project gutenberg's carnacki, the ghost finder, by william hope hodgson 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: carnacki, the ghost finder 

author: william hope hodgson 

release date: january 25, 2004 [ebook #10832] 
last updated: october 5, 2012 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook carnacki, the ghost finder *** 




produce by suzanne shell, project gutenberg beginner projects, 







carnacki, the ghost finder 

by william hope hodgson 

1910, 1912 







no. 1--the gateway of the monster 


in response to carnacki's usual card of invitation to have dinner and 
listen to a story, i arrive prompt at 427, cheyne walk, to find the 
three other who were always invite to these happy little times, there 
before me. five minutes later, carnacki, arkright, jessop, taylor, and i 
were all engaged in the "pleasant occupation" of dining. 

"you've not been long away, this time," i remarked, as i finished my 
soup; forget momentarily carnacki's dislike of being ask even to 
skirt the border of his story until such time as he was ready. then he 
would not stint words. 

"that's all," he replied, with brevity; and i change the subject, 
remark that i had been buy a new gun, to which piece of news he 
gave an intelligent nod, and a smile which i think show a genuine 
good-humored appreciation of my intentional change of the conversation. 

later, when dinner was finished, carnacki snug himself comfortable 
down in his big chair, along with his pipe, and began his story, with 
very little circumlocution:-- 

"as dodgson was remark just now, i've only been away a short time, and 
for a very good reason too--i've only been away a short distance. the 
exact locality i am afraid i must not tell you; but it is less than 
twenty mile from here; though, except for change a name, that won't 
spoil the story. and it is a story too! one of the most extraordinary 
things ever i have run against. 

"i received a letter a fortnight ago from a man i must call anderson, 
ask for an appointment. i arrange a time, and when he came, i found 
that he wish me to investigate and see whether i could not clear up a 
long-standing and well--too well--authenticated case of what he term 
'haunting.' he gave me very full particulars, and, finally, as the case 
seem to present something unique, i decided to take it up. 

"two days later, i drove to the house late in the afternoon. i found it a 
very old place, standing quite alone in its own grounds. anderson had 
left a letter with the butler, i found, pleading excuse for his absence, 
and leave the whole house at my disposal for my investigations. the 
butler evidently knew the object of my visit, and i question him pretty 
thorough during dinner, which i had in rather lonely state. he is an 
old and privileged servant, and had the history of the grey room exact in 
detail. from him i learned more particulars regarding two things that 
anderson had mention in but a casual manner. the first was that the 
door of the grey room would be heard in the dead of night to open, and 
slam heavily, and this even though the butler knew it was locked, and the 
key on the bunch in his pantry. the second was that the bedclothes would 
always be found torn off the bed, and hurl in a heap into a corner. 

"but it was the door slam that chiefly bother the old butler. many 
and many a time, he told me, had he lain awake and just got shiver 
with fright, listening; for sometimes the door would be slam time 
after time--thud! thud! thud!--so that sleep was impossible. 

"from anderson, i knew already that the room had a history extend back 
over a hundred and fifty years. three people had been strangle in it--an 
ancestor of his and his wife and child. this is authentic, as i had taken 
very great pains to discover; so that you can imagine it was with a 
feeling i had a striking case to investigate that i went upstairs after 
dinner to have a look at the grey room. 

"peter, the old butler, was in rather a state about my going, and assured 
me with much solemnity that in all the twenty years of his service, no 
one had ever enter that room after nightfall. he beg me, in quite a 
fatherly way, to wait till the morning, when there would be no danger, 
and then he could accompany me himself. 

"of course, i smile a little at him, and told him not to bother. i 
explain that i should do no more than look 'round a bit, and, perhaps, 
affix a few seals. he need not fear; i was use to that sort of thing. 
but he shook his head when i said that. 

"'there isn't many ghost like ours, sir,' he assured me, with mournful 
pride. and, by jove! he was right, as you will see. 

"i took a couple of candles, and peter follow with his bunch of keys. 
he unlock the door; but would not come inside with me. he was evidently 
in a fright, and he renew his request that i would put off my 
examination until daylight. of course, i laugh at him again, and told 
him he could stand sentry at the door, and catch anything that came out. 

"'it never come outside, sir,' he said, in his funny, old, solemn 
manner. somehow, he manage to make me feel as if i were go to have 
the 'creeps' right away. anyway, it was one to him, you know. 

"i left him there, and examine the room. it is a big apartment, and well 
furnish in the grand style, with a huge four-poster, which stand with 
its head to the end wall. there were two candle on the mantelpiece, and 
two on each of the three table that were in the room. i lit the lot, and 
after that, the room felt a little less inhuman dreary; though, mind 
you, it was quite fresh, and well kept in every way. 

"after i had taken a good look 'round, i seal length of baby ribbon 
across the windows, along the walls, over the pictures, and over the 
fireplace and the wall closets. all the time, as i worked, the butler 
stood just without the door, and i could not persuade him to enter; 
though i jest him a little, as i stretch the ribbons, and went here 
and there about my work. every now and again, he would say:--'you'll 
excuse me, i'm sure, sir; but i do wish you would come out, sir. i'm fair 
in a quake for you.' 

"i told him he need not wait; but he was loyal enough in his way to what 
he considered his duty. he said he could not go away and leave me all 
alone there. he apologized; but made it very clear that i did not realize 
the danger of the room; and i could see, generally, that he was in a 
pretty frightened state. all the same, i had to make the room so that i 
should know if anything material enter it; so i ask him not to bother 
me, unless he really heard or saw something. he was beginning to get on 
my nerves, and the 'feel' of the room was bad enough, without making it 
any nastier. 

"for a time further, i worked, stretch ribbon across the floor, and 
sealing them, so that the merest touch would have broken them, were 
anyone to venture into the room in the dark with the intention of 
play the fool. all this had taken me far long than i had 
anticipated; and, suddenly, i heard a clock strike eleven. i had taken 
off my coat soon after commence work; now, however, as i had 
practically made an end of all that i intended to do, i walk across to 
the settee, and picked it up. i was in the act of get into it, when 
the old butler's voice (he had not said a word for the last hour) came 
sharp and frightened:--'come out, sir, quick! there's something go to 
happen!' jove! but i jumped, and then, in the same moment, one of the 
candle on the table to the left went out. now whether it was the wind, 
or what, i do not know; but, just for a moment, i was enough startle to 
make a run for the door; though i am glad to say that i pull up, before 
i reach it. i simply could not bunk out, with the butler standing 
there, after having, as it were, read him a sort of lesson on 'bein' 
brave, y'know.' so i just turn right 'round, picked up the two candle 
off the mantelpiece, and walk across to the table near the bed. well, i 
saw nothing. i blew out the candle that was still alight; then i went to 
those on the two tables, and blew them out. then, outside of the door, 
the old man call again:--'oh! sir, do be told! do be told!' 

"'all right, peter,' i said, and by jove, my voice was not as steady as 
i should have liked! i made for the door, and had a bit of work not to 
start running. i took some thundering long strides, as you can imagine. 
near the door, i had a sudden feeling that there was a cold wind in the 
room. it was almost as if the window had been sudden open a little. 
i got to the door, and the old butler gave back a step, in a sort of 
instinctive way. 'collar the candles, peter!' i said, pretty sharply, 
and shove them into his hands. i turned, and caught the handle, and 
slam the door shut, with a crash. somehow, do you know, as i did so, 
i thought i felt something pull back on it; but it must have been only 
fancy. i turn the key in the lock, and then again, double-locking the 
door. i felt easy then, and set-to and seal the door. in addition, i 
put my card over the keyhole, and seal it there; after which i 
pocket the key, and went downstairs--with peter; who was nervous and 
silent, leading the way. poor old beggar! it had not struck me until 
that moment that he had been enduring a considerable strain during the 
last two or three hours. 

"about midnight, i went to bed. my room lay at the end of the corridor 
upon which open the door of the grey room. i count the door between 
it and mine, and found that five rooms lay between. and i am sure you can 
understand that i was not sorry. then, just as i was beginning to 
undress, an idea came to me, and i took my candle and sealing wax, and 
seal the door of all five rooms. if any door slam in the night, i 
should know just which one. 

"i return to my room, lock the door, and went to bed. i was wake 
sudden from a deep sleep by a loud crash somewhere out in the passage. 
i sat up in bed, and listened, but heard nothing. then i lit my candle. i 
was in the very act of lighting it when there came the bang of a door 
being violent slammed, along the corridor. i jump out of bed, and got 
my revolver. i unlock the door, and went out into the passage, holding 
my candle high, and keeping the pistol ready. then a queer thing 
happened. i could not go a step toward the grey room. you all know i am 
not really a cowardly chap. i've gone into too many case connected with 
ghostly things, to be accused of that; but i tell you i funk it; simply 
funk it, just like any blessed kid. there was something precious unholy 
in the air that night. i ran back into my bedroom, and shut and lock 
the door. then i sat on the bed all night, and listen to the dismal 
thud of a door up the corridor. the sound seem to echo through all 
the house. 

"daylight came at last, and i wash and dressed. the door had not 
slam for about an hour, and i was get back my nerve again. i felt 
ashamed of myself; though, in some ways it was silly; for when you're 
meddle with that sort of thing, your nerve is bound to go, sometimes. 
and you just have to sit quiet and call yourself a coward until daylight. 
sometimes it is more than just cowardice, i fancy. i believe at times it 
is something warning you, and fight _for_ you. but, all the same, i 
always feel mean and miserable, after a time like that. 

"when the day came properly, i open my door, and, keeping my revolver 
handy, went quiet along the passage. i had to pass the head of the 
stairs, along the way, and who should i see coming up, but the old 
butler, carry a cup of coffee. he had merely tuck his nightshirt 
into his trousers, and he had an old pair of carpet slipper on. 

"'hullo, peter!' i said, feeling sudden cheerful; for i was as glad as 
any lost child to have a live human being close to me. 'where are you off 
to with the refreshments?' 

"the old man gave a start, and slop some of the coffee. he stare up 
at me, and i could see that he look white and done-up. he came on up 
the stairs, and held out the little tray to me. 'i'm very thankful 
indeed, sir, to see you safe and well,' he said. 'i feared, one time, you 
might risk go into the grey room, sir. i've lain awake all night, with 
the sound of the door. and when it came light, i thought i'd make you a 
cup of coffee. i knew you would want to look at the seals, and somehow it 
seem safe if there's two, sir.' 

"'peter,' i said, 'you're a brick. this is very thoughtful of you.' and i 
drank the coffee. 'come along,' i told him, and hand him back the tray. 
'i'm go to have a look at what the brute have been up to. i simply 
hadn't the pluck to in the night.' 

"'i'm very thankful, sir,' he replied. 'flesh and blood can do nothing, 
sir, against devils; and that's what's in the grey room after dark.' 

"i examine the seal on all the doors, as i went along, and found them 
right; but when i got to the grey room, the seal was broken; though the 
card, over the keyhole, was untouched. i rip it off, and unlock the 
door, and went in, rather cautiously, as you can imagine; but the whole 
room was empty of anything to frighten one, and there was heap of light. 
i examine all my seals, and not a single one was disturbed. the old 
butler had follow me in, and, suddenly, he call out:--'the 
bedclothes, sir!' 

"i ran up to the bed, and look over; and, surely, they were lie in 
the corner to the left of the bed. jove! you can imagine how queer i 
felt. something _had_ been in the room. i stare for a while, from the 
bed, to the clothes on the floor. i had a feeling that i did not want to 
touch either. old peter, though, did not seem to be affected that way. he 
went over to the bed coverings, and was go to pick them up, as, 
doubtless, he had done every day these twenty years back; but i stop 
him. i want nothing touched, until i had finished my examination. this, 
i must have spent a full hour over, and then i let peter straighten up 
the bed; after which we went out, and i lock the door; for the room was 
get on my nerves. 

"i had a short walk, and then breakfast; after which i felt more my own 
man, and so return to the grey room, and, with peter's help, and one of 
the maids, i had everything taken out of the room, except the bed--even 
the very pictures. i examine the walls, floor and ceiling then, with 
probe, hammer and magnify glass; but found nothing suspicious. and i 
can assure you, i began to realize, in very truth, that some incredible 
thing had been loose in the room during the past night. i seal up 
everything again, and went out, lock and sealing the door, as before. 

"after dinner, peter and i unpack some of my stuff, and i fixed up my 
camera and flashlight opposite to the door of the grey room, with a 
string from the trigger of the flashlight to the door. then, you see, if 
the door were really opened, the flashlight would blare out, and there 
would be, possibly, a very queer picture to examine in the morning. the 
last thing i did, before leaving, was to uncap the lens; and after that i 
went off to my bedroom, and to bed; for i intended to be up at midnight; 
and to ensure this, i set my little alarm to call me; also i left my 
candle burning. 

"the clock woke me at twelve, and i got up and into my dressing gown and 
slippers. i shove my revolver into my right side-pocket, and open my 
door. then, i lit my darkroom lamp, and withdrew the slide, so that it 
would give a clear light. i carry it up the corridor, about thirty 
feet, and put it down on the floor, with the open side away from me, so 
that it would show me anything that might approach along the dark 
passage. then i went back, and sat in the doorway of my room, with my 
revolver handy, staring up the passage toward the place where i knew my 
camera stood outside the door of the grey room. 

"i should think i had watch for about an hour and a half, when, 
suddenly, i heard a faint noise, away up the corridor. i was immediately 
conscious of a queer prickle sensation about the back of my head, and 
my hand began to sweat a little. the following instant, the whole end of 
the passage flick into sight in the abrupt glare of the flashlight. 
there came the succeed darkness, and i peer nervous up the 
corridor, listen tensely, and try to find what lay beyond the faint 
glow of my dark-lamp, which now seem ridiculous dim by contrast with 
the tremendous blaze of the flash-power.... and then, as i stoop 
forward, staring and listening, there came the crashing thud of the door 
of the grey room. the sound seem to fill the whole of the large 
corridor, and go echo hollow through the house. i tell you, i felt 
horrible--as if my bone were water. simply beastly. jove! how i did 
stare, and how i listened. and then it came again--thud, thud, thud, and 
then a silence that was almost worse than the noise of the door; for i 
kept fancy that some awful thing was steal upon me along the 
corridor. and then, suddenly, my lamp was put out, and i could not see a 
yard before me. i realize all at once that i was do a very silly 
thing, sitting there, and i jump up. even as i did so, i _thought_ i 
heard a sound in the passage, and quite _near_ me. i made one backward 
spring into my room, and slam and lock the door. i sat on my bed, 
and stare at the door. i had my revolver in my hand; but it seem an 
abominable useless thing. i felt that there was something the other side 
of that door. for some unknown reason i _knew_ it was pressed up against 
the door, and it was soft. that was just what i thought. most 
extraordinary thing to think. 

"presently i got hold of myself a bit, and marked out a pentacle 
hurried with chalk on the polish floor; and there i sat in it 
almost until dawn. and all the time, away up the corridor, the door of 
the grey room thud at solemn and horrid intervals. it was a 
miserable, brutal night. 

"when the day began to break, the thud of the door came gradual to 
an end, and, at last, i got hold of my courage, and went along the 
corridor in the half light to cap the lens of my camera. i can tell you, 
it took some doing; but if i had not done so my photograph would have 
been spoilt, and i was tremendous keen to save it. i got back to my 
room, and then set-to and rub out the five-pointed star in which i had 
been sitting. 

"half an hour later there was a tap at my door. it was peter with my 
coffee. when i had drunk it, we both went along to the grey room. as we 
went, i had a look at the seal on the other doors; but they were 
untouched. the seal on the door of the grey room was broken, as also was 
the string from the trigger of the flashlight; but the card over the 
keyhole was still there. i rip it off, and open the door. nothing 
unusual was to be seen until we came to the bed; then i saw that, as on 
the previous day, the bedclothes had been torn off, and hurl into the 
left-hand corner, exactly where i had seen them before. i felt very 
queer; but i did not forget to look at all the seals, only to find that 
not one had been broken. 

"then i turn and look at old peter, and he look at me, 
nod his head. 

"'let's get out of here!' i said. 'it's no place for any living human to 
enter, without proper protection.' 

"we went out then, and i lock and seal the door, again. 

"after breakfast, i develop the negative; but it show only the door 
of the grey room, half opened. then i left the house, as i want to get 
certain matter and implement that might be necessary to life; perhaps 
to the spirit; for i intended to spend the coming night in the grey room. 

"i got back in a cab, about half-past five, with my apparatus, and this, 
peter and i carry up to the grey room, where i pile it careful in 
the center of the floor. when everything was in the room, including a cat 
which i had brought, i lock and seal the door, and went toward the 
bedroom, telling peter i should not be down for dinner. he said, 'yes, 
sir,' and went downstairs, thinking that i was go to turn in, which 
was what i want him to believe, as i knew he would have worried both me 
and himself, if he had known what i intended. 

"but i merely got my camera and flashlight from my bedroom, and hurried 
back to the grey room. i lock and seal myself in, and set to work, 
for i had a lot to do before it got dark. 

"first, i clear away all the ribbon across the floor; then i carry 
the cat--still fasten in its basket--over toward the far wall, and left 
it. i return then to the center of the room, and measured out a space 
twenty-one feet in diameter, which i swept with a 'broom of hyssop.' 
about this, i drew a circle of chalk, taking care never to step over the 
circle. beyond this i smudged, with a bunch of garlic, a broad belt right 
around the chalk circle, and when this was complete, i took from among 
my stores in the center a small jar of a certain water. i broke away the 
parchment, and withdrew the stopper. then, dip my left forefinger in 
the little jar, i went 'round the circle again, making upon the floor, 
just within the line of chalk, the second sign of the saaamaaa ritual, 
and join each sign most careful with the left-handed crescent. i can 
tell you, i felt easy when this was done, and the 'water circle' 
complete. then, i unpack some more of the stuff that i had brought, and 
placed a light candle in the 'valley' of each crescent. after that, i 
drew a pentacle, so that each of the five points of the defensive star 
touched the chalk circle. in the five points of the star i placed five 
portion of the bread, each wrap in linen, and in the five 'vales,' 
five open jar of the water i had use to make the 'water circle.' and 
now i had my first protective barrier complete. 

"now, anyone, except you who know something of my method of 
investigation, might consider all this a piece of useless and foolish 
superstition; but you all remember the black veil case, in which i 
believe my life was save by a very similar form of protection, whilst 
aster, who sneer at it, and would not come inside, died. i got the idea 
from the sigsand ms., written, so far as i can make out, in the 14th 
century. at first, naturally, i imagine it was just an expression of 
the superstition of his time; and it was not until a year later that it 
occur to me to test his 'defense,' which i did, as i've just said, in 
that horrible black veil business. you know how _that_ turn out. later, 
i use it several times, and always i came through safe, until that 
moving fur case. it was only a partial 'defense' therefore, and i nearly 
die in the pentacle. after that i came across professor garder's 
'experiments with a medium.' when they surround the medium with a 
current, in vacuum, he lost his power--almost as if it cut him off from 
the immaterial. that made me think a lot; and that is how i came to make 
the electric pentacle, which is a most marvelous 'defense' against 
certain manifestations. i use the shape of the defensive star for this 
protection, because i have, personally, no doubt at all but that there is 
some extraordinary virtue in the old magic figure. curious thing for a 
twentieth century man to admit, is it not? but, then, as you all know, i 
never did, and never will, allow myself to be blind by the little cheap 
laughter. i ask questions, and keep my eyes open. 

"in this last case i had little doubt that i had run up against a 
supernatural monster, and i meant to take every possible care; for the 
danger is abominable. 

"i turned-to now to fit the electric pentacle, setting it so that each of 
its 'points' and 'vales' coincide exactly with the 'points' and 'vales' 
of the drawn pentagram upon the floor. then i connected up the battery, 
and the next instant the pale blue glare from the intertwine vacuum 
tube shone out. 

"i glance about me then, with something of a sigh of relief, and 
realize sudden that the dusk was upon me, for the window was grey and 
unfriendly. then 'round at the big, empty room, over the double barrier 
of electric and candle light. i had an abrupt, extraordinary sense of 
weird thrust upon me--in the air, you know; as it were, a sense of 
something inhuman impending. the room was full of the stench of bruise 
garlic, a smell i hate. 

"i turn now to the camera, and saw that it and the flashlight were in 
order. then i test my revolver, carefully, though i had little thought 
that it would be needed. yet, to what extent materialize of an 
ab-natural creature is possible, given favorable conditions, no one can 
say; and i had no idea what horrible thing i was go to see, or feel 
the presence of. i might, in the end, have to fight with a materialize 
monster. i did not know, and could only be prepared. you see, i never 
forgot that three other people had been strangle in the bed close to me, 
and the fierce slam of the door i had heard myself. i had no doubt 
that i was investigate a dangerous and ugly case. 

"by this time, the night had come; though the room was very light with 
the burning candles; and i found myself glancing behind me, constantly, 
and then all 'round the room. it was nervy work wait for that thing to 
come. then, suddenly, i was aware of a little, cold wind sweeping over 
me, coming from behind. i gave one great nerve-thrill, and a prickly 
feeling went all over the back of my head. then i hove myself 'round with 
a sort of stiff jerk, and stare straight against that queer wind. it 
seem to come from the corner of the room to the left of the bed--the 
place where both times i had found the heap of toss bedclothes. yet, i 
could see nothing unusual; no opening--nothing!... 

"abruptly, i was aware that the candle were all a-flicker in that 
unnatural wind.... i believe i just squat there and stare in a 
horrible frightened, wooden way for some minutes. i shall never be able 
to let you know how disgusting horrible it was sitting in that vile, 
cold wind! and then, flick! flick! flick! all the candle 'round the 
outer barrier went out; and there was i, lock and seal in that room, 
and with no light beyond the weakish blue glare of the electric pentacle. 

"a time of abominable tense passed, and still that wind blew upon me; 
and then, suddenly, i knew that something stir in the corner to the 
left of the bed. i was made conscious of it, rather by some inward, 
unused sense than by either sight or sound; for the pale, short-radius 
glare of the pentacle gave but a very poor light for seeing by. yet, as i 
stared, something began slow to grow upon my sight--a moving shadow, a 
little dark than the surrounding shadows. i lost the thing amid the 
vagueness, and for a moment or two i glance swift from side to side, 
with a fresh, new sense of impending danger. then my attention was 
direct to the bed. all the covering's were being drawn steady off, 
with a hateful, stealthy sort of motion. i heard the slow, drag 
slither of the clothes; but i could see nothing of the thing that pulled. 
i was aware in a funny, subconscious, introspective fashion that the 
'creep' had come upon me; yet that i was cooler mental than i had been 
for some minutes; sufficient so to feel that my hand were sweat 
coldly, and to shift my revolver, half-consciously, whilst i rub my 
right hand dry upon my knee; though never, for an instant, taking my gaze 
or my attention from those moving clothes. 

"the faint noise from the bed cease once, and there was a most intense 
silence, with only the sound of the blood beating in my head. yet, 
immediately afterward, i heard again the slur of the bedclothes being 
drag off the bed. in the midst of my nervous tension i remember the 
camera, and reach 'round for it; but without look away from the bed. 
and then, you know, all in a moment, the whole of the bed covering were 
torn off with extraordinary violence, and i heard the flump they made as 
they were hurl into the corner. 

"there was a time of absolute quiet then for perhaps a couple of 
minutes; and you can imagine how horrible i felt. the bedclothes had been 
thrown with such savageness! and, then again, the brutal unnatural of 
the thing that had just been done before me! 

"abruptly, over by the door, i heard a faint noise--a sort of crickl 
sound, and then a pit or two upon the floor. a great nervous thrill 
swept over me, seeming to run up my spine and over the back of my head; 
for the seal that secure the door had just been broken. something was 
there. i could not see the door; at least, i mean to say that it was 
impossible to say how much i actually saw, and how much my imagination 
supplied. i made it out, only as a continuation of the grey walls.... and 
then it seem to me that something dark and indistinct move and waver 
there among the shadows. 

"abruptly, i was aware that the door was opening, and with an effort i 
reach again for my camera; but before i could aim it the door was 
slam with a terrific crash that fill the whole room with a sort of 
hollow thunder. i jumped, like a frightened child. there seem such a 
power behind the noise; as though a vast, wanton force were 'out.' can 
you understand? 

"the door was not touched again; but, directly afterward, i heard the 
basket, in which the cat lay, creak. i tell you, i fairly pringle all 
along my back. i knew that i was go to learn definitely whether 
whatever was abroad was dangerous to life. from the cat there rose 
sudden a hideous caterwaul, that cease abruptly; and then--too late--i 
snap off the flashlight. in the great glare, i saw that the basket had 
been overturned, and the lid was wrench open, with the cat lie half 
in, and half out upon the floor. i saw nothing else, but i was full of 
the knowledge that i was in the presence of some being or thing that had 
power to destroy. 

"during the next two or three minutes, there was an odd, noticeable 
quiet in the room, and you much remember i was half-blinded, for the 
time, because of the flashlight; so that the whole place seem to be 
pitchy dark just beyond the shine of the pentacle. i tell you it was most 
horrible. i just knelt there in the star, and whirl 'round, try to 
see whether anything was coming at me. 

"my power of sight came gradually, and i got a little hold of myself; and 
abrupt i saw the thing i was look for, close to the 'water circle.' 
it was big and indistinct, and waver curiously, as though the shadow of 
a vast spider hung suspend in the air, just beyond the barrier. it 
pass swift 'round the circle, and seem to probe ever toward me; but 
only to draw back with extraordinary jerky movements, as might a living 
person if they touched the hot bar of a grate. 

"'round and 'round it moved, and 'round and 'round i turned. then, just 
opposite to one of the vales' in the pentacles, it seem to pause, as 
though preliminary to a tremendous effort. it retired almost beyond the 
glow of the vacuum light, and then came straight toward me, appear to 
gather form and solidity as it came. there seem a vast, malign 
determination behind the movement, that must succeed. i was on my knees, 
and i jerk back, fall on to my left hand, and hip, in a wild 
endeavor to get back from the advance thing. with my right hand i was 
grab madly for my revolver, which i had let slip. the brutal thing 
came with one great sweep straight over the garlic and the 'water 
circle,' almost to the vale of the pentacle. i believe i yelled. then, 
just as sudden as it had swept over, it seem to be hurl back by 
some mighty, invisible force. 

"it must have been some moments before i realize that i was safe; and 
then i got myself together in the middle of the pentacles, feeling 
horrible gone and shaken, and glancing 'round and 'round the barrier; but 
the thing had vanished. yet, i had learnt something, for i knew now that 
the grey room was haunt by a monstrous hand. 

"suddenly, as i crouch there, i saw what had so nearly given the 
monster an opening through the barrier. in my movements within the 
pentacle i must have touched one of the jar of water; for just where the 
thing had made its attack the jar that guarded the 'deep' of the 'vale' 
had been move to one side, and this had left one of the 'five doorways' 
unguarded. i put it back, quickly, and felt almost safe again, for i had 
found the cause, and the 'defense' was still good. and i began to hope 
again that i should see the morning come in. when i saw that thing so 
nearly succeed, i had an awful, weak, overwhelming feeling that the 
'barriers' could never bring me safe through the night against such a 
force. you can understand? 

"for a long time i could not see the hand; but, presently, i thought i 
saw, once or twice, an odd wavering, over among the shadow near the 
door. a little later, as though in a sudden fit of malignant rage, the 
dead body of the cat was picked up, and beaten with dull, sickening blow 
against the solid floor. that made me feel rather queer. 

"a minute afterward, the door was open and slam twice with 
tremendous force. the next instant the thing made one swift, vicious dart 
at me, from out of the shadows. instinctively, i start sideways from 
it, and so pluck my hand from upon the electric pentacle, where--for a 
wicked careless moment--i had placed it. the monster was hurl off 
from the neighborhood of the pentacles; though--owing to my inconceivable 
foolishness--it had been enable for a second time to pass the outer 
barriers. i can tell you, i shook for a time, with sheer funk. i move 
right to the center of the pentacle again, and knelt there, making 
myself as small and compact as possible. 

"as i knelt, there came to me presently, a vague wonder at the two 
'accidents' which had so nearly allow the brute to get at me. was i 
being _influenced_ to unconscious voluntary action that endanger me? 
the thought took hold of me, and i watch my every movement. abruptly, i 
stretch a tired leg, and knock over one of the jar of water. some 
was spilled; but, because of my suspicious watchfulness, i had it upright 
and back within the vale while yet some of the water remained. even as i 
did so, the vast, black, half-materialized hand beat up at me out of the 
shadows, and seem to leap almost into my face; so nearly did it 
approach; but for the third time it was thrown back by some altogether 
enormous, overmaster force. yet, apart from the daze fright in which 
it left me, i had for a moment that feeling of spiritual sickness, as if 
some delicate, beautiful, inward grace had suffered, which is felt only 
upon the too near approach of the ab-human, and is more dreadful, in a 
strange way, than any physical pain that can be suffered. i knew by this 
more of the extent and close of the danger; and for a long time i was 
simply cow by the butt-headed brutality of that force upon my spirit. i 
can put it no other way. 

"i knelt again in the center of the pentacles, watch myself with more 
fear, almost, than the monster; for i knew now that, unless i guarded 
myself from every sudden impulse that came to me, i might simply work my 
own destruction. do you see how horrible it all was? 

"i spent the rest of the night in a haze of sick fright, and so tense 
that i could not make a single movement naturally. i was in such fear 
that any desire for action that came to me might be prompt by the 
influence that i knew was at work on me. and outside of the barrier that 
ghastly thing went 'round and 'round, grab and grab in the air at 
me. twice more was the body of the dead cat molested. the second time, i 
heard every bone in its body scrunch and crack. and all the time the 
horrible wind was blow upon me from the corner of the room to the left 
of the bed. 

"then, just as the first touch of dawn came into the sky, that unnatural 
wind ceased, in a single moment; and i could see no sign of the hand. the 
dawn came slowly, and presently the wan light fill all the room, and 
made the pale glare of the electric pentacle look more unearthly. yet, it 
was not until the day had fully come, that i made any attempt to leave 
the barrier, for i did not know but that there was some method abroad, in 
the sudden stopping of that wind, to entice me from the pentacles. 

"at last, when the dawn was strong and bright, i took one last look 
'round, and ran for the door. i got it unlocked, in a nervous and clumsy 
fashion, then lock it hurriedly, and went to my bedroom, where i lay on 
the bed, and try to steady my nerves. peter came, presently, with the 
coffee, and when i had drunk it, i told him i meant to have a sleep, as i 
had been up all night. he took the tray, and went out quietly, and after 
i had lock my door i turn in properly, and at last got to sleep. 

"i woke about midday, and after some lunch, went up to the grey room. i 
switch off the current from the pentacle, which i had left on in my 
hurry; also, i remove the body of the cat. you can understand i did not 
want anyone to see the poor brute. after that, i made a very careful 
search of the corner where the bedclothes had been thrown. i made several 
holes, and probed, and found nothing. then it occur to me to try with 
my instrument under the skirting. i did so, and heard my wire ring on 
metal. i turn the hook end that way, and fish for the thing. at the 
second go, i got it. it was a small object, and i took it to the window. 
i found it to be a curious ring, made of some grey material. the 
curious thing about it was that it was made in the form of a pentagon; 
that is, the same shape as the inside of the magic pentacle, but without 
the 'mounts,' which form the points of the defensive star. it was free 
from all chase or engraving. 

"you will understand that i was excited, when i tell you that i felt sure 
i held in my hand the famous luck ring of the anderson family; which, 
indeed, was of all things the one most intimate connected with the 
history of the haunting. this ring was hand on from father to son 
through generations, and always--in obedience to some ancient family 
tradition--each son had to promise never to wear the ring. the ring, i 
may say, was brought home by one of the crusaders, under very peculiar 
circumstances; but the story is too long to go into here. 

"it appear that young sir hulbert, an ancestor of anderson's, made a 
bet, in drink, you know, that he would wear the ring that night. he did 
so, and in the morning his wife and child were found strangle in the 
bed, in the very room in which i stood. many people, it would seem, 
thought young sir hulbert was guilty of have done the thing in drunken 
anger; and he, in an attempt to prove his innocence, slept a second night 
in the room. he also was strangled. since then, as you may imagine, no 
one has ever spent a night in the grey room, until i did so. the ring had 
been lost so long, that it had become almost a myth; and it was most 
extraordinary to stand there, with the actual thing in my hand, as you 
can understand. 

"it was whilst i stood there, look at the ring, that i got an idea. 
supposing that it were, in a way, a doorway--you see what i mean? a sort 
of gap in the world-hedge. it was a queer idea, i know, and probably was 
not my own, but came to me from the outside. you see, the wind had come 
from that part of the room where the ring lay. i thought a lot about it. 
then the shape--the inside of a pentacle. it had no 'mounts,' and without 
mounts, as the sigsand ms. has it:--'thee mownt wych are thee five hill 
of safetie. to lack is to gyve pow'r to thee daemon; and surelie to 
fayvor the evill thynge.' you see, the very shape of the ring was 
significant; and i determined to test it. 

"i unmade the pentacle, for it must be made afresh _and around_ the one 
to be protected. then i went out and lock the door; after which i left 
the house, to get certain matters, for neither 'yarbs nor fyre nor waier' 
must be use a second time. i return about seven thirty, and as soon as 
the things i had brought had been carry up to the grey room, i 
dismiss peter for the night, just as i had done the evening before. 
when he had gone downstairs, i let myself into the room, and lock and 
seal the door. i went to the place in the center of the room where all 
the stuff had been packed, and set to work with all my speed to construct 
a barrier about me and the ring. 

"i do not remember whether i explain it to you. but i had reasoned 
that, if the ring were in any way a 'medium of admission,' and it were 
enclose with me in the electric pentacle, it would be, to express it 
loosely, insulated. do you see? the force, which had visible expression 
as a hand, would have to stay beyond the barrier which separate the ab 
from the normal; for the 'gateway' would be remove from accessibility. 

"as i was saying, i work with all my speed to get the barrier complete 
about me and the ring, for it was already later than i care to be in 
that room 'unprotected.' also, i had a feeling that there would be a vast 
effort made that night to regain the use of the ring. for i had the 
strongest conviction that the ring was a necessity to materialization. 
you will see whether i was right. 

"i complete the barrier in about an hour, and you can imagine something 
of the relief i felt when i felt the pale glare of the electric pentacle 
once more all about me. from then, onward, for about two hours, i sat 
quietly, facing the corner from which the wind came. about eleven o'clock 
a queer knowledge came that something was near to me; yet nothing 
happen for a whole hour after that. then, suddenly, i felt the cold, 
queer wind begin to blow upon me. to my astonishment, it seem now to 
come from behind me, and i whip 'round, with a hideous quake of fear. 
the wind met me in the face. it was blow up from the floor close to 
me. i stare down, in a sickening maze of new frights. what on earth had 
i done now! the ring was there, close beside me, where i had put it. 
suddenly, as i stared, bewildered, i was aware that there was something 
queer about the ring--funny shadowy movements and convolutions. i look 
at them, stupidly. and then, abruptly, i knew that the wind was blow 
up at me from the ring. a queer indistinct smoke became visible to me, 
seeming to pour upward through the ring, and mix with the moving shadows. 
suddenly, i realize that i was in more than any mortal danger; for the 
convolute shadow about the ring were taking shape, and the death-hand 
was form _within_ the pentacle. my goodness! do you realize it! i had 
brought the 'gateway' into the pentacles, and the brute was coming 
through--pouring into the material world, as gas might pour out from the 
mouth of a pipe. 

"i should think that i knelt for a moment in a sort of stun fright. 
then, with a mad, awkward movement, i snatch at the ring, intend to 
hurl it out of the pentacle. yet it elude me, as though some invisible, 
living thing jerk it hither and thither. at last, i grip it; yet, 
in the same instant, it was torn from my grasp with incredible and brutal 
force. a great, black shadow cover it, and rose into the air, and came 
at me. i saw that it was the hand, vast and nearly perfect in form. i 
gave one crazy yell, and jump over the pentacle and the ring of burning 
candles, and ran despairing for the door. i fumble idiot and 
ineffectual with the key, and all the time i stared, with a fear that 
was like insanity, toward the barriers. the hand was plunge toward me; 
yet, even as it had been unable to pass into the pentacle when the ring 
was without, so, now that the ring was within, it had no power to pass 
out. the monster was chained, as surely as any beast would be, were 
chain rivet upon it. 

"even then, i got a flash of this knowledge; but i was too utterly shaken 
with fright, to reason; and the instant i manage to get the key turned, 
i sprang into the passage, and slam the door with a crash. i lock 
it, and got to my room somehow; for i was tremble so that i could 
hardly stand, as you can imagine. i lock myself in, and manage to get 
the candle lit; then i lay down on my bed, and kept quiet for an hour or 
two, and so i got steadied. 

"i got a little sleep, later; but woke when peter brought my coffee. 
when i had drunk it i felt altogether better, and took the old man along 
with me whilst i had a look into the grey room. i open the door, and 
peep in. the candle were still burning, wan against the daylight; and 
behind them was the pale, glowing star of the electric pentacle. and 
there, in the middle, was the ring ... the gateway of the monster, lie 
demure and ordinary. 

"nothing in the room was touched, and i knew that the brute had never 
manage to cross the pentacles. then i went out, and lock the door. 

"after a sleep of some hours, i left the house. i return in the 
afternoon in a cab. i had with me an oxy-hydrogen jet, and two 
cylinders, contain the gases. i carry the things into the grey 
room, and there, in the center of the electric pentacle, i erect the 
little furnace. five minutes later the luck ring, once the 'luck,' but 
now the 'bane,' of the anderson family, was no more than a little solid 
splash of hot metal." 

carnacki felt in his pocket, and pull out something wrap in tissue 
paper. he pass it to me. i open it, and found a small circle of 
greyish metal, something like lead, only hard and rather brighter. 

"well?" i asked, at length, after examine it and hand it 'round to 
the others. "did that stop the haunting?" 

carnacki nodded. "yes," he said. "i slept three nights in the grey room, 
before i left. old peter nearly faint when he knew that i meant to; but 
by the third night he seem to realize that the house was just safe and 
ordinary. and, you know, i believe, in his heart, he hardly approved." 

carnacki stood up and began to shake hands. "out you go!" he said, 
genially. and presently we went, pondering, to our various homes. 




no. 2--the house among the laurels 


"this is a curious yarn that i am go to tell you," said carnacki, as 
after a quiet little dinner we made ourselves comfortable in his cozy 
dine room. 

"i have just got back from the west of ireland," he continued. 
"wentworth, a friend of mine, has lately had rather an unexpected legacy, 
in the shape of a large estate and manor, about a mile and a half outside 
of the village of korunton. this place is name gannington manor, and has 
been empty a great number of years; as you will find is almost always the 
case with house reputed to be haunted, as it is usually termed. 

"it seem that when wentworth went over to take possession, he found the 
place in very poor repair, and the estate total uncared for, and, as i 
know, look very desolate and lonesome generally. he went through the 
big house by himself, and he admitted to me that it had an uncomfortable 
feeling about it; but, of course, that might be nothing more than the 
natural dismal of a big, empty house, which has been long 
uninhabited, and through which you are wandering alone. 

"when he had finished his look 'round, he went down to the village, 
meaning to see the one-time agent of the estate, and arrange for someone 
to go in as caretaker. the agent, who prove by the way to be a 
scotchman, was very willing to take up the management of the estate once 
more; but he assured wentworth that they would get no one to go in as 
caretaker; and that his--the agent's--advice was to have the house pull 
down, and a new one built. 

"this, naturally, astonish my friend, and, as they went down to the 
village, he manage to get a sort of explanation from the man. it seem 
that there had been always curious story told about the place, which in 
the early days was call landru castle, and that within the last seven 
years there had been two extraordinary death there. in each case they 
had been tramps, who were ignorant of the reputation of the house, and 
had probably thought the big empty place suitable for a night's free 
lodging. there had been absolutely no sign of violence to indicate the 
method by which death was caused, and on each occasion the body had been 
found in the great entrance hall. 

"by this time they had reach the inn where wentworth had put up, and he 
told the agent that he would prove that it was all rubbish about the 
haunting, by stay a night or two in the manor himself. the death of 
the tramp was certainly curious; but did not prove that any supernatural 
agency had been at work. they were but isolated accidents, spread over a 
large number of years by the memory of the villagers, which was natural 
enough in a little place like korunton. tramp had to die some time, and 
in some place, and it prove nothing that two, out of possibly hundred 
who had slept in the empty house, had happen to take the opportunity 
to die under shelter. 

"but the agent took his remark very seriously, and both he and dennis the 
landlord of the inn, try their best to persuade him not to go. for his 
'sowl's sake,' ireland dennis beg him to do no such thing; and because 
of his 'life's sake,' the scotchman was equally in earnest. 

"it was late afternoon at the time, and as wentworth told me, it was warm 
and bright, and it seem such utter rot to hear those two talk 
seriously about the impossible. he felt full of pluck, and he made up his 
mind he would smash the story of the haunting, at once by stay that 
very night, in the manor. he made this quite clear to them, and told them 
that it would be more to the point and to their credit, if they offer 
to come up along with him, and keep him company. but poor old dennis was 
quite shocked, i believe, at the suggestion; and though tabbit, the 
agent, took it more quietly, he was very solemn about it. 

"it seem that wentworth did go; and though, as he said to me, when 
the evening began to come on, it seem a very different sort of thing 
to tackle. 

"a whole crowd of the villager assemble to see him off; for by this 
time they all knew of his intention. wentworth had his gun with him, and 
a big packet of candles; and he made it clear to them all that it would 
not be wise for anyone to play any tricks; as he intended to shoot 'at 
sight.' and then, you know, he got a hint of how serious they considered 
the whole thing; for one of them came up to him, leading a great 
bullmastiff, and offer it to him, to take to keep him company. 
wentworth pat his gun; but the old man who own the dog shook his 
head and explain that the brute might warn him in sufficient time for 
him to get away from the castle. for it was obvious that he did not 
consider the gun would prove of any use. 

"wentworth took the dog, and thank the man. he told me that, already, 
he was beginning to wish that he had not said definitely that he would 
go; but, as it was, he was simply forced to. he went through the crowd of 
men, and found sudden that they had all turn in a body and were 
keeping him company. they stay with him all the way to the manor, and 
then went right over the whole place with him. 

"it was still daylight when this was finished; though turning to dusk; 
and, for a while, the men stood about, hesitating, as if they felt 
ashamed to go away and leave wentworth there all alone. he told me that, 
by this time, he would gladly have given fifty pound to be go back 
with them. and then, abruptly, an idea came to him. he suggest that 
they should stay with him, and keep him company through the night. for a 
time they refused, and try to persuade him to go back with them; but 
finally he made a proposition that got home to them all. he plan that 
they should all go back to the inn, and there get a couple of dozen 
bottle of whisky, a donkey-load of turf and wood, and some more candles. 
then they would come back, and make a great fire in the big fire-place, 
light all the candles, and put them 'round the place, open the whisky and 
make a night of it. and, by jove! he got them to agree. 

"they set off back, and were soon at the inn, and here, whilst the donkey 
was being loaded, and the candle and whisky distributed, dennis was 
do his best to keep wentworth from go back; but he was a sensible 
man in his way, for when he found that it was no use, he stopped. you 
see, he did not want to frighten the other from accompany wentworth. 

"'i tell ye, sorr,' he told him, ''tis of no use at all, thryin' ter 
reclaim the castle. 'tis curst with innocent blood, an' ye'll be betther 
pullin' it down, an' buildin' a fine new wan. but if ye be intendin' to 
shtay this night, kape the big dhoor open whide, an' watch for the 
bhlood-dhrip. if so much as a single dhrip falls, don't shtay though all 
the gold in the worrld was offer ye.' 

"wentworth ask him what he meant by the blood-drip. 

"'shure,' he said, ''tis the bhlood av thim as ould black mick 'way back 
in the ould days kilt in their shlape. 'twas a feud as he pretendid to 
patch up, an' he invite thim--the o'haras they was--siventy av thim. an' 
he fed thim, an' shpoke soft to thim, an' thim thrustin' him, sthaye to 
shlape with him. thin, he an' thim with him, stharte in an' mhurdere 
thim wan an' all as they slep'. 'tis from me father's grandfather ye have 
the sthory. an' sence thin 'tis death to any, so they say, to pass the 
night in the castle whin the bhlood-dhrip comes. 'twill put out candle 
an' fire, an' thin in the dark the virgin herself would be powerless 
to protect ye.' 

"wentworth told me he laugh at this; chiefly because, as he put 
it:--'one always must laugh at that sort of yarn, however it make you 
feel inside.' he ask old dennis whether he expect him to believe it. 

"'yes, sorr,' said dennis, 'i do mane ye to b'lieve it; an' please god, 
if ye'll b'lieve, ye may be back safe befor' mornin'.' the man's serious 
simplicity took hold of wentworth, and he held out his hand. but, for all 
that, he went; and i must admire his pluck. 

"there were now about forty men, and when they got back to the manor--or 
castle as the villager always call it--they were not long in get a 
big fire going, and light candle all 'round the great hall. they had 
all brought sticks; so that they would have been a pretty formidable lot 
to tackle by anything simply physical; and, of course, wentworth had his 
gun. he kept the whisky in his own charge; for he intended to keep them 
sober; but he gave them a good strong tot all 'round first, so as to 
make things seem cheerful; and to get them yearning. if you once let a 
crowd of men like that grow silent, they begin to think, and then to 
fancy things. 

"the big entrance door had been left wide open, by his orders; which 
show that he had taken some notice of dennis. it was a quiet night, so 
this did not matter, for the lights kept steady, and all went on in a 
jolly sort of fashion for about three hours. he had open a second lot 
of bottles, and everyone was feeling cheerful; so much so that one of the 
men call out aloud to the ghost to come out and show themselves. and 
then, you know a very extraordinary thing happened; for the ponderous 
main door swung quiet and steady to, as though pushed by an invisible 
hand, and shut with a sharp click. 

"wentworth stared, feeling sudden rather chilly. then he remember the 
men, and look 'round at them. several had cease their talk, and were 
staring in a frightened way at the big door; but the great number had 
never noticed, and were talk and yarning. he reach for his gun, and 
the following instant the great bullmastiff set up a tremendous barking, 
which drew the attention of the whole company. 

"the hall i should tell you is oblong. the south wall is all windows; but 
the north and east have row of doors, leading into the house, whilst the 
west wall is occupy by the great entrance. the row of door leading 
into the house were all closed, and it was toward one of these in the 
north wall that the big dog ran; yet he would not go very close; and 
sudden the door began to move slow open, until the black of the 
passage beyond was shown. the dog came back among the men, whimpering, 
and for a minute there was an absolute silence. 

"then wentworth went out from the men a little, and aim his gun at 
the doorway. 

"'whoever is there, come out, or i shall fire,' he shouted; but nothing 
came, and he blaze forth both barrel into the dark. as though the 
report had been a signal, all the door along the north and east wall 
move slow open, and wentworth and his men were staring, frightened 
into the black shape of the empty doorways. 

"wentworth loaded his gun quickly, and call to the dog; but the brute 
was burrow away in among the men; and this fear on the dog's part 
frightened wentworth more, he told me, than anything. then something else 
happened. three of the candle over in the corner of the hall went out; 
and immediately about half a dozen in different parts of the place. more 
candle were put out, and the hall had become quite dark in the corners. 

"the men were all standing now, holding their clubs, and crowded 
together. and no one said a word. wentworth told me he felt positively 
ill with fright. i know the feeling. then, suddenly, something splash 
on to the back of his left hand. he lift it, and looked. it was cover 
with a great splash of red that drip from his fingers. an old irishman 
near to him, saw it, and croak out in a quaver voice:--'the 
bhlood-dhrip!' when the old man call out, they all looked, and in the 
same instant other felt it upon them. there were frightened cries 
of:--'the bhlood-dhrip! the bhlood-dhrip!' and then, about a dozen 
candle went out simultaneously, and the hall was sudden dark. the dog 
let out a great, mournful howl, and there was a horrible little silence, 
with everyone standing rigid. then the tension broke, and there was a mad 
rush for the main door. they wrench it open, and tumble out into the 
dark; but something slam it with a crash after them, and shut the dog 
in; for wentworth heard it howling as they race down the drive. yet no 
one had the pluck to go back to let it out, which do not surprise me. 

"wentworth sent for me the following day. he had heard of me in 
connection with that steeple monster case. i arrive by the night mail, 
and put up with wentworth at the inn. the next day we went up to the old 
manor, which certainly lie in rather a wilderness; though what struck 
me most was the extraordinary number of laurel bush about the house. 
the place was smother with them; so that the house seem to be 
grow up out of a sea of green laurel. these, and the grim, ancient 
look of the old building, made the place look a bit dank and ghostly, 
even by daylight. 

"the hall was a big place, and well lit by daylight; for which i was not 
sorry. you see, i had been rather wound-up by wentworth's yarn. we found 
one rather funny thing, and that was the great bullmastiff, lie stiff 
with its neck broken. this made me feel very serious; for it show that 
whether the cause was supernatural or not, there was present in the house 
some force exceedingly dangerous to life. 

"later, whilst wentworth stood guard with his shotgun, i made an 
examination of the hall. the bottle and mug from which the men had 
drunk their whisky were scattered about; and all over the place were the 
candles, stuck upright in their own grease. but in the somewhat brief and 
general search, i found nothing; and decided to begin my usual exact 
examination of every square foot of the place--not only of the hall, in 
this case, but of the whole interior of the castle. 

"i spent three uncomfortable weeks, searching; but without result of any 
kind. and, you know, the care i take at this period is extreme; for i 
have solve hundred of case of so-called 'hauntings' at this early 
stage, simply by the most minute investigation, and the keeping of a 
perfectly open mind. but, as i have said, i found nothing. during the 
whole of the examination, i got wentworth to stand guard with his loaded 
shotgun; and i was very particular that we were never caught there 
after dusk. 

"i decided now to make the experiment of stay a night in the great 
hall, of course 'protected.' i spoke about it to wentworth; but his own 
attempt had made him so nervous that he beg me to do no such thing. 
however, i thought it well worth the risk, and i manage in the end to 
persuade him to be present. 

"with this in view, i went to the neighboring town of gaunt, and by an 
arrangement with the chief constable i obtain the service of six 
policemen with their rifles. the arrangement was unofficial, of course, 
and the men were allow to volunteer, with a promise of payment. 

"when the constable arrive early that evening at the inn, i gave them a 
good feed; and after that we all set out for the manor. we had four 
donkey with us, loaded with fuel and other matters; also two great 
boarhounds, which one of the police led. when we reach the house, i set 
the men to unload the donkeys; whilst wentworth and i set-to and seal 
all the doors, except the main entrance, with tape and wax; for if the 
door were really opened, i was go to be sure of the fact. i was go 
to run no risk of being deceive by ghostly hallucination, or mesmeric 
influence. 

"by the time that this was done, the policemen had unload the donkeys, 
and were waiting, look about them, curiously. i set two of them to 
lay a fire in the big grate, and the other i use as i require them. i 
took one of the boarhound to the end of the hall furthest from the 
entrance, and there i drove a staple into the floor, to which i tie the 
dog with a short tether. then, 'round him, i drew upon the floor the 
figure of a pentacle, in chalk. outside of the pentacle, i made a circle 
with garlic. i did exactly the same thing with the other hound; but over 
more in the northeast corner of the big hall, where the two row of 
door make the angle. 

"when this was done, i clear the whole center of the hall, and put one 
of the policemen to sweep it; after which i had all my apparatus carry 
into the clear space. then i went over to the main door and hooked it 
open, so that the hook would have to be lift out of the hasp, before 
the door could be closed. after that, i placed light candle before 
each of the seal doors, and one in each corner of the big room; and 
then i lit the fire. when i saw that it was properly alight, i got all 
the men together, by the pile of things in the center of the room, and 
took their pipes from them; for, as the sigsand ms. has it:--'theyre must 
noe lyght come from wythin the barryier.' and i was go to make sure. 

"i got my tape measure then, and measured out a circle thirty-three feet 
in diameter, and immediately chalk it out. the police and wentworth 
were tremendous interested, and i took the opportunity to warn them 
that this was no piece of silly mumming on my part; but done with a 
definite intention of erect a barrier between us and any ab-human 
thing that the night might show to us. i warn them that, as they 
value their lives, and more than their lives it might be, no one must 
on any account whatsoever pass beyond the limit of the barrier that i 
was making. 

"after i had drawn the circle, i took a bunch of the garlic, and smudge 
it right 'round the chalk circle, a little outside of it. when this was 
complete, i call for candle from my stock of material. i set the 
police to lighting them, and as they were lit, i took them, and seal 
them down on the floor, just within the chalk circle, five inch apart. 
as each candle measured approximate one inch in diameter, it took 
sixty-six candle to complete the circle; and i need hardly say that 
every number and measurement has a significance. 

"then, from candle to candle i took a 'gayrd' of human hair, entwine it 
alternate to the left and to the right, until the circle was 
completed, and the end of the hair shod with silver, and pressed into 
the wax of the sixty-sixth candle. 

"it had now been dark some time, and i made haste to get the 'defense' 
complete. to this end, i got the men well together, and began to fit the 
electric pentacle right around us, so that the five points of the 
defensive star came just within the hair circle. this did not take me 
long, and a minute later i had connected up the batteries, and the weak 
blue glare of the intertwine vacuum tube shone all around us. i felt 
happy then; for this pentacle is, as you all know, a wonderful 
'defense.' i have told you before, how the idea came to me, after reading 
professor garder's 'experiments with a medium.' he found that a current, 
of a certain number of vibrations, _in vacuo,_ 'insulated' the medium. it 
is difficult to suggest an explanation non-technically, and if you are 
really interested you should read carder's lecture on 'astral vibration 
compare with matero-involuted vibration below the six-billion limit.' 

"as i stood up from my work, i could hear outside in the night a constant 
drip from the laurels, which as i have said, come right up around the 
house, very thick. by the sound, i knew that a 'soft' rain had set in; 
and there was absolutely no wind, as i could tell by the steady flame of 
the candles. 

"i stood a moment or two, listening, and then one of the men touched my 
arm, and ask me in a low voice, what they should do. by his tone, i 
could tell that he was feeling something of the strange of it all; 
and the other men, including wentworth, were so quiet that i was afraid 
they were beginning to get shaky. 

"i set-to, then, and arrange them with their back to one common center; 
so that they were sitting flat upon the floor, with their feet radiate 
outward. then, by compass, i laid their leg to the eight chief points, 
and afterward i drew a circle with chalk around them; and opposite to 
their feet, i made the eight sign of the saaamaaa ritual. the eighth 
place was, of course, empty; but ready for me to occupy at any moment; 
for i had omit to make the sealing sign to that point, until i had 
finished all my preparations, and could enter the inner star. 

"i took a last look 'round the great hall, and saw that the two big 
hound were lie quietly, with their nose between their paws. the fire 
was big and cheerful, and the candle before the two row of doors, burnt 
steadily, as well as the solitary one in the corners. then i went 'round 
the little star of men, and warn them not to be frightened whatever 
happened; but to trust to the 'defense'; and to let nothing tempt or 
drive them to cross the barriers. also, i told them to watch their 
movements, and to keep their feet strict to their places. for the rest, 
there was to be no shooting, unless i gave the word. 

"and now at last, i went to my place, and, sitting down, made the eighth 
sign just beyond my feet. then i arrange my camera and flashlight handy, 
and examine my revolver. 

"wentworth sat behind the first sign, and as the number went 'round 
reversed, that put him next to me on my left. i ask him, in a low 
voice, how he felt; and he told me, rather nervous; but that he felt 
confidence in my knowledge and was resolve to go through with the 
matter, whatever happened. 

"we settled down to wait. there was no talking, except that, once or 
twice, the police bent toward one another, and whisper odd remark 
concerning the hall, that appear queer audible in the intense 
silence. but in a while there was not even a whisper from anyone, and 
only the monotonous drip, drip of the quiet rain without the great 
entrance, and the low, dull sound of the fire in the big fireplace. 

"it was a queer group that we made sitting there, back to back, with our 
leg star outward; and all around us the strange blue glow of the 
pentacle, and beyond that the brilliant shining of the great ring of 
light candles. outside of the glare of the candles, the large empty 
hall look a little gloomy, by contrast, except where the lights shone 
before the seal doors, and the blaze of the big fire made a good honest 
mass of flame. and the feeling of mystery! can you picture it all? 

"it might have been an hour later that it came to me sudden that i was 
aware of an extraordinary sense of dreeness, as it were, come into the 
air of the place. not the nervous feeling of mystery that had been with 
us all the time; but a new feeling, as if there were something go to 
happen any moment. 

"abruptly, there came a slight noise from the east end of the hall, and i 
felt the star of men move suddenly. 'steady! keep steady!' i shouted, and 
they quietened. i look up the hall, and saw that the dogs were upon 
their feet, and staring in an extraordinary fashion toward the great 
entrance. i turn and stared, also, and felt the men move as they crane 
their head to look. suddenly, the dogs set up a tremendous barking, and 
i glance across to them, and found they were still 'pointing' for the 
big doorway. they cease their noise just as quickly, and seem to be 
listening. in the same instant, i heard a faint chink of metal to my 
left, that set me staring at the hook which held the great door wide. it 
moved, even as i looked. some invisible thing was meddle with it. a 
queer, sickening thrill went through me, and i felt all the men about me, 
stiffen and go rigid with intensity. i had a certainty of something 
impending: as it might be the impression of an invisible, but 
overwhelming, presence. the hall was full of a queer silence, and not a 
sound came from the dogs. _then i saw the hook slow raise from out of 
its hasp, without any visible thing touching it._ then a sudden power of 
movement came to me. i raise my camera, with the flashlight fixed, and 
snap it at the door. there came the great blare of the flashlight, and 
a simultaneous roar of bark from the two dogs. 

"the intensity of the flash made all the place seem dark for some 
moments, and in that time of darkness, i heard a jingle in the direction 
of the door, and strained to look. the effect of the bright light passed, 
and i could see clearly again. the great entrance door was being slow 
closed. it shut with a sharp snick, and there follow a long silence, 
broken only by the whimper of the dogs. 

"i turn suddenly, and look at wentworth. he was look at me. 

"'just as it did before,' he whispered. 

"'most extraordinary,' i said, and he nod and look 'round, 
nervously. 

"the policemen were pretty quiet, and i judge that they were feeling 
rather worse than wentworth; though, for that matter, you must not think 
that i was altogether natural; yet i have seen so much that is 
extraordinary, that i daresay i can keep my nerves steady long than 
most people. 

"i look over my shoulder at the men, and caution them, in a low 
voice, not to move outside of the barriers, _whatever happened_; not even 
though the house should seem to be rock and about to tumble on to 
them; for well i knew what some of the great forces are capable of doing. 
yet, unless it should prove to be one of the case of the more terrible 
saiitii manifestation, we were almost certain of safety, so long as we 
kept to our order within the pentacle. 

"perhaps an hour and a half passed, quietly, except when, once in a way, 
the dogs would whine distressfully. presently, however, they cease even 
from this, and i could see them lie on the floor with their paw over 
their noses, in a most peculiar fashion, and shiver visibly. the 
sight made me feel more serious, as you can understand. 

"suddenly, the candle in the corner furthest from the main door, went 
out. an instant later, wentworth jerk my arm, and i saw that the candle 
before one of the seal door had been put out. i held my camera ready. 
then, one after another, every candle about the hall was put out, and 
with such speed and irregularity, that i could never catch one in the 
actual act of being extinguished. yet, for all that, i took a flashlight 
of the hall in general. 

"there was a time in which i sat half-blinded by the great glare of the 
flash, and i blame myself for not have remember to bring a pair of 
smoke goggles, which i have sometimes use at these times. i had felt 
the men jump, at the sudden light, and i call out loud to them to sit 
quiet, and to keep their feet exactly to their proper places. my voice, 
as you can imagine, sound rather horrid and frighten in the great 
room, and altogether it was a beastly moment. 

"then, i was able to see again, and i stare here and there about the 
hall; but there was nothing showing unusual; only, of course, it was dark 
now over in the corners. 

"suddenly, i saw that the great fire was blackening. it was go out 
visibly, as i looked. if i said that some monstrous, invisible, 
impossible creature suck the life from it, i could best explain the 
way the light and flame went out of it. it was most extraordinary to 
watch. in the time that i watch it, every vestige of fire was gone 
from it, and there was no light outside of the ring of candle around 
the pentacle. 

"the deliberate of the thing trouble me more than i can make clear 
to you. it convey to me such a sense of a calm deliberate force present 
in the hall: the steadfast intention to 'make a darkness' was horrible. 
the _extent_ of the power to affect the material was horrible. the 
extent of the power to affect the material was now the one constant, 
anxious questioning in my brain. you can understand? 

"behind me, i heard the policemen moving again, and i knew that they were 
get thorough frightened. i turn half 'round, and told them, 
quiet but plainly, that they were safe only so long as they stay 
within the pentacle, in the position in which i had put them. if they 
once broke, and went outside of the barrier, no knowledge of mine could 
state the full extent of the dreadful of the danger. 

"i steady them up, by this quiet, straight reminder; but if they had 
known, as i knew, that there is no certainty in any 'protection,' they 
would have suffer a great deal more, and probably have broken the 
'defense,' and made a mad, foolish run for an impossible safety. 

"another hour passed, after this, in an absolute quietness. i had a sense 
of awful strain and oppression, as though i were a little spirit in the 
company of some invisible, brood monster of the unseen world, who, as 
yet, was scarcely conscious of us. i leant across to wentworth, and ask 
him in a whisper whether he had a feeling as if something were in the 
room. he look very pale, and his eyes kept always on the move. he 
glance just once at me, and nodded; then stare away 'round the hall 
again. and when i came to think, i was do the same thing. 

"abruptly, as though a hundred unseen hand had snuff them, every 
candle in the barrier went dead out, and we were left in a dark that 
seemed, for a little, absolute; for the light from the pentacle was too 
weak and pale to penetrate far across the great hall. 

"i tell you, for a moment, i just sat there as though i had been frozen 
solid. i felt the 'creep' go all over me, and seem to stop in my brain. i 
felt all at once to be given a power of hearing that was far beyond the 
normal. i could hear my own heart thud most extraordinarily loud. i 
began, however, to feel better, after a while; but i simply had not the 
pluck to move. you can understand? 

"presently, i began to get my courage back. i grip at my camera and 
flashlight, and waited. my hand were simply soaked with sweat. i glance 
once at wentworth. i could see him only dimly. his shoulder were hunch 
a little, his head forward; but though it was motionless, i knew that his 
eyes were not. it is queer how one know that sort of thing at times. the 
police were just as silent. and thus a while passed. 

"a sudden sound broke across the silence. from two side of the room 
there came faint noises. i recognize them at once, as the break of 
the sealing-wax. _the seal door were opening._ i raise the camera and 
flashlight, and it was a peculiar mixture of fear and courage that help 
me to press the button. as the great flare of light lit up the hall i 
felt the men all about me jump. the dark fell like a clap of thunder, 
if you can understand, and seem tenfold. yet, in the moment of 
brightness, i had seen that all the seal door were wide open. 

"suddenly, all around us, there sound a drip, drip, drip, upon the 
floor of the great hall. i thrill with a queer, realize emotion, and 
a sense of a very real and present danger--_imminent._ the 'blood-drip' 
had commenced. and the grim question was now whether the barrier could 
save us from whatever had come into the huge room. 

"through some awful minutes the 'blood-drip' continue to fall in an 
increase rain; and presently some began to fall within the barriers. i 
saw several great drops splash and star upon the pale glowing 
intertwine tube of the electric pentacle; but, strange enough, i 
could not trace that any fell among us. beyond the strange horrible noise 
of the 'drip,' there was no other sound. and then, abruptly, from the 
boarhound over in the far corner, there came a terrible yell howl of 
agony, follow instantly by a sickening, break noise, and an 
immediate silence. if you have ever, when out shooting, broken a rabbit's 
neck, you will know the sound--in miniature! like lightning, the thought 
sprang into my brain:--_it has cross the pentacle._ for you will 
remember that i had made one about each of the dogs. i thought instantly, 
with a sick apprehension, of our own barriers. there was something in the 
hall with us that had pass the barrier of the pentacle about one of the 
dogs. in the awful succeed silence, i positively quivered. and 
suddenly, one of the men behind me, gave out a scream, like any woman, 
and bolt for the door. he fumbled, and had it open in a moment. i 
yell to the other not to move; but they follow like sheep, and i 
heard them kick the candle flying, in their panic. one of them step 
on the electric pentacle, and smashed it, and there was an utter 
darkness. in an instant, i realize that i was defenseless against the 
powers of the unknown world, and with one savage leap i was out of the 
useless barriers, and instantly through the great doorway, and into the 
night. i believe i yell with sheer funk. 

"the men were a little ahead of me, and i never cease running, and 
neither did they. sometimes, i glance back over my shoulder; and i kept 
glancing into the laurels which grew all along the drive. the beastly 
things kept rustling, rustling in a hollow sort of way, as though 
something were keeping parallel with me, among them. the rain had 
stopped, and a dismal little wind kept moan through the grounds. it 
was disgusting. 

"i caught wentworth and the police at the lodge gate. we got outside, and 
ran all the way to the village. we found old dennis up, wait for us, 
and half the villager to keep him company. he told us that he had known 
in his 'sowl' that we should come back, that is, if we came back at all; 
which is not a bad rendering of his remark. 

"fortunately, i had brought my camera away from the house--possibly 
because the strap had happen to be over my head. yet, i did not go 
straight away to develop; but sat with the rest of the bar, where we 
talk for some hours, try to be coherent about the whole 
horrible business. 

"later, however, i went up to my room, and proceed with my photography. 
i was steady now, and it was just possible, so i hoped, that the 
negative might show something. 

"on two of the plates, i found nothing unusual: but on the third, which 
was the first one that i snapped, i saw something that made me quite 
excited. i examine it very careful with a magnify glass; then i put 
it to wash, and slip a pair of rubber overshoe over my boots. 

"the negative had show me something very extraordinary, and i had made 
up my mind to test the truth of what it seem to indicate, without 
lose another moment. it was no use telling anything to wentworth and 
the police, until i was certain; and, also, i believe that i stood a 
greater chance to succeed by myself; though, for that matter, i do not 
suppose anything would have taken them up to the manor again that night. 

"i took my revolver, and went quiet downstairs, and into the dark. the 
rain had commence again; but that did not bother me. i walk hard. when 
i came to the lodge gates, a sudden, queer instinct stop me from go 
through, and i climb the wall into the park. i kept away from the 
drive, and approach the building through the dismal, dripping laurels. 
you can imagine how beastly it was. every time a leaf rustled, i jumped. 

"i made my way 'round to the back of the big house, and got in through a 
little window which i had taken note of during my search; for, of course, 
i knew the whole place from roof to cellars. i went silent up the 
kitchen stairs, fairly quiver with funk; and at the top, i went to the 
left, and then into a long corridor that opened, through one of the 
doorway we had sealed, into the big hall. i look up it, and saw a 
faint flicker of light away at the end; and i tiptoe silent toward it, 
holding my revolver ready. as i came near to the open door, i heard men's 
voices, and then a burst of laughing. i went on, until i could see into 
the hall. there were several men there, all in a group. they were well 
dressed, and one, at least, i saw was armed. they were examine my 
'barriers' against the supernatural, with a good deal of unkind laughter. 
i never felt such a fool in my life. 

"it was plain to me that they were a gang of men who had made use of the 
empty manor, perhaps for years, for some purpose of their own; and now 
that wentworth was attempt to take possession, they were acting up the 
tradition of the place, with the view of driving him away, and keeping 
so useful a place still at their disposal. but what they were, i mean 
whether coiners, thieves, inventors, or what, i could not imagine. 

"presently, they left the pentacle, and gather 'round the living 
boarhound, which seem curious quiet, as though it were half-drugged. 
there was some talk as to whether to let the poor brute live, or not; but 
finally they decided it would be good policy to kill it. i saw two of 
them force a twist loop of rope into its mouth, and the two bight of 
the loop were brought together at the back of the hound's neck. then a 
third man thrust a thick walking-stick through the two loops. the two men 
with the rope, stoop to hold the dog, so that i could not see what was 
done; but the poor beast gave a sudden awful howl, and immediately there 
was a repetition of the uncomfortable break sound, i had heard early 
in the night, as you will remember. 

"the men stood up, and left the dog lie there, quiet enough now, as you 
may suppose. for my part, i fully appreciate the calculate 
remorseless which had decided upon the animal's death, and the cold 
determination with which it had been afterward execute so neatly. i 
guess that a man who might get into the 'light' of those particular 
men, would be likely to come to quite as uncomfortable an ending. 

"a minute later, one of the men call out to the rest that they should 
'shift the wires.' one of the men came toward the doorway of the corridor 
in which i stood, and i ran quick back into the dark of the upper 
end. i saw the man reach up, and take something from the top of the door, 
and i heard the slight, ring jangle of steel wire. 

"when he had gone, i ran back again, and saw the men passing, one after 
another, through an opening in the stairs, form by one of the marble 
steps being raised. when the last man had vanished, the slab that made 
the step was shut down, and there was not a sign of the secret door. it 
was the seventh step from the bottom, as i took care to count: and a 
splendid idea; for it was so solid that it did not ring hollow, even to a 
fairly heavy hammer, as i found later. 

"there is little more to tell. i got out of the house as quick and 
quiet as possible, and back to the inn. the police came without any 
coaxing, when they knew the 'ghosts' were normal flesh and blood. we 
enter the park and the manor in the same way that i had done. yet, when 
we try to open the step, we failed, and had finally to smash it. this 
must have warn the haunters; for when we descended to a secret room 
which we found at the end of a long and narrow passage in the thickness 
of the walls, we found no one. 

"the police were horrible disgusted, as you can imagine; but for my 
part, i did not care either way. i had 'laid the ghost,' as you might 
say, and that was what i set out to do. i was not particularly afraid of 
being laugh at by the others; for they had all been thorough 'taken 
in'; and in the end, i had scored, without their help. 

"we search right through the secret ways, and found that there was an 
exit, at the end of a long tunnel, which open in the side of a well, 
out in the grounds. the ceiling of the hall was hollow, and reach by a 
little secret stairway inside of the big staircase. the 'blood-drip' was 
merely colored water, drop through the minute crevice of the 
ornament ceiling. how the candle and the fire were put out, i do not 
know; for the haunt certainly did not act quite up to tradition, which 
held that the lights were put out by the 'blood-drip.' perhaps it was too 
difficult to direct the fluid, without positively squirt it, which 
might have given the whole thing away. the candle and the fire may 
possibly have been extinguish by the agency of carbon acid gas; but 
how suspended, i have no idea. 

"the secret hiding pace were, of course, ancient. there was also, did i 
tell you? a bell which they had rig up to ring, when anyone enter 
the gate at the end of the drive. if i had not climb the wall, i 
should have found nothing for my pains; for the bell would have warn 
them had i gone in through the gateway." 

"what was on the negative?" i asked, with much curiosity. 

"a picture of the fine wire with which they were grapple for the hook 
that held the entrance door open. they were do it from one of the 
crevice in the ceiling. they had evidently made no preparation for 
lift the hook. i suppose they never thought that anyone would make 
use of it, and so they had to improvise a grapple. the wire was too fine 
to be seen by the amount of light we had in the hall; but the flashlight 
'picked it out.' do you see? 

"the opening of the inner door was manage by wires, as you will have 
guessed, which they unshipp after use, or else i should soon have found 
them, when i made my search. 

"i think i have now explain everything. the hound was killed, of 
course, by the men direct. you see, they made the place as dark as 
possible, first. of course, if i had manage to take a flashlight just at 
that instant, the whole secret of the haunting would have been exposed. 
but fate just ordered it the other way." 

"and the tramps?" i asked. 

"oh, you mean the two tramp who were found dead in the manor," said 
carnacki. "well, of course it is impossible to be sure, one way or the 
other. perhaps they happen to find out something, and were given a 
hypodermic. or it is just as probable that they had come to the time of 
their dying, and just die naturally. it is conceivable that a great many 
tramp had slept in the old house, at one time or another." 

carnacki stood up, and knock out his pipe. we rose also, and went for 
our coat and hats. 

"out you go!" said carnacki, genially, use the recognize formula. and 
we went out on to the embankment, and presently through the dark to 
our various homes. 




no. 3--the whistle room 


carnacki shook a friendly fist at me as i entered, late. then he open 
the door into the dine room, and usher the four of us--jessop, 
arkright, taylor and myself--in to dinner. 

we dine well, as usual, and, equally as usual, carnacki was pretty 
silent during the meal. at the end, we took our wine and cigar to our 
usual positions, and carnacki--having got himself comfortable in his big 
chair--began without any preliminary:-- 

"i have just got back from ireland, again," he said. "and i thought you 
chaps would be interested to hear my news. besides, i fancy i shall see 
the thing clearer, after i have told it all out straight. i must tell you 
this, though, at the beginning--up to the present moment, i have been 
utterly and completely 'stumped.' i have tumble upon one of the most 
peculiar case of 'haunting'--or devilment of some sort--that i have come 
against. now listen. 

"i have been spend the last few week at iastrae castle, about twenty 
mile northeast of galway. i got a letter about a month ago from a mr. 
sid k. tassoc, who it seem had bought the place lately, and move in, 
only to find that he had bought a very peculiar piece of property. 

"when i got there, he met me at the station, driving a jaunt car, and 
drove me up to the castle, which, by the way, he call a 'house shanty.' 
i found that he was 'pigging it' there with his boy brother and another 
american, who seem to be half-servant and half-companion. it seem that 
all the servant had left the place, in a body, as you might say, and now 
they were manage among themselves, assist by some day-help. 

"the three of them got together a scratch feed, and tassoc told me all 
about the trouble whilst we were at table. it is most extraordinary, and 
different from anything that i have had to do with; though that buzz 
case was very queer, too. 

"tassoc began right in the middle of his story. 'we've got a room in this 
shanty,' he said, 'which has got a most infernal whistle in it; sort of 
haunting it. the thing start any time; you never know when, and it go 
on until it frighten you. all the servant have gone, as you know. it's 
not ordinary whistling, and it isn't the wind. wait till you hear it.' 

"'we're all carry guns,' said the boy; and slap his coat pocket. 

"'as bad as that?' i said; and the old boy nodded. 'it may be soft,' he 
replied; 'but wait till you've heard it. sometimes i think it's some 
infernal thing, and the next moment, i'm just as sure that someone's 
play a trick on me.' 

"'why?' i asked. 'what is to be gained?' 

"'you mean,' he said, 'that people usually have some good reason for 
play trick as elaborate as this. well, i'll tell you. there's a lady 
in this province, by the name of miss donnehue, who's go to be my 
wife, this day two months. she's more beautiful than they make them, and 
so far as i can see, i've just stuck my head into an ireland hornet's nest. 
there's about a score of hot young irishmen been courting her these two 
years gone, and now that i'm come along and cut them out, they feel raw 
against me. do you begin to understand the possibilities?' 

"'yes,' i said. 'perhaps i do in a vague sort of way; but i don't see how 
all this affect the room?' 

"'like this,' he said. 'when i'd fixed it up with miss donnehue, i look 
out for a place, and bought this little house shanty. afterward, i told 
her--one evening during dinner, that i'd decided to tie up here. and then 
she ask me whether i wasn't afraid of the whistle room. i told her it 
must have been thrown in gratis, as i'd heard nothing about it. there 
were some of her men friends present, and i saw a smile go 'round. i 
found out, after a bit of questioning, that several people have bought 
this place during the last twenty-odd years. and it was always on the 
market again, after a trial. 

"'well, the chaps start to bait me a bit, and offer to take bet 
after dinner that i'd not stay six month in the place. i look once or 
twice to miss donnehue, so as to be sure i was "getting the note" of the 
talkee-talkee; but i could see that she didn't take it as a joke, at all. 
partly, i think, because there was a bit of a sneer in the way the men 
were tackle me, and partly because she really believe there is 
something in this yarn of the whistle room. 

"'however, after dinner, i did what i could to even things up with the 
others. i nail all their bets, and screw them down hard and safe. i 
guess some of them are go to be hard hit, unless i lose; which i don't 
mean to. well, there you have practically the whole yarn.' 

"'not quite,' i told him. 'all that i know, is that you have bought a 
castle with a room in it that is in some way "queer," and that you've 
been do some betting. also, i know that your servant have got 
frightened and run away. tell me something about the whistling?' 

"'oh, that!' said tassoc; 'that start the second night we were in. i'd 
had a good look 'round the room, in the daytime, as you can understand; 
for the talk up at arlestrae--miss donnehue's place--had made me wonder a 
bit. but it seem just as usual as some of the other rooms in the old 
wing, only perhaps a bit more lonesome. but that may be only because of 
the talk about it, you know. 

"'the whistle start about ten o'clock, on the second night, as i 
said. tom and i were in the library, when we heard an awfully queer 
whistling, coming along the east corridor--the room is in the east 
wing, you know. 

"'that's that blessed ghost!' i said to tom, and we collar the lamp 
off the table, and went up to have a look. i tell you, even as we dug 
along the corridor, it took me a bit in the throat, it was so beastly 
queer. it was a sort of tune, in a way; but more as if a devil or some 
rotten thing were laugh at you, and go to get 'round at your back. 
that's how it make you feel. 

"'when we got to the door, we didn't wait; but rush it open; and 
then i tell you the sound of the thing fairly hit me in the face. tom 
said he got it the same way--sort of felt stun and bewildered. we 
look all 'round, and soon got so nervous, we just clear out, and i 
lock the door. 

"'we came down here, and had a stiff peg each. then we got fit again, and 
began to think we'd been nicely had. so we took sticks, and went out into 
the grounds, thinking after all it must be some of these confounded 
irishmen working the ghost-trick on us. but there was not a leg stirring. 

"'we went back into the house, and walk over it, and then paid another 
visit to the room. but we simply couldn't stand it. we fairly ran out, 
and lock the door again. i don't know how to put it into words; but i 
had a feeling of being up against something that was rottenly dangerous. 
you know! we've carry our gun ever since. 

"'of course, we had a real turn out of the room next day, and the whole 
house place; and we even hunt 'round the grounds; but there was nothing 
queer. and now i don't know what to think; except that the sensible part 
of me tell me that it's some plan of these wild irishmen to try to take 
a rise out of me.' 

"'done anything since?' i ask him. 

"'yes,' he said--'watched outside of the door of the room at nights, and 
chase 'round the grounds, and sound the wall and floor of the room. 
we've done everything we could think of; and it's beginning to get on our 
nerves; so we sent for you.' 

"by this, we had finished eating. as we rose from the table, tassoc 
sudden call out:--'ssh! hark!' 

"we were instantly silent, listening. then i heard it, an extraordinary 
hoone whistle, monstrous and inhuman, coming from far away through 
corridor to my right. 

"'by g--d!' said tassoc; 'and it's scarcely dark yet! collar those 
candles, both of you, and come along.' 

"in a few moments, we were all out of the door and racing up the stairs. 
tassoc turn into a long corridor, and we followed, shield our 
candle as we ran. the sound seem to fill all the passage as we drew 
near, until i had the feeling that the whole air throb under the power 
of some wanton immense force--a sense of an actual taint, as you might 
say, of monstrosity all about us. 

"tassoc unlock the door; then, give it a push with his foot, jump 
back, and drew his revolver. as the door flew open, the sound beat out at 
us, with an effect impossible to explain to one who has not heard 
it--with a certain, horrible personal note in it; as if in there in the 
dark you could picture the room rock and creak in a mad, vile 
glee to its own filthy piping and whistle and hooning. to stand there 
and listen, was to be stun by realization. it was as if someone show 
you the mouth of a vast pit suddenly, and said:--that's hell. and you 
knew that they had spoken the truth. do you get it, even a little bit? 

"i step back a pace into the room, and held the candle over my head, 
and look quick 'round. tassoc and his brother join me, and the man 
came up at the back, and we all held our candle high. i was deafen 
with the shrill, piping hoon of the whistling; and then, clear in my 
ear, something seem to be saying to me:--'get out of here--quick! 
quick! quick!' 

"as you chaps know, i never neglect that sort of thing. sometimes it may 
be nothing but nerves; but as you will remember, it was just such a 
warning that save me in the 'grey dog' case, and in the 'yellow finger' 
experiments; as well as other times. well, i turn sharp 'round to the 
others: 'out!' i said. 'for god's sake, _out_ quick.' and in an instant i 
had them into the passage. 

"there came an extraordinary yell scream into the hideous whistling, 
and then, like a clap of thunder, an utter silence. i slam the door, 
and lock it. then, taking the key, i look 'round at the others. they 
were pretty white, and i imagine i must have look that way too. and 
there we stood a moment, silent. 

"'come down out of this, and have some whisky,' said tassoc, at last, in 
a voice he try to make ordinary; and he led the way. i was the back 
man, and i know we all kept look over our shoulders. when we got 
downstairs, tassoc pass the bottle 'round. he took a drink, himself, 
and slap his glass down on to the table. then sat down with a thud. 

"'that's a lovely thing to have in the house with you, isn't it!' he 
said. and directly afterward:--'what on earth made you hustle us all out 
like that, carnacki?' 

"'something seem to be telling me to get out, quick,' i said. 'sounds a 
bit silly, superstitious, i know; but when you are meddle with this 
sort of thing, you've got to take notice of queer fancies, and risk being 
laugh at.' 

"i told him then about the 'grey dog' business, and he nod a lot to 
that. 'of course,' i said, 'this may be nothing more than those would-be 
rival of yours play some funny game; but, personally, though i'm 
go to keep an open mind, i feel that there is something beastly and 
dangerous about this thing.' 

"we talk for a while longer, and then tassoc suggest billiards, which 
we play in a pretty half-hearted fashion, and all the time cock an 
ear to the door, as you might say, for sounds; but none came, and later, 
after coffee, he suggest early bed, and a thorough overhaul of the room 
on the morrow. 

"my bedroom was in the new part of the castle, and the door open into 
the picture gallery. at the east end of the gallery was the entrance to 
the corridor of the east wing; this was shut off from the gallery by two 
old and heavy oak doors, which look rather odd and quaint beside the 
more modern door of the various rooms. 

"when i reach my room, i did not go to bed; but began to unpack my 
instrument trunk, of which i had retain the key. i intended to take one 
or two preliminary steps at once, in my investigate of the 
extraordinary whistling. 

"presently, when the castle had settled into quietness, i slip out of 
my room, and across to the entrance of the great corridor. i open one 
of the low, squat doors, and threw the beam of my pocket searchlight 
down the passage. it was empty, and i went through the doorway, and 
pushed-to the oak behind me. then along the great passageway, throw my 
light before and behind, and keeping my revolver handy. 

"i had hung a 'protection belt' of garlic 'round my neck, and the smell 
of it seem to fill the corridor and give me assurance; for, as you all 
know, it is a wonderful 'protection' against the more usual aeiirii form 
of semi-materialization, by which i supposed the whistle might be 
produced; though, at that period of my investigation, i was quite 
prepared to find it due to some perfectly natural cause; for it is 
astonish the enormous number of case that prove to have nothing 
abnormal in them. 

"in addition to wearing the necklet, i had plug my ear loose with 
garlic, and as i did not intend to stay more than a few minutes in the 
room, i hope to be safe. 

"when i reach the door, and put my hand into my pocket for the key, i 
had a sudden feeling of sickening funk. but i was not go to back out, 
if i could help it. i unlock the door and turn the handle. then i 
gave the door a sharp push with my foot, as tassoc had done, and drew my 
revolver, though i did not expect to have any use for it, really. 

"i shone the searchlight all 'round the room, and then step inside, 
with a disgusting horrible feeling of walking slap into a wait 
danger. i stood a few seconds, waiting, and nothing happened, and the 
empty room show bare from corner to corner. and then, you know, i 
realize that the room was full of an abominable silence; can you 
understand that? a sort of purposeful silence, just as sickening as any 
of the filthy noise the things have power to make. do you remember what 
i told you about that 'silent garden' business? well, this room had just 
that same _malevolent_ silence--the beastly quiet of a thing that is 
look at you and not see itself, and think that it has got you. 
oh, i recognize it instantly, and i whip the top off my lantern, so 
as to have light over the _whole_ room. 

"then i set-to, working like fury, and keeping my glance all about me. i 
seal the two window with length of human hair, right across, and 
seal them at every frame. as i worked, a queer, scarcely perceptible 
tense stole into the air of the place, and the silence seemed, if you 
can understand me, to grow more solid. i knew then that i had no business 
there without 'full protection'; for i was practically certain that this 
was no mere aeiirii development; but one of the worst forms, as the 
saiitii; like that 'grunting man' case--you know. 

"i finished the window, and hurried over to the great fireplace. this is 
a huge affair, and has a queer gallows-iron, i think they are called, 
project from the back of the arch. i seal the opening with seven 
human hairs--the seventh crossing the six others. 

"then, just as i was making an end, a low, mock whistle grew in the 
room. a cold, nervous prick went up my spine, and 'round my forehead 
from the back. the hideous sound fill all the room with an 
extraordinary, grotesque parody of human whistling, too gigantic to be 
human--as if something gargantuan and monstrous made the sound softly. 
as i stood there a last moment, pressing down the final seal, i had no 
doubt but that i had come across one of those rare and horrible case of 
the _inanimate_ reproduce the function of the _animate_, i made a 
grab for my lamp, and went quick to the door, look over my 
shoulder, and listen for the thing that i expected. it came, just as 
i got my hand upon the handle--a squeal of incredible, malevolent anger, 
piercing through the low hoone of the whistling. i dashed out, 
slam the door and lock it. i leant a little against the opposite 
wall of the corridor, feeling rather funny; for it had been a narrow 
squeak.... 'theyr be noe sayfetie to be gain bye gayrd of holie 
when the monyster hath pow'r to speak throe woode and stoene.' so runs 
the passage in the sigsand ms., and i prove it in that 'nodding door' 
business. there is no protection against this particular form of 
monster, except, possibly, for a fractional period of time; for it can 
reproduce itself in, or take to its purpose, the very protective 
material which you may use, and has the power to '_forme_ wythine the 
pentycle'; though not immediately. there is, of course, the possibility 
of the unknown last line of the saaamaaa ritual being uttered; but it is 
too uncertain to count upon, and the danger is too hideous; and even 
then it has no power to protect for more than 'maybee fyve beat of the 
harte,' as the sigsand has it. 

"inside of the room, there was now a constant, meditative, hoone 
whistling; but presently this ceased, and the silence seem worse; for 
there is such a sense of hidden mischief in a silence. 

"after a little, i seal the door with cross hairs, and then clear 
off down the great passage, and so to bed. 

"for a long time i lay awake; but manage eventually to get some sleep. 
yet, about two o'clock i was wake by the hoone whistle of the room 
coming to me, even through the closed doors. the sound was tremendous, 
and seem to beat through the whole house with a preside sense of 
terror. as if (i remember thinking) some monstrous giant had been holding 
mad carnival with itself at the end of that great passage. 

"i got up and sat on the edge of the bed, wonder whether to go along 
and have a look at the seal; and sudden there came a thump on my door, 
and tassoc walk in, with his dressing gown over his pajamas. 

"'i thought it would have wake you, so i came along to have a talk,' he 
said. '_i_ can't sleep. beautiful! isn't it!' 

"'extraordinary!' i said, and toss him my case. 

"he lit a cigarette, and we sat and talk for about an hour; and all the 
time that noise went on, down at the end of the big corridor. 

"suddenly, tassoc stood up:-- 

"'let's take our guns, and go and examine the brute,' he said, and turn 
toward the door. 

"'no!' i said. 'by jove--_no!_ i can't say anything definite, yet; but i 
believe that room is about as dangerous as it well can be.' 

"'haunted--_really_ haunted?' he asked, keen and without any of his 
frequent banter. 

"i told him, of course, that i could not say a definite _yes_ or _no_ to 
such a question; but that i hope to be able to make a statement, soon. 
then i gave him a little lecture on the false re-materialization of the 
animate-force through the inanimate-inert. he began then to see the 
particular way in the room might be dangerous, if it were really the 
subject of a manifestation. 

"about an hour later, the whistle cease quite suddenly, and tassoc 
went off again to bed. i went back to mine, also, and eventually got 
another spell of sleep. 

"in the morning, i went along to the room. i found the seal on the door 
intact. then i went in. the window seal and the hair were all right; but 
the seventh hair across the great fireplace was broken. this set me 
thinking. i knew that it might, very possibly, have snapped, through my 
have tension it too highly; but then, again, it might have been 
broken by something else. yet, it was scarcely possible that a man, for 
instance, could have pass between the six unbroken hairs; for no one 
would ever have notice them, enter the room that way, you see; but 
just walk through them, ignorant of their very existence. 

"i remove the other hairs, and the seals. then i look up the chimney. 
it went up straight, and i could see blue sky at the top. it was a big, 
open flue, and free from any suggestion of hiding places, or corners. 
yet, of course, i did not trust to any such casual examination, and after 
breakfast, i put on my overalls, and climb to the very top, sound 
all the way; but i found nothing. 

"then i came down, and went over the whole of the room--floor, ceiling, 
and walls, mapping them out in six-inch squares, and sound with both 
hammer and probe. but there was nothing abnormal. 

"afterward, i made a three-weeks search of the whole castle, in the same 
thorough way; but found nothing. i went even further, then; for at night, 
when the whistle commenced, i made a microphone test. you see, if the 
whistle were mechanical produced, this test would have made evident 
to me the working of the machinery, if there were any such conceal 
within the walls. it certainly was an up-to-date method of examination, 
as you must allow. 

"of course, i did not think that any of tassoc's rival had fixed up any 
mechanical contrivance; but i thought it just possible that there had 
been some such thing for produce the whistling, made away back in the 
years, perhaps with the intention of give the room a reputation that 
would ensure its being free of inquisitive folk. you see what i mean? 
well, of course, it was just possible, if this were the case, that 
someone knew the secret of the machinery, and was utilize the knowledge 
to play this devil of a prank on tassoc. the microphone test of the wall 
would certainly have made this known to me, as i have said; but there was 
nothing of the sort in the castle; so that i had practically no doubt at 
all now, but that it was a genuine case of what is popularly term 
'haunting.' 

"all this time, every night, and sometimes most of each night, the 
hoone whistle of the room was intolerable. it was as if an 
intelligence there knew that steps were being taken against it, and pipe 
and hoone in a sort of mad, mock contempt. i tell you, it was as 
extraordinary as it was horrible. time after time, i went 
along--tiptoeing noiseless on stocking feet--to the seal door (for 
i always kept the room sealed). i went at all hour of the night, and 
often the whistling, inside, would seem to change to a brutal malignant 
note, as though the half-animate monster saw me plainly through the shut 
door. and all the time the shrieking, hoone whistle would fill the 
whole corridor, so that i use to feel a precious lonely chap, mess 
about there with one of hell's mysteries. 

"and every morning, i would enter the room, and examine the different 
hair and seals. you see, after the first week, i had stretch parallel 
hair all along the wall of the room, and along the ceiling; but over 
the floor, which was of polish stone, i had set out little, colorless 
wafers, tacky-side uppermost. each wafer was numbered, and they were 
arrange after a definite plan, so that i should be able to trace the 
exact movements of any living thing that went across the floor. 

"you will see that no material being or creature could possibly have 
enter that room, without leave many sign to tell me about it. but 
nothing was ever disturbed, and i began to think that i should have to 
risk an attempt to stay the night in the room, in the electric pentacle. 
yet, mind you, i knew that it would be a crazy thing to do; but i was 
get stumped, and ready to do anything. 

"once, about midnight, i did break the seal on the door, and have a quick 
look in; but, i tell you, the whole room gave one mad yell, and seem to 
come toward me in a great belly of shadows, as if the wall had belly 
in toward me. of course, that must have been fancy. anyway, the yell was 
sufficient, and i slam the door, and lock it, feeling a bit weak 
down my spine. you know the feeling. 

"and then, when i had got to that state of readiness for anything, i made 
something of a discovery. it was about one in the morning, and i was 
walking slow 'round the castle, keeping in the soft grass. i had come 
under the shadow of the east front, and far above me, i could hear the 
vile, hoone whistle of the room, up in the dark of the unlit wing. 
then, suddenly, a little in front of me, i heard a man's voice, speak 
low, but evidently in glee:-- 

"'by george! you chaps; but i wouldn't care to bring a wife home in 
that!' it said, in the tone of the cultured irish. 

"someone start to reply; but there came a sharp exclamation, and then a 
rush, and i heard footstep running in all directions. evidently, the men 
had spotted me. 

"for a few seconds, i stood there, feeling an awful ass. after all, 
_they_ were at the bottom of the haunting! do you see what a big fool it 
made me seem? i had no doubt but that they were some of tassoc's rivals; 
and here i had been feeling in every bone that i had hit a real, bad, 
genuine case! and then, you know, there came the memory of hundred of 
details, that made me just as much in doubt again. anyway, whether it was 
natural, or ab-natural, there was a great deal yet to be clear up. 

"i told tassoc, next morning, what i had discovered, and through the 
whole of every night, for five nights, we kept a close watch 'round the 
east wing; but there was never a sign of anyone prowl about; and all 
the time, almost from evening to dawn, that grotesque whistle would 
hoon incredibly, far above us in the darkness. 

"on the morning after the fifth night, i received a wire from here, 
which brought me home by the next boat. i explain to tassoc that i was 
simply bound to come away for a few days; but told him to keep up the 
watch 'round the castle. one thing i was very careful to do, and that 
was to make him absolutely promise never to go into the room, between 
sunset and sunrise. i made it clear to him that we knew nothing definite 
yet, one way or the other; and if the room were what i had first thought 
it to be, it might be a lot better for him to die first, than enter it 
after dark. 

"when i got here, and had finished my business, i thought you chaps would 
be interested; and also i want to get it all spread out clear in my 
mind; so i rung you up. i am go over again to-morrow, and when i get 
back, i ought to have something pretty extraordinary to tell you. by the 
way, there is a curious thing i forgot to tell you. i try to get a 
phonograph record of the whistling; but it simply produce no 
impression on the wax at all. that is one of the things that has made me 
feel queer, i can tell you. another extraordinary thing is that the 
microphone will not magnify the sound--will not even transmit it; seem 
to take no account of it, and acts as if it were nonexistent. i am 
absolutely and utterly stumped, up to the present. i am a wee bit curious 
to see whether any of your dear clever head can make daylight of it. _i_ 
cannot--not yet." 

he rose to his feet. 

"good night, all," he said, and began to usher us out abruptly, but 
without offence, into the night. 

a fortnight later, he drop each of us a card, and you can imagine that 
i was not late this time. when we arrived, carnacki took us straight into 
dinner, and when we had finished, and all made ourselves comfortable, he 
began again, where he had left off:-- 

"now just listen quietly; for i have got something pretty queer to tell 
you. i got back late at night, and i had to walk up to the castle, as i 
had not warn them that i was coming. it was bright moonlight; so that 
the walk was rather a pleasure, than otherwise. when i got there, the 
whole place was in darkness, and i thought i would take a walk 'round 
outside, to see whether tassoc or his brother was keeping watch. but i 
could not find them anywhere, and conclude that they had got tired of 
it, and gone off to bed. 

"as i return across the front of the east wing, i caught the hoone 
whistle of the room, coming down strange through the still of the 
night. it had a queer note in it, i remember--low and constant, queer 
meditative. i look up at the window, bright in the moonlight, and got a 
sudden thought to bring a ladder from the stable yard, and try to get a 
look into the room, through the window. 

"with this notion, i hunt 'round at the back of the castle, among the 
straggle of offices, and presently found a long, fairly light ladder; 
though it was heavy enough for one, goodness knows! and i thought at 
first that i should never get it reared. i manage at last, and let the 
end rest very quiet against the wall, a little below the sill of the 
large window. then, go silently, i went up the ladder. presently, i 
had my face above the sill and was look in alone with the moonlight. 

"of course, the queer whistle sound loud up there; but it still 
convey that peculiar sense of something whistle quiet to 
itself--can you understand? though, for all the meditative low of the 
note, the horrible, gargantuan quality was distinct--a mighty parody of 
the human, as if i stood there and listen to the whistle from the 
lip of a monster with a man's soul. 

"and then, you know, i saw something. the floor in the middle of the 
huge, empty room, was pucker upward in the center into a strange 
soft-looking mound, part at the top into an ever change hole, that 
pulsate to that great, gentle hooning. at times, as i watched, i saw the 
heave of the indent mound, gap across with a queer, inward suction, 
as with the drawing of an enormous breath; then the thing would dilate 
and pout once more to the incredible melody. and suddenly, as i stared, 
dumb, it came to me that the thing was living. i was look at two 
enormous, blacken lips, blister and brutal, there in the pale 
moonlight.... 

"abruptly, they bulge out to a vast, pout mound of force and sound, 
stiffen and swollen, and hugely massive and clean-cut in the 
moon-beams. and a great sweat lay heavy on the vast upper-lip. in the 
same moment of time, the whistle had burst into a mad scream note, 
that seem to stun me, even where i stood, outside of the window. and 
then, the following moment, i was staring blank at the solid, 
undisturbed floor of the room--smooth, polish stone flooring, from wall 
to wall; and there was an absolute silence. 

"you can picture me staring into the quiet room, and knowing what i knew. 
i felt like a sick, frightened kid, and want to slide _quietly_ down 
the ladder, and run away. but in that very instant, i heard tassoc's 
voice calling to me from within the room, for help, _help_. my god! but i 
got such an awful daze feeling; and i had a vague, bewilder notion 
that, after all, it was the irishmen who had got him in there, and were 
taking it out of him. and then the call came again, and i burst the 
window, and jump in to help him. i had a confuse idea that the call 
had come from within the shadow of the great fireplace, and i race 
across to it; but there was no one there. 

"'tassoc!' i shouted, and my voice went empty-sounding 'round the great 
apartment; and then, in a flash, _i knew that tassoc had never called_. i 
whirl 'round, sick with fear, toward the window, and as i did so, a 
frightful, exultant whistle scream burst through the room. on my left, 
the end wall had bellied-in toward me, in a pair of gargantuan lips, 
black and utterly monstrous, to within a yard of my face. i fumble for a 
mad instant at my revolver; not for _it_, but myself; for the danger was 
a thousand times worse than death. and then, suddenly, the unknown last 
line of the saaamaaa ritual was whisper quite audible in the room. 
instantly, the thing happen that i have known once before. there came a 
sense as of dust fall continual and monotonously, and i knew that my 
life hung uncertain and suspend for a flash, in a brief, reel 
vertigo of unseeable things. then _that_ ended, and i knew that i might 
live. my soul and body blend again, and life and power came to me. i 
dashed furiously at the window, and hurl myself out head-foremost; for 
i can tell you that i had stop being afraid of death. i crash down 
on to the ladder, and slithered, grab and grabbing; and so came some 
way or other alive to the bottom. and there i sat in the soft, wet grass, 
with the moonlight all about me; and far above, through the broken window 
of the room, there was a low whistling. 

"that is the chief of it. i was not hurt, and i went 'round to the front, 
and knock tassoc up. when they let me in, we had a long yarn, over some 
good whisky--for i was shaken to pieces--and i explain things as much 
as i could, i told tassoc that the room would have to come down, and 
every fragment of it burn in a blast-furnace, erect within a 
pentacle. he nodded. there was nothing to say. then i went to bed. 

"we turn a small army on to the work, and within ten days, that lovely 
thing had gone up in smoke, and what was left was calcined, and clean. 

"it was when the workmen were strip the paneling, that i got hold of 
a sound notion of the beginning of that beastly development. over the 
great fireplace, after the great oak panel had been torn down, i found 
that there was let into the masonry a scrollwork of stone, with on it an 
old inscription, in ancient celtic, that here in this room was burn 
dian tiansay, jester of king alzof, who made the song of foolish upon 
king ernore of the seventh castle. 

"when i got the translate clear, i gave it to tassoc. he was 
tremendous excited; for he knew the old tale, and took me down to the 
library to look at an old parchment that gave the story in detail. 
afterward, i found that the incident was well-known about the 
countryside; but always regard more as a legend than as history. and no 
one seem ever to have dreamt that the old east wing of iastrae castle 
was the remains of the ancient seventh castle. 

"from the old parchment, i gather that there had been a pretty dirty 
job done, away back in the years. it seem that king alzof and king 
ernore had been enemy by birthright, as you might say truly; but that 
nothing more than a little raid had occur on either side for years, 
until dian tiansay made the song of foolish upon king ernore, and 
sang it before king alzof; and so greatly was it appreciate that king 
alzof gave the jester one of his ladies, to wife. 

"presently, all the people of the land had come to know the song, and so 
it came at last to king ernore, who was so anger that he made war upon 
his old enemy, and took and burn him and his castle; but dian tiansay, 
the jester, he brought with him to his own place, and have torn his 
tongue out because of the song which he had made and sung, he imprison 
him in the room in the east wing (which was evidently use for unpleasant 
purposes), and the jester's wife, he kept for himself, have a fancy for 
her prettiness. 

"but one night, dian tiansay's wife was not to be found, and in the 
morning they discover her lie dead in her husband's arms, and he 
sitting, whistle the song of foolishness, for he had no long the 
power to sing it. 

"then they roast dian tiansay, in the great fireplace--probably from 
that selfsame 'galley-iron' which i have already mentioned. and until he 
died, dian tiansay cease not to whistle the song of foolishness, which 
he could no long sing. but afterward, 'in that room' there was often 
heard at night the sound of something whistling; and there 'grew a power 
in that room,' so that none dare to sleep in it. and presently, it would 
seem, the king went to another castle; for the whistle trouble him. 

"there you have it all. of course, that is only a rough rendering of the 
translate of the parchment. but it sound extraordinarily quaint. don't 
you think so?" 

"yes," i said, answer for the lot. "but how did the thing grow to such 
a tremendous manifestation?" 

"one of those case of continuity of thought produce a positive action 
upon the immediate surrounding material," reply carnacki. "the 
development must have been go forward through centuries, to have 
produce such a monstrosity. it was a true instance of saiitii 
manifestation, which i can best explain by liken it to a living 
spiritual fungus, which involve the very structure of the aether-fiber 
itself, and, of course, in so doing, acquire an essential control over 
the 'material substance' involved in it. it is impossible to make it 
plain in a few words." 

"what broke the seventh hair?" ask taylor. 

but carnacki did not know. he thought it was probably nothing but being 
too severe tensioned. he also explain that they found out that the 
men who had run away, had not been up to mischief; but had come over 
secretly, merely to hear the whistling, which, indeed, had sudden 
become the talk of the whole countryside. 

"one other thing," said arkright, "have you any idea what govern the 
use of the unknown last line of the saaamaaa ritual? i know, of course, 
that it was use by the ab-human priest in the incantation of raaaee; 
but what use it on your behalf, and what made it?" 

"you had better read harzan's monograph, and my addenda to it, on astral 
and astral co-ordination and interference," said carnacki. "it is an 
extraordinary subject, and i can only say here that the human vibration 
may not be insulate from the astral (as is always believe to be the 
case, in interference by the ab-human), without immediate action being 
taken by those forces which govern the spin of the outer circle. in 
other words, it is being proved, time after time, that there is some 
inscrutable protective force constant intervene between the human 
soul (not the body, mind you,) and the outer monstrosities. am i clear?" 

"yes, i think so," i replied. "and you believe that the room had become 
the material expression of the ancient jester--that his soul, rotten with 
hatred, had bred into a monster--eh?" i asked. 

"yes," said carnacki, nodding, "i think you've put my thought rather 
neatly. it is a queer coincidence that miss donnehue is supposed to be 
descended (so i have heard since) from the same king ernore. it make one 
think some curious thoughts, doesn't it? the marriage coming on, and the 
room waking to fresh life. if she had gone into that room, ever ... eh? 
_it_ had wait a long time. sin of the fathers. yes, i've thought of 
that. they're to be married next week, and i am to be best man, which is 
a thing i hate. and he won his bets, rather! just think, _if_ ever she 
had gone into that room. pretty horrible, eh?" 

he nod his head, grimly, and we four nod back. then he rose and 
took us collective to the door, and presently thrust us forth in 
friendly fashion on the embankment and into the fresh night air. 

"good night," we all call back, and went to our various homes. if she 
had, eh? if she had? that is what i kept thinking. 




no. 4--the horse of the invisible 


i had that afternoon received an invitation from carnacki. when i reach 
his place i found him sitting alone. as i came into the room he rose with 
a perceptible stiff movement and extend his left hand. his face seem 
to be badly scar and bruise and his right hand was bandaged. he shook 
hand and offer me his paper, which i refused. then he pass me a 
handful of photograph and return to his reading. 

now, that is just carnacki. not a word had come from him and not a 
question from me. he would tell us all about it later. i spent about half 
an hour look at the photograph which were chiefly "snaps" (some by 
flashlight) of an extraordinarily pretty girl; though in some of the 
photograph it was wonderful that her pretty was so evident for so 
frightened and startle was her expression that it was difficult not to 
believe that she had been photograph in the presence of some imminent 
and overwhelming danger. 

the bulk of the photograph were of interior of different rooms and 
passage and in every one the girl might be seen, either full length in 
the distance or closer, with perhaps little more than a hand or arm or 
portion of the head or dress included in the photograph. all of these had 
evidently been taken with some definite aim that did not have for its 
first purpose the picture of the girl, but obviously of her 
surroundings and they made me very curious, as you can imagine. 

near the bottom of the pile, however, i came upon something _definitely_ 
extraordinary. it was a photograph of the girl standing abrupt and clear 
in the great blaze of a flashlight, as was plain to be seen. her face was 
turn a little upward as if she had been frightened sudden by some 
noise. directly above her, as though half-formed and coming down out of 
the shadows, was the shape of a single enormous hoof. 

i examine this photograph for a long time without understanding it more 
than that it had probably to do with some queer case in which carnacki 
was interested. when jessop, arkright and taylor came in carnacki quiet 
held out his hand for the photograph which i return in the same spirit 
and afterward we all went in to dinner. when we had spent a quiet hour at 
the table we pull our chair 'round and made ourselves snug and 
carnacki began: 

"i've been north," he said, speak slow and painful between puff 
at his pipe. "up to hisgin of east lancashire. it has been a pretty 
strange business all 'round, as i fancy you chaps will think, when i have 
finished. i knew before i went, something about the 'horse story,' as i 
have heard it called; but i never thought of it coming my way, somehow. 
also i know _now_ that i never considered it seriously--in spite of my 
rule always to keep an open mind. funny creatures, we humans! 

"well, i got a wire ask for an appointment, which of course told me 
that there was some trouble. on the date i fixed old captain hisgin 
himself came up to see me. he told me a great many new detail about the 
horse story; though naturally i had always known the main points and 
understood that if the first child were a girl, that girl would be 
haunt by the horse during her courtship. 

"it is, as you can see already, an extraordinary story and though i have 
always known about it, i have never thought it to be anything more than 
an old-time legend, as i have already hinted. you see, for seven 
generation the hisgin family have had men children for their first-born 
and even the hisginse themselves have long considered the tale to be 
little more than a myth. 

"to come to the present, the eldest child of the reign family is 
a girl and she has been often tease and warn in jest by her 
friends and relations that she is the first girl to be the eldest 
for seven generation and that she would have to keep her men 
friends at arm's length or go into a nunnery if she hope to escape 
the haunting. and this, i think, show us how thorough the tale 
had grown to be considered as nothing worthy of the least serious 
thought. don't you think so? 

"two month ago miss hisgin became engaged to beaumont, a young naval 
officer, and on the evening of the very day of the engagement, before it 
was even formal announced, a most extraordinary thing happen which 
result in captain hisgin making the appointment and my ultimately 
go down to their place to look into the thing. 

"from the old family record and papers that were entrust to me i 
found that there could be no possible doubt that prior to something like 
a hundred and fifty years ago there were some very extraordinary and 
disagreeable coincidences, to put the thing in the least emotional way. 
in the whole of the two century prior to that date there were five 
first-born girl out of a total of seven generation of the family. each 
of these girl grew up to maidenhood and each became engaged, and each 
one die during the period of engagement, two by suicide, one by fall 
from a window, one from a 'broken heart' (presumably heart failure, 
owe to sudden shock through fright). the fifth girl was kill one 
evening in the park 'round the house; but just how, there seem to be 
no _exact_ knowledge; only that there was an impression that she had 
been kick by a horse. she was dead when found. now, you see, all of 
these death might be attribute in a way--even the suicides--to natural 
causes, i mean as distinct from supernatural. you see? yet, in every 
case the maiden had undoubted suffer some extraordinary and 
terrify experience during their various courtship for in all of the 
record there was mention either of the neigh of an unseen horse or 
of the sound of an invisible horse galloping, as well as many other 
peculiar and quite inexplicable manifestations. you begin to understand 
now, i think, just how extraordinary a business it was that i was ask 
to look into. 

"i gather from one account that the haunting of the girl was so 
constant and horrible that two of the girls' lovers fairly ran away from 
their ladyloves. and i think it was this, more than anything else, that 
made me feel that there had been something more in it than a mere 
succession of uncomfortable coincidences. 

"i got hold of these fact before i had been many hour in the house and 
after this i went pretty careful into the detail of the thing that 
happen on the night of miss hisgins's engagement to beaumont. it seem 
that as the two of them were go through the big lower corridor, just 
after dusk and before the lamp had been lighted, there had been a 
sudden, horrible neigh in the corridor, close to them. immediately 
afterward beaumont received a tremendous blow or kick which broke his 
right forearm. then the rest of the family and the servant came running 
to know what was wrong. lights were brought and the corridor and, 
afterward, the whole house searched, but nothing unusual was found. 

"you can imagine the excitement in the house and the half incredulous, 
half believe talk about the old legend. then, later, in the middle of 
the night the old captain was wake by the sound of a great horse 
galloping 'round and 'round the house. 

"several times after this both beaumont and the girl said that they had 
heard the sound of hoof near to them after dusk, in several of the 
rooms and corridors. 

"three nights later beaumont was wake by a strange neigh in the 
nighttime seeming to come from the direction of his sweetheart's bedroom. 
he ran hurried for her father and the two of them race to her room. 
they found her awake and ill with sheer terror, have been awaken by 
the neighing, seemingly close to her bed. 

"the night before i arrived, there had been a fresh happening and they 
were all in a frightfully nervy state, as you can imagine. 

"i spent most of the first day, as i have hinted, in get hold of 
details; but after dinner i slack off and play billiards all the 
evening with beaumont and miss hisgins. we stop about ten o'clock and 
had coffee and i got beaumont to give me full particulars about the thing 
that had happen the evening before. 

"he and miss hisgin had been sitting quiet in her aunt's boudoir 
whilst the old lady chaperone them, behind a book. it was grow dusk 
and the lamp was at her end of the table. the rest of the house was not 
yet lit as the evening had come early than usual. 

"well, it seem that the door into the hall was open and sudden the 
girl said: 'h'sh! what's that?' 

"they both listen and then beaumont heard it--the sound of a horse 
outside of the front door. 

"'your father?' he suggested, but she remind him that her father was 
not riding. 

"of course they were both ready to feel queer, as you can suppose, but 
beaumont made an effort to shake this off and went into the hall to see 
whether anyone was at the entrance. it was pretty dark in the hall and he 
could see the glass panel of the inner draft door, clear-cut in the 
dark of the hall. he walk over to the glass and look through into 
the drive beyond, but there nothing in sight. 

"he felt nervous and puzzle and open the inner door and went out on to 
the carriage-circle. almost directly afterward the great hall door swung 
to with a crash behind him. he told me that he had a sudden awful feeling 
of have been trap in some way--that is how he put it. he whirl 
'round and grip the door handle, but something seem to be holding it 
with a vast grip on the other side. then, before he could be fixed in his 
mind that this was so, he was able to turn the handle and open the door. 

"he pause a moment in the doorway and peer into the hall, for he had 
hardly steady his mind sufficient to know whether he was really 
frightened or not. then he heard his sweetheart blow him a kiss out of 
the grey of the big, unlit hall and he knew that she had follow him 
from the boudoir. he blew her a kiss back and step inside the doorway, 
meaning to go to her. and then, suddenly, in a flash of sickening 
knowledge he knew that it was not his sweetheart who had blown him that 
kiss. he knew that something was try to tempt him alone into the 
dark and that the girl had never left the boudoir. he jump back and 
in the same instant of time he heard the kiss again, near to him. he 
call out at the top of his voice: 'mary, stay in the boudoir. don't 
move out of the boudoir until i come to you.' he heard her call something 
in reply from the boudoir and then he had struck a clump of a dozen or 
so match and was holding them above his head and look 'round the 
hall. there was no one in it, but even as the match burn out there 
came the sound of a great horse galloping down the empty drive. 

"now you see, both he and the girl had heard the sound of the horse 
galloping; but when i question more close i found that the aunt had 
heard nothing, though it is true she is a bit deaf, and she was further 
back in the room. of course, both he and miss hisgin had been in an 
extremely nervous state and ready to hear anything. the door might have 
been slam by a sudden puff of wind owe to some inner door being 
opened; and as for the grip on the handle, that may have been nothing 
more than the snick catching. 

"with regard to the kiss and the sound of the horse galloping, i 
pointed out that these might have seem ordinary enough sounds, if they 
had been only cool enough to reason. as i told him, and as he knew, the 
sound of a horse galloping carry a long way on the wind so that what he 
had heard might have been nothing more than a horse being ridden some 
distance away. and as for the kiss, plenty of quiet noises--the rustle of 
a paper or a leaf--have a somewhat similar sound, especially if one is in 
an overstrung condition and imagine things. 

"i finished preach this little sermon on commonsense versus hysteria 
as we put out the lights and left the billiard room. but neither 
beaumont nor miss hisgin would agree that there had been any fancy on 
their parts. 

"we had come out of the billiard room by this time and were go along 
the passage and i was still do my best to make both of them see the 
ordinary, commonplace possibility of the happening, when what kill my 
pig, as the saying goes, was the sound of a hoof in the dark billiard 
room we had just left. 

"i felt the 'creep' come on me in a flash, up my spine and over the back 
of my head. miss hisgin whoop like a child with the whoop cough and 
ran up the passage, give little gasp screams. beaumont, however, 
rip 'round on his heel and jump back a couple of yards. i gave back 
too, a bit, as you can understand. 

"'there it is,' he said in a low, breathless voice. 'perhaps you'll 
believe now.' 

"'there's certainly something,' i whispered, never taking my gaze off the 
closed door of the billiard room. 

"'h'sh!' he muttered. 'there it is again.' 

"there was a sound like a great horse pace 'round and 'round the 
billiard room with slow, deliberate steps. a horrible cold fright took me 
so that it seem impossible to take a full breath, you know the feeling, 
and then i saw we must have been walking backward for we found ourselves 
sudden at the opening of the long passage. 

"we stop there and listened. the sound went on steady with a 
horrible sort of deliberateness, as if the brute were taking a sort of 
malicious gusto in walking about all over the room which we had just 
occupied. do you understand just what i mean? 

"then there was a pause and a long time of absolute quiet except for an 
excited whisper from some of the people down in the big hall. the 
sound came plainly up the wide stairway. i fancy they were gather 
'round miss hisgins, with some notion of protect her. 

"i should think beaumont and i stood there, at the end of the passage for 
about five minutes, listen for any noise in the billiard room. then i 
realize what a horrible funk i was in and i said to him: 'i'm go to 
see what's there.' 

"'so'm i,' he answered. he was pretty white, but he had heap of pluck. 
i told him to wait one instant and i made a dash into my bedroom and got 
my camera and flashlight. i slip my revolver into my right-hand pocket 
and a knuckle-duster over my left fist, where it was ready and yet would 
not stop me from being able to work my flashlight. 

"then i ran back to beaumont. he held out his hand to show me that he had 
his pistol and i nodded, but whisper to him not to be too quick to 
shoot, as there might be some silly practical joke at work, after all. 
he had got a lamp from a bracket in the upper hall which he was holding 
in the crook of his damage arm, so that we had a good light. then we 
went down the passage toward the billiard room and you can imagine that 
we were a pretty nervous couple. 

"all this time there had not been a sound, but abrupt when we were 
within perhaps a couple of yard of the door we heard the sudden clump 
of a hoof on the solid _parquet_ floor of the billiard room. in the 
instant afterward it seem to me that the whole place shook beneath the 
ponderous hoof falls of some huge thing, _coming toward the door_. both 
beaumont and i gave back a pace or two, and then realize and hung on to 
our courage, as you might say, and waited. the great tread came right up 
to the door and then stop and there was an instant of absolute 
silence, except that so far as i was concerned, the pulse in my throat 
and temple almost deafen me. 

"i dare say we wait quite half a minute and then came the further 
restless clump of a great hoof. immediately afterward the sound came 
right on as if some invisible thing pass through the closed door and 
the ponderous tread was upon us. we jumped, each of us, to our side of 
the passage and i know that i spread myself stiff against the wall. the 
clungk clunck, clungk clunck, of the great hoof falls pass right 
between us and slow and with deadly deliberateness, down the passage. 
i heard them through a haze of blood beat in my ear and temple and my 
body was extraordinarily rigid and pringl and i was horrible 
breathless. i stood for a little time like this, my head turn so that i 
could see up the passage. i was conscious only that there was a hideous 
danger abroad. do you understand? 

"and then, suddenly, my pluck came back to me. i was aware that the noise 
of the hoof beat sound near the other end of the passage. i twist 
quick and got my camera to bear and snap off the flashlight. 
immediately afterward, beaumont let fly a storm of shot down the passage 
and began to run, shouting: 'it's after mary. run! run!' 

"he rush down the passage and i after him. we came out on the main 
landing and heard the sound of a hoof on the stairs and after that, 
nothing. and from thence onward, nothing. 

"down below us in the big hall i could see a number of the household 
'round miss hisgins, who seem to have faint and there were several of 
the servant clump together a little way off, staring up at the main 
landing and no one saying a single word. and about some twenty steps up 
the stairs was the old captain hisgin with a drawn sword in his hand 
where he had halted, just below the last hoof sound. i think i never saw 
anything fine than the old man standing there between his daughter and 
that infernal thing. 

"i daresay you can understand the queer feeling of horror i had at 
passing that place on the stairs where the sound had ceased. it was as 
if the monster were still standing there, invisible. and the peculiar 
thing was that we never heard another sound of the hoof, either up or 
down the stairs. 

"after they had taken miss hisgin to her room i sent word that i should 
follow, so soon as they were ready for me. and presently, when a message 
came to tell me that i could come any time, i ask her father to give 
me a hand with my instrument box and between us we carry it into the 
girl's bedroom. i had the bed pull well out into the middle of the 
room, after which i erect the electric pentacle 'round the bed. 

"then i direct that lamp should be placed 'round the room, but that on 
no account must any light be made within the pentacle; neither must 
anyone pass in or out. the girl's mother i had placed within the pentacle 
and direct that her maid should sit without, ready to carry any message 
so as to make sure that mrs. hisgin did not have to leave the pentacle. 
i suggest also that the girl's father should stay the night in the room 
and that he had better be armed. 

"when i left the bedroom i found beaumont wait outside the door in a 
miserable state of anxiety. i told him what i had done and explain to 
him that miss hisgin was probably perfectly safe within the 
'protection'; but that in addition to her father remain the night in 
the room, i intended to stand guard at the door. i told him that i should 
like him to keep me company, for i knew that he could never sleep, 
feeling as he did, and i should not be sorry to have a companion. also, i 
want to have him under my own observation, for there was no doubt but 
that he was actually in greater danger in some ways than the girl. at 
least, that was my opinion and is still, as i think you will agree later. 

"i ask him whether he would object to my drawing a pentacle 'round him 
for the night and got him to agree, but i saw that he did not know 
whether to be superstitious about it or to regard it more as a piece of 
foolish mumming; but he took it seriously enough when i gave him some 
particulars about the black veil case, when young aster died. you 
remember, he said it was a piece of silly superstition and stay 
outside. poor devil! 

"the night pass quiet enough until a little while before dawn when 
we both heard the sound of a great horse galloping 'round and 'round the 
house just as old captain hisgin had describe it. you can imagine how 
queer it made me feel and directly afterward, i heard someone stir within 
the bedroom. i knock at the door, for i was uneasy, and the captain 
came. i ask whether everything was right; to which he reply yes, and 
immediately ask me whether i had heard the galloping, so that i knew he 
had heard them also. i suggest that it might be well to leave the 
bedroom door open a little until the dawn came in, as there was certainly 
something abroad. this was done and he went back into the room, to be 
near his wife and daughter. 

"i had better say here that i was doubtful whether there was any value in 
the 'defense' about miss hisgins, for what i term the 'personal sounds' 
of the manifestation were so extraordinarily material that i was inclined 
to parallel the case with that one of harford's where the hand of the 
child kept materialize within the pentacle and pat the floor. as 
you will remember, that was a hideous business. 

"yet, as it chanced, nothing further happen and so soon as daylight had 
fully come we all went off to bed. 

"beaumont knock me up about midday and i went down and made breakfast 
into lunch. miss hisgin was there and seem in very fair spirits, 
considering. she told me that i had made her feel almost safe for the 
first time for days. she told me also that her cousin, harry parsket, was 
coming down from london and she knew that he would do anything to help 
fight the ghost. and after that she and beaumont went out into the 
grounds to have a little time together. 

"i had a walk in the grounds myself and went 'round the house, but saw no 
trace of hoof mark and after that i spent the rest of the day making an 
examination of the house, but found nothing. 

"i made an end of my search before dark and went to my room to dress for 
dinner. when i got down the cousin had just arrive and i found him one 
of the nicest men i have met for a long time. a chap with a tremendous 
amount of pluck, and the particular kind of man i like to have with me in 
a bad case like the one i was on. i could see that what puzzle him most 
was our belief in the genuine of the haunting and i found myself 
almost wanting something to happen, just to show him how true it was. as 
it chanced, something did happen, with a vengeance. 

"beaumont and miss hisgin had gone out for a stroll just before the dusk 
and captain hisgin ask me to come into his study for a short chat 
whilst parsket went upstairs with his traps, for he had no man with him. 

"i had a long conversation with the old captain in which i pointed out 
that the 'haunting' had evidently no particular connection with the 
house, but only with the girl herself and that the soon she was 
married, the better as it would give beaumont a right to be with her at 
all times and further than this, it might be that the manifestation 
would cease if the marriage were actually performed. 

"the old man nod agreement to this, especially to the first part and 
remind me that three of the girl who were said to have been 'haunted' 
had been sent away from home and met their death whilst away. and then 
in the midst of our talk there came a pretty frighten interruption, 
for all at once the old butler rush into the room, most 
extraordinarily pale: 

"'miss mary, sir! miss mary, sir!' he gasped. 'she's scream ... out in 
the park, sir! and they say they can hear the horse--' 

"the captain made one dive for a rack of arms and snatch down his old 
sword and ran out, drawing it as he ran. i dashed out and up the stairs, 
snatch my camera-flashlight and a heavy revolver, gave one yell at 
parsket's door: 'the horse!' and was down and into the grounds. 

"away in the dark there was a confuse shouting and i caught the 
sound of shooting, out among the scattered trees. and then, from a patch 
of black to my left, there burst sudden an infernal gobble sort 
of neighing. instantly i whip 'round and snap off the flashlight. 
the great light blaze out momentarily, showing me the leaves of a big 
tree close at hand, quiver in the night breeze, but i saw nothing else 
and then the ten-fold black came down upon me and i heard parsket 
shouting a little way back to know whether i had seen anything. 

"the next instant he was beside me and i felt safe for his company, 
for there was some incredible thing near to us and i was momentarily 
blind because of the bright of the flashlight. 'what was it? what 
was it?' he kept repeating in an excited voice. and all the time i was 
staring into the dark and answering, mechanically, 'i don't know. i 
don't know.' 

"there was a burst of shouting somewhere ahead and then a shot. we ran 
toward the sounds, yell to the people not to shoot; for in the 
dark and panic there was this danger also. then there came two of the 
game-keepers racing hard up the drive with their lantern and guns; and 
immediately afterward a row of lights dance toward us from the house, 
carry by some of the men-servants. 

"as the lights came up i saw we had come close to beaumont. he was 
standing over miss hisgin and he had his revolver in his hand. then i 
saw his face and there was a great wound across his forehead. by him was 
the captain, turning his naked sword this way and that, and peer into 
the darkness; a little behind him stood the old butler, a battle-axe from 
one of the arm stand in the hall in his hands. yet there was nothing 
strange to be seen anywhere. 

"we got the girl into the house and left her with her mother and 
beaumont, whilst a groom rode for a doctor. and then the rest of us, with 
four other keepers, all armed with gun and carry lanterns, search 
'round the home park. but we found nothing. 

"when we got back we found that the doctor had been. he had bound up 
beaumont's wound, which lucky was not deep, and ordered miss hisgin 
straight to bed. i went upstairs with the captain and found beaumont on 
guard outside of the girl's door. i ask him how he felt and then, so 
soon as the girl and her mother were ready for us, captain hisgin and 
i went into the bedroom and fixed the pentacle again 'round the bed. 
they had already got lamp about the room and after i had set the same 
order of watch as on the previous night, i join beaumont outside 
of the door. 

"parsket had come up while i had been in the bedroom and between us we 
got some idea from beaumont as to what had happen out in the park. it 
seem that they were coming home after their stroll from the direction of 
the west lodge. it had got quite dark and sudden miss hisgin said: 
'hush!' and came to a standstill. he stop and listened, but heard 
nothing for a little. then he caught it--the sound of a horse, seemingly 
a long way off, galloping toward them over the grass. he told the girl 
that it was nothing and start to hurry her toward the house, but she 
was not deceived, of course. in less than a minute they heard it quite 
close to them in the dark and they start running. then miss hisgin 
caught her foot and fell. she began to scream and that is what the butler 
heard. as beaumont lift the girl he heard the hoof come thud right 
at him. he stood over her and fire all five chambers of his revolver 
right at the sounds. he told us that he was sure he saw something that 
look like an enormous horse's head, right upon him in the light of the 
last flash of his pistol. immediately afterward he was struck a 
tremendous blow which knock him down and then the captain and the 
butler came running up, shouting. the rest, of course, we knew. 

"about ten o'clock the butler brought us up a tray, for which i was very 
glad, as the night before i had got rather hungry. i warn beaumont, 
however, to be very particular not to drink any spirits and i also made 
him give me his pipe and matches. at midnight i drew a pentacle 'round 
him and parsket and i sat one on each side of him, outside the pentacle, 
for i had no fear that there would be any manifestation made against 
anyone except beaumont or miss hisgins. 

"after that we kept pretty quiet. the passage was lit by a big lamp at 
each end so that we had plenty of light and we were all armed, beaumont 
and i with revolver and parsket with a shotgun. in addition to my weapon 
i had my camera and flashlight. 

"now and again we talk in whisper and twice the captain came out of 
the bedroom to have a word with us. about half-past one we had all grown 
very silent and suddenly, about twenty minutes later, i held up my hand, 
silently, for there seem to be a sound of galloping out in the night. i 
knock on the bedroom door for the captain to open it and when he came i 
whisper to him that we thought we heard the horse. for some time we 
stay listening, and both parsket and the captain thought they heard it; 
but now i was not so sure, neither was beaumont. yet afterward, i thought 
i heard it again. 

"i told captain hisgin i thought he had better go into the bedroom and 
leave the door a little open and this he did. but from that time onward 
we heard nothing and presently the dawn came in and we all went very 
thankful to bed. 

"when i was call at lunchtime i had a little surprise, for captain 
hisgin told me that they had held a family council and had decided to 
take my advice and have the marriage without a day's more delay than 
possible. beaumont was already on his way to london to get a special 
license and they hope to have the wedding next day. 

"this pleased me, for it seem the sanest thing to be done in the 
extraordinary circumstances and meanwhile i should continue my 
investigations; but until the marriage was accomplished, my chief thought 
was to keep miss hisgin near to me. 

"after lunch i thought i would take a few experimental photograph of 
miss hisgin and her _surroundings_. sometimes the camera see things 
that would seem very strange to normal human eyesight. 

"with this intention and partly to make an excuse to keep her in my 
company as much as possible, i ask miss hisgin to join me in my 
experiments. she seem glad to do this and i spent several hour with 
her, wandering all over the house, from room to room and whenever the 
impulse came i took a flashlight of her and the room or corridor in which 
we chance to be at the moment. 

"after we had gone right through the house in this fashion, i ask her 
whether she felt sufficient brave to repeat the experiment in the 
cellars. she said yes, and so i rooted out captain hisgin and parsket, 
for i was not go to take her even into what you might call artificial 
dark without help and companionship at hand. 

"when we were ready we went down into the wine cellar, captain hisgin 
carry a shotgun and parsket a specially prepared background and a 
lantern. i got the girl to stand in the middle of the cellar whilst 
parsket and the captain held out the background behind her. then i fire 
off the flashlight, and we went into the next cellar where we repeated 
the experiment. 

"then in the third cellar, a tremendous, pitch-dark place, something 
extraordinary and horrible manifest itself. i had station miss 
hisgin in the center of the place, with her father and parsket holding 
the background as before. when all was ready and just as i pressed the 
trigger of the 'flash,' there came in the cellar that dreadful, gobble 
neigh that i had heard out in the park. it seem to come from 
somewhere above the girl and in the glare of the sudden light i saw that 
she was staring tense upward, but at no visible thing. and then in the 
succeed comparative darkness, i was shouting to the captain and 
parsket to run miss hisgin out into the daylight. 

"this was done instantly and i shut and lock the door afterward making 
the first and eighth sign of the saaamaaa ritual opposite to each post 
and connect them across the threshold with a triple line. 

"in the meanwhile parsket and captain hisgin carry the girl to her 
mother and left her there, in a half faint condition whilst i stay 
on guard outside of the cellar door, feeling pretty horrible for i knew 
that there was some disgust thing inside, and along with this feeling 
there was a sense of half ashamedness, rather miserable, you know, 
because i had expose miss hisgin to the danger. 

"i had got the captain's shotgun and when he and parsket came down again 
they were each carry gun and lanterns. i could not possibly tell you 
the utter relief of spirit and body that came to me when i heard them 
coming, but just try to imagine what it was like, standing outside of 
that cellar. can you? 

"i remember noticing, just before i went to unlock the door, how white 
and ghastly parsket look and the old captain was grey-looking and i 
wonder whether my face was like theirs. and this, you know, had its own 
distinct effect upon my nerves, for it seem to bring the beastly 
of the thing crashing down on to me in a fresh way. i know it was only sheer 
will power that carry me up to the door and made me turn the key. 

"i pause one little moment and then with a nervy jerk sent the door wide 
open and held my lantern over my head. parsket and the captain came one 
on each side of me and held up their lanterns, but the place was 
absolutely empty. of course, i did not trust to a casual look of this 
kind, but spent several hour with the help of the two other in sound 
every square foot of the floor, ceiling and walls. 

"yet, in the end i had to admit that the place itself was absolutely 
normal and so we came away. but i seal the door and outside, opposite 
each doorpost i made the first and last sign of the saaamaaa ritual, 
join them as before, with a triple line. can you imagine what it was 
like, searching that cellar? 

"when we got upstairs i inquire very anxious how miss hisgin was 
and the girl came out herself to tell me that she was all right and 
that i was not to trouble about her, or blame myself, as i told her i 
had been doing. 

"i felt happy then and went off to dress for dinner and after that was 
done, parsket and i took one of the bathroom to develop the negative 
that i had been taking. yet none of the plate had anything to tell us 
until we came to the one that was taken in the cellar. parsket was 
develop and i had taken a batch of the fixed plate out into the 
lamplight to examine them. 

"i had just gone careful through the lot when i heard a shout from 
parsket and when i ran to him he was look at a partly-developed 
negative which he was holding up to the red lamp. it show the girl 
plainly, look upward as i had seen her, but the thing that astonish 
me was the shadow of an enormous hoof, right above her, as if it were 
coming down upon her out of the shadows. and you know, i had run her 
bang into that danger. that was the thought that was chief in my mind. 

"as soon as the develop was complete i fixed the plate and examine it 
careful in a good light. there was no doubt about it at all, the thing 
above miss hisgin was an enormous, shadowy hoof. yet i was no near to 
coming to any definite knowledge and the only thing i could do was to 
warn parsket to say nothing about it to the girl for it would only 
increase her fright, but i show the thing to her father for i 
considered it right that he should know. 

"that night we took the same precaution for miss hisgins's safety as on 
the two previous nights and parsket kept me company; yet the dawn came in 
without anything unusual have happen and i went off to bed. 

"when i got down to lunch i learnt that beaumont had wire to say that he 
would be in soon after four; also that a message had been sent to the 
rector. and it was generally plain that the ladies of the house were in a 
tremendous fluster. 

"beaumont's train was late and he did not get home until five, but even 
then the rector had not put in an appearance and the butler came in to 
say that the coachman had return without him as he had been call away 
unexpectedly. twice more during the evening the carriage was sent down, 
but the clergyman had not return and we had to delay the marriage until 
the next day. 

"that night i arrange the 'defense' 'round the girl's bed and the 
captain and his wife sat up with her as before. beaumont, as i expected, 
insist on keeping watch with me and he seem in a curious frightened 
mood; not for himself, you know, but for miss hisgins. he had a horrible 
feeling he told me, that there would be a final, dreadful attempt on his 
sweetheart that night. 

"this, of course, i told him was nothing but nerves; yet really, it made 
me feel very anxious; for i have seen too much not to know that under 
such circumstances a premonitory _conviction_ of impending danger is not 
necessarily to be put down entire to nerves. in fact, beaumont was so 
simply and earnest convinced that the night would bring some 
extraordinary manifestation that i got parsket to rig up a long cord from 
the wire of the butler's bell, to come along the passage handy. 

"to the butler himself i gave directions not to undress and to give the 
same order to two of the footmen. if i rang he was to come instantly, 
with the footmen, carry lantern and the lantern were to be kept 
ready lit all night. if for any reason the bell did not ring and i blew 
my whistle, he was to take that as a signal in the place of the bell. 

"after i had arrange all these minor detail i drew a pentacle about 
beaumont and warn him very particularly to stay within it, whatever 
happened. and when this was done, there was nothing to do but wait and 
pray that the night would go as quiet as the night before. 

"we scarcely talk at all and by about one a.m. we were all very tense 
and nervous so that at last parsket got up and began to walk up and 
down the corridor to steady himself a bit. presently i slip off my 
pump and join him and we walk up and down, whisper occasional 
for something over an hour, until in turning i caught my foot in the 
bell cord and went down on my face; but without hurt myself or 
making a noise. 

"when i got up parsket nudge me. 

"'did you notice that the bell never rang?' he whispered. 

"'jove!' i said, 'you're right.' 

"'wait a minute,' he answered. 'i'll bet it's only a kink somewhere in 
the cord.' he left his gun and slip along the passage and taking the 
top lamp, tiptoe away into the house, carry beaumont's revolver ready 
in his right hand. he was a plucky chap, i remember thinking then, and 
again, later. 

"just then beaumont motion to me for absolute quiet. directly afterward 
i heard the thing for which he listened--the sound of a horse galloping, 
out in the night. i think that i may say i fairly shivered. the sound 
die away and left a horrible, desolate, eerie feeling in the air, you 
know. i put my hand out to the bell cord, hope parsket had got it 
clear. then i waited, glancing before and behind. 

"perhaps two minutes passed, full of what seem like an almost unearthly 
quiet. and then, suddenly, down the corridor at the light end there 
sound the clump of a great hoof and instantly the lamp was thrown 
with a tremendous crash and we were in the dark. i tug hard on the 
cord and blew the whistle; then i raise my snapshot and fire the 
flashlight. the corridor blaze into brilliant light, but there was 
nothing, and then the dark fell like thunder. i heard the captain at 
the bedroom door and shout to him to bring out a lamp, _quick_; but 
instead something start to kick the door and i heard the captain 
shouting within the bedroom and then the scream of the women. i had a 
sudden horrible fear that the monster had got into the bedroom, but in 
the same instant from up the corridor there came abrupt the vile, 
gobble neigh that we had heard in the park and the cellar. i blew 
the whistle again and grope blind for the bell cord, shouting to 
beaumont to stay in the pentacle, whatever happened. i yell again to 
the captain to bring out a lamp and there came a smashing sound against 
the bedroom door. then i had my match in my hand, to get some light 
before that incredible, unseen monster was upon us. 

"the match scrape on the box and flared up dul and in the same instant 
i heard a faint sound behind me. i whip 'round in a kind of mad terror 
and saw something in the light of the match--a monstrous horse-head close 
to beaumont. 

"'look out, beaumont!' i shout in a sort of scream. 'it's behind you!' 

"the match went out abrupt and instantly there came the huge bang of 
parsket's double-barrel (both barrel at once), fire evidently 
single-handed by beaumont close to my ear, as it seemed. i caught a 
momentary glimpse of the great head in the flash and of an enormous hoof 
amid the belch of fire and smoke seeming to be descend upon beaumont. 
in the same instant i fire three chambers of my revolver. there was the 
sound of a dull blow and then that horrible, gobble neigh broke out 
close to me. i fire twice at the sound. immediately afterward something 
struck me and i was knock backward. i got on to my knee and shout 
for help at the top of my voice. i heard the women scream behind the 
closed door of the bedroom and was dul aware that the door was being 
smashed from the inside, and directly afterward i knew that beaumont was 
struggle with some hideous thing near to me. for an instant i held 
back, stupidly, paralyze with funk and then, blind and in a sort of 
rigid chill of goose flesh i went to help him, shouting his name. i can 
tell you, i was nearly sick with the naked fear i had on me. there came a 
little, choke scream out of the darkness, and at that i jump forward 
into the dark. i grip a vast, furry ear. then something struck me 
another great blow knock me sick. i hit back, weak and blind and 
grip with my other hand at the incredible thing. abrupt i was dim 
aware of a tremendous crash behind me and a great burst of light. there 
were other lights in the passage and a noise of feet and shouting. my 
hand-grips were torn from the thing they held; i shut my eyes stupid 
and heard a loud yell above me and then a heavy blow, like a butcher 
chop meat and then something fell upon me. 

"i was help to my knee by the captain and the butler. on the floor lay 
an enormous horse-head out of which protrude a man's trunk and legs. on 
the wrist were fixed great hoofs. it was the monster. the captain cut 
something with the sword that he held in his hand and stoop and lift 
off the mask, for that is what it was. i saw the face then of the man who 
had worn it. it was parsket. he had a bad wound across the forehead where 
the captain's sword had bit through the mask. i look bewildered from 
him to beaumont, who was sitting up, leaning against the wall of the 
corridor. then i stare at parsket again. 

"'by jove!' i said at last, and then i was quiet for i was so ashamed for 
the man. you can understand, can't you? and he was opening his eyes. and 
you know, i had grown so to like him. 

"and then, you know, just as parsket was get back his wit and 
look from one to the other of us and beginning to remember, there 
happen a strange and incredible thing. for from the end of the 
corridor there sound suddenly, the clump of a great hoof. i look 
that way and then instantly at parsket and saw a horrible fear in his 
face and eyes. he wrench himself 'round, weakly, and stare in mad 
terror up the corridor to where the sound had been, and the rest of us 
stared, in a frozen group. i remember vague half sob and whisper 
from miss hisgins's bedroom, all the while that i stare frightened up 
the corridor. 

"the silence last several seconds and then, abrupt there came again 
the clump of the great hoof, away at the end of the corridor. and 
immediately afterward the clungk, clunk--clungk, clunk of mighty hoof 
coming down the passage toward us. 

"even then, you know, most of us thought it was some mechanism of 
parsket's still at work and we were in the queerest mixture of fright and 
doubt. i think everyone look at parsket. and sudden the captain 
shout out: 

"'stop this damn fool at once. haven't you done enough?' 

"for my part, i was now frightened for i had a _sense_ that there was 
something horrible and wrong. and then parsket manage to gasp out: 

"'it's not me! my god! it's not me! my god! it's not me.' 

"and then, you know, it seem to come home to everyone in an instant 
that there was really some dreadful thing coming down the passage. there 
was a mad rush to get away and even old captain hisgin gave back with 
the butler and the footmen. beaumont faint outright, as i found 
afterward, for he had been badly mauled. i just flatten back against 
the wall, kneel as i was, too stupid and daze even to run. and almost 
in the same instant the ponderous hoof falls sound close to me and 
seeming to shake the solid floor as they passed. abrupt the great 
sound cease and i knew in a sort of sick fashion that the thing had 
halt opposite to the door of the girl's bedroom. and then i was aware 
that parsket was standing rock in the doorway with his arms spread 
across, so as to fill the doorway with his body. parsket was 
extraordinarily pale and the blood was running down his face from the 
wound in his forehead; and then i notice that he seem to be look at 
something in the passage with a peculiar, desperate, fixed, incredible 
masterful gaze. but there was really nothing to be seen. and sudden the 
clungk, clunk--clungk, clunk recommence and pass onward down the 
passage. in the same moment parsket pitch forward out of the doorway 
on to his face. 

"there were shout from the huddle of men down the passage and the two 
footmen and the butler simply ran, carry their lanterns, but the 
captain went against the side-wall with his back and put the lamp he was 
carry over his head. the dull tread of the horse went past him, and 
left him unharmed and i heard the monstrous hoof falls go away and 
away through the quiet house and after that a dead silence. 

"then the captain move and came toward us, very slow and shaky and with 
an extraordinarily grey face. 

"i crept toward parsket and the captain came to help me. we turn him 
over and, you know, i knew in a moment that he was dead; but you can 
imagine what a feeling it sent through me. 

"i look at the captain and sudden he said: 

"'that--that--that--' and i know that he was try to tell me that 
parsket had stood between his daughter and whatever it was that had gone 
down the passage. i stood up and steady him, though i was not very 
steady myself. and sudden his face began to work and he went down on to 
his knee by parsket and cry like some shaken child. then the women 
came out of the doorway of the bedroom and i turn away and left him to 
them, whilst i over to beaumont. 

"that is practically the whole story and the only thing that is left to 
me is to try to explain some of the puzzle parts, here and there. 

"perhaps you have seen that parsket was in love with miss hisgin and 
this fact is the key to a good deal that was extraordinary. he was 
doubtless responsible for some portion of the 'haunting'; in fact i 
think for nearly everything, but, you know, i can prove nothing and what 
i have to tell you is chiefly the result of deduction. 

"in the first place, it is obvious that parsket's intention was to 
frighten beaumont away and when he found that he could not do this, i 
think he grew so desperate that he really intended to kill him. i hate to 
say this, but the fact force me to think so. 

"i am quite certain that it was parsket who broke beaumont's arm. he knew 
all the detail of the so-called 'horse legend,' and got the idea to work 
upon the old story for his own end. he evidently had some method of 
slip in and out of the house, probably through one of the many france 
windows, or possibly he had a key to one or two of the garden doors, and 
when he was supposed to be away, he was really coming down on the quiet 
and hiding somewhere in the neighborhood. 

"the incident of the kiss in the dark hall i put down to sheer nervous 
imagine on the part of beaumont and miss hisgins, yet i must say that 
the sound of the horse outside of the front door is a little difficult to 
explain away. but i am still inclined to keep to my first idea on this 
point, that there was nothing really unnatural about it. 

"the hoof sound in the billiard room and down the passage were done by 
parsket from the floor below by bump up against the panel ceiling 
with a block of wood tie to one of the window hooks. i prove this by an 
examination which show the dent in the woodwork. 

"the sound of the horse galloping 'round the house were possibly made 
also by parsket, who must have had a horse tie up in the plantation 
nearby, unless, indeed, he made the sound himself, but i do not see how 
he could have gone fast enough to produce the illusion. in any case, i 
don't feel perfect certainty on this point. i fail to find any hoof 
marks, as you remember. 

"the gobble neigh in the park was a ventriloquial achievement on 
the part of parsket and the attack out there on beaumont was also by 
him, so that when i thought he was in his bedroom, he must have been 
outside all the time and join me after i ran out of the front door. 
this is almost probable. i mean that parsket was the cause, for if it 
had been something more serious he would certainly have given up his 
foolishness, knowing that there was no long any need for it. i cannot 
imagine how he escape being shot, both then and in the last mad action 
of which i have just told you. he was enormously without fear of any 
kind for himself as you can see. 

"the time when parsket was with us, when we thought we heard the horse 
galloping 'round the house, we must have been deceived. no one was 
very sure, except, of course, parsket, who would naturally encourage 
the belief. 

"the neigh in the cellar is where i consider there came the first 
suspicion into parsket's mind that there was something more at work than 
his sham haunting. the neigh was done by him in the same way that he 
did it in the park; but when i remember how ghastly he look i feel sure 
that the sound must have had some infernal quality add to them which 
frightened the man himself. yet, later, he would persuade himself that he 
had been get fanciful. of course, i must not forget that the effect 
upon miss hisgin must have made him feel pretty miserable. 

"then, about the clergyman being call away, we found afterward that it 
was a bogus errand, or, rather, call and it is apparent that parsket was 
at the bottom of this, so as to get a few more hour in which to achieve 
his end and what that was, a very little imagination will show you; for 
he had found that beaumont would not be frightened away. i hate to think 
this, but i'm bound to. anyway, it is obvious that the man was 
temporary a bit off his normal balance. love's a queer disease! 

"then, there is no doubt at all but that parsket left the cord to the 
butler's bell hitch somewhere so as to give him an excuse to slip away 
naturally to clear it. this also gave him the opportunity to remove one 
of the passage lamps. then he had only to smash the other and the passage 
was in utter dark for him to make the attempt on beaumont. 

"in the same way, it was he who lock the door of the bedroom and took 
the key (it was in his pocket). this prevent the captain from bring 
a light and coming to the rescue. but captain hisgin broke down the door 
with the heavy fender curb and it was his smashing the door that sound 
so confuse and frighten in the dark of the passage. 

"the photograph of the monstrous hoof above miss hisgin in the cellar is 
one of the things that i am less sure about. it might have been fake by 
parsket, whilst i was out of the room, and this would have been easy 
enough, to anyone who knew how. but, you know, it do not look like a 
fake. yet, there is as much evidence of probability that it was faked, as 
against; and the thing is too vague for an examination to help to a 
definite decision so that i will express no opinion, one way or the 
other. it is certainly a horrible photograph. 

"and now i come to that last, dreadful thing. there has been no further 
manifestation of anything abnormal so that there is an extraordinary 
uncertainty in my conclusions. if we had not heard those last sound and 
if parsket had not shown that enormous sense of fear the whole of this 
case could be explain in the way in which i have shown. and, in fact, 
as you have seen, i am of the opinion that almost all of it can be 
clear up, but i see no way of go past the thing we heard at the last 
and the fear that parsket showed. 

"his death--no, that prove nothing. at the inquest it was describe 
somewhat untechnic as due to heart spasm. that is normal enough and 
leaves us quite in the dark as to whether he die because he stood 
between the girl and some incredible thing of monstrosity. 

"the look on parsket's face and the thing he call out when he heard the 
great hoof sound coming down the passage seem to show that he had the 
sudden realization of what before then may have been nothing more than a 
horrible suspicion. and his fear and appreciation of some tremendous 
danger approach was probably more keen real even than mine. and then 
he did the one fine, great thing!" 

"and the cause?" i said. "what cause it?" 

carnacki shook his head. 

"god knows," he answered, with a peculiar, sincere reverence. "if that 
thing was what it seem to be one might suggest an explanation which 
would not offend one's reason, but which may be utterly wrong. yet i have 
thought, though it would take a long lecture on thought induction to get 
you to appreciate my reasons, that parsket had produce what i might term 
a kind of 'induced haunting,' a kind of induce simulation of his mental 
conception to his desperate thought and broodings. it is impossible to 
make it clear in a few words." 

"but the old story!" i said. "why may not there have been something 
in _that_?" 

"there may have been something in it," said carnacki. "but i do not think 
it had anything to do with this. i have not clearly thought out my 
reasons, yet; but later i may be able to tell you why i think so." 

"and the marriage? and the cellar--was there anything found there?" 
ask taylor. 

"yes, the marriage was perform that day in spite of the tragedy," 
carnacki told us. "it was the wisest thing to do considering the things 
that i cannot explain. yes, i had the floor of that big cellar up, for i 
had a feeling i might find something there to give me some light. but 
there was nothing. 

"you know, the whole thing is tremendous and extraordinary. i shall 
never forget the look on parsket's face. and afterward the disgust 
sound of those great hoof go away through the quiet house." 

carnacki stood up. 

"out you go!" he said in friendly fashion, use the recognize formula. 

and we went presently out into the quiet of the embankment, and so to 
our homes. 




no. 5--the search of the end house 


it was still evening, as i remember, and the four of us, jessop, 
arkright, taylor and i, look disappointed at carnacki, where he sat 
silent in his great chair. 

we had come in response to the usual card of invitation, which--as you 
know--we have come to consider as a sure prelude to a good story; and 
now, after telling us the short incident of the three straw platters, he 
had lapsed into a contented silence, and the night not half gone, as i 
have hinted. 

however, as it chanced, some pity fate jog carnacki's elbow, or his 
memory, and he began again, in his queer level way:-- 

"the 'straw platters' business remind me of the 'searcher' case, which i 
have sometimes thought might interest you. it was some time ago, in fact 
a deuce of a long time ago, that the thing happened; and my experience of 
what i might term 'curious' things was very small at that time. 

"i was living with my mother when it occurred, in a small house just 
outside of appledorn, on the south coast. the house was the last of a 
row of detached cottage villas, each house standing in its own garden; 
and very dainty little place they were, very old, and most of them 
smother in roses; and all with those quaint old lead windows, and 
door of genuine oak. you must try to picture them for the sake of their 
complete niceness. 

"now i must remind you at the beginning that my mother and i had live in 
that little house for two years; and in the whole of that time there had 
not been a single peculiar happening to worry us. 

"and then, something happened. 

"it was about two o'clock one morning, as i was finish some letters, 
that i heard the door of my mother's bedroom open, and she came to the 
top of the stairs, and knock on the banisters. 

"'all right, dear,' i called; for i suppose she was merely remind me 
that i should have been in bed long ago; then i heard her go back to her 
room, and i hurried my work, for fear she should lie awake, until she 
heard me safe up to my room. 

"when i was finished, i lit my candle, put out the lamp, and went 
upstairs. as i came opposite the door of my mother's room, i saw that it 
was open, call good night to her, very softly, and ask whether i 
should close the door. as there was no answer, i knew that she had 
drop off to sleep again, and i closed the door very gently, and turn 
into my room, just across the passage. as i did so, i experienced a 
momentary, half-aware sense of a faint, peculiar, disagreeable odor in 
the passage; but it was not until the following night that i _realized_ i 
had notice a smell that offend me. you follow me? it is so often like 
that--one sudden know a thing that really record itself on one's 
consciousness, perhaps a year before. 

"the next morning at breakfast, i mention casual to my mother that 
she had 'dropped off,' and i had shut the door for her. to my surprise, 
she assured me she had never been out of her room. i remind her about 
the two rap she had given upon the banister; but she still was certain i 
must be mistaken; and in the end i tease her, saying she had grown so 
accustomed to my bad habit of sitting up late, that she had come to call 
me in her sleep. of course, she deny this, and i let the matter drop; 
but i was more than a little puzzled, and did not know whether to believe 
my own explanation, or to take the mater's, which was to put the noise 
down to the mice, and the open door to the fact that she couldn't have 
properly latch it, when she went to bed. i suppose, away in the 
subconscious part of me, i had a stirring of less reasonable thoughts; 
but certainly, i had no real uneasy at that time. 

"the next night there came a further development. about two thirty a.m., 
i heard my mother's door open, just as on the previous night, and 
immediately afterward she rap sharply, on the banister, as it seem 
to me. i stop my work and call up that i would not be long. as she 
made no reply, and i did not hear her go back to bed, i had a quick sense 
of wonder whether she might not be do it in her sleep, after all, just 
as i had said. 

"with the thought, i stood up, and taking the lamp from the table, began 
to go toward the door, which was open into the passage. it was then i got 
a sudden nasty sort of thrill; for it came to me, all at once, that my 
mother never knocked, when i sat up too late; she always called. you will 
understand i was not really frightened in any way; only vague uneasy, 
and pretty sure she must really be do the thing in her sleep. 

"i went quick up the stairs, and when i came to the top, my mother was 
not there; but her door was open. i had a bewilder sense though 
believe she must have gone quiet back to bed, without my hearing 
her. i enter her room and found her sleep quiet and naturally; for 
the vague sense of trouble in me was sufficient strong to make me go 
over to look at her. 

"when i was sure that she was perfectly right in every way, i was still 
a little bothered; but much more inclined to think my suspicion correct 
and that she had gone quiet back to bed in her sleep, without knowing 
what she had been doing. this was the most reasonable thing to think, as 
you must see. 

"and then it came to me, suddenly, that vague, queer, mildewy smell in 
the room; and it was in that instant i became aware i had smelt the same 
strange, uncertain smell the night before in the passage. 

"i was definitely uneasy now, and began to search my mother's room; 
though with no aim or clear thought of anything, except to assure myself 
that there was nothing in the room. all the time, you know, i never 
_expected really_ to find anything; only my uneasy had to be assured. 

"in the middle of my search my mother woke up, and of course i had to 
explain. i told her about her door opening, and the knock on the 
banister, and that i had come up and found her asleep. i said nothing 
about the smell, which was not very distinct; but told her that the thing 
happening twice had made me a bit nervous, and possibly fanciful, and i 
thought i would take a look 'round, just to feel satisfied. 

"i have thought since that the reason i made no mention of the smell, was 
not only that i did not want to frighten my mother, for i was scarcely 
that myself; but because i had only a vague half-knowledge that i 
associate the smell with fancies too indefinite and peculiar to bear 
talk about. you will understand that i am able _now_ to analyze and 
put the thing into words; but _then_ i did not even know my chief reason 
for saying nothing; let alone appreciate its possible significance. 

"it was my mother, after all, who put part of my vague sensation 
into words:-- 

"'what a disagreeable smell!' she exclaimed, and was silent a moment, 
look at me. then:--'you feel there's something wrong?' still look 
at me, very quiet but with a little, nervous note of questioning 
expectancy. 

"'i don't know,' i said. 'i can't understand it, unless you've really 
been walking about in your sleep.' 

"'the smell,' she said. 

"'yes,' i replied. 'that's what puzzle me too. i'll take a walk through 
the house; but i don't suppose it's anything.' 

"i lit her candle, and taking the lamp, i went through the other 
bedrooms, and afterward all over the house, including the three 
underground cellars, which was a little try to the nerves, seeing that 
i was more nervous than i would admit. 

"then i went back to my mother, and told her there was really nothing to 
bother about; and, you know, in the end, we talk ourselves into 
believe it was nothing. my mother would not agree that she might have 
been sleepwalking; but she was ready to put the door opening down to the 
fault of the latch, which certainly snick very lightly. as for the 
knocks, they might be the old warp woodwork of the house crack a 
bit, or a mouse rattling a piece of loose plaster. the smell was more 
difficult to explain; but finally we agree that it might easily be the 
queer night smell of the moist earth, coming in through the open window 
of my mother's room, from the back garden, or--for that matter--from the 
little churchyard beyond the big wall at the bottom of the garden. 

"and so we quieten down, and finally i went to bed, and to sleep. 

"i think this is certainly a lesson on the way we human can delude 
ourselves; for there was not one of these explanation that my reason 
could really accept. try to imagine yourself in the same circumstances, 
and you will see how absurd our attempt to explain the happening 
really were. 

"in the morning, when i came down to breakfast, we talk it all over 
again, and whilst we agree that it was strange, we also agree that we 
had begun to imagine funny things in the back of our minds, which now we 
felt half ashamed to admit. this is very strange when you come to look 
into it; but very human. 

"and then that night again my mother's door was slam once more just 
after midnight. i caught up the lamp, and when i reach her door, i 
found it shut. i open it quickly, and went in, to find my mother lie 
with her eyes open, and rather nervous; have been wake by the bang of 
the door. but what upset me more than anything, was the fact that there 
was a disgust smell in the passage and in her room. 

"whilst i was ask her whether she was all right, a door slam 
twice downstairs; and you can imagine how it made me feel. my mother 
and i look at one another; and then i lit her candle, and taking the 
poker from the fender, went downstairs with the lamp, beginning to feel 
really nervous. the cumulative effect of so many queer happening was 
get hold of me; and all the _apparently_ reasonable explanation 
seem futile. 

"the horrible smell seem to be very strong in the downstairs passage; 
also in the front room and the cellars; but chiefly in the passage. i 
made a very thorough search of the house, and when i had finished, i knew 
that all the lower window and door were properly shut and fastened, and 
that there was no living thing in the house, beyond our two selves. then 
i went up to my mother's room again, and we talk the thing over for an 
hour or more, and in the end came to the conclusion that we might, after 
all, be reading too much into a number of little things; but, you know, 
inside of us, we did not believe this. 

"later, when we had talk ourselves into a more comfortable state of 
mind, i said good night, and went off to bed; and presently manage to 
get to sleep. 

"in the early hour of the morning, whilst it was still dark, i was wake 
by a loud noise. i sat up in bed, and listened. and from downstairs, i 
heard:--bang, bang, bang, one door after another being slammed; at least, 
that is the impression the sound gave to me. 

"i jump out of bed, with the tingle and shiver of sudden fright on me; 
and at the same moment, as i lit my candle, my door was pushed slow 
open; i had left it unlatched, so as not to feel that my mother was quite 
shut off from me. 

"'who's there?' i shout out, in a voice twice as deep as my natural 
one, and with a queer breathlessness, that sudden fright so often give 
one. 'who's there?' 

"then i heard my mother saying:-- 

"'it's me, thomas. whatever is happening downstairs?' 

"she was in the room by this, and i saw she had her bedroom poker in one 
hand, and her candle in the other. i could have smile at her, had it not 
been for the extraordinary sound downstairs. 

"i got into my slippers, and reach down an old sword bayonet from the 
wall; then i picked up my candle, and beg my mother not to come; but i 
knew it would be little use, if she had made up her mind; and she had, 
with the result that she act as a sort of rearguard for me, during our 
search. i know, in some ways, i was very glad to have her with me, as you 
will understand. 

"by this time, the door slam had ceased, and there seemed, probably 
because of the contrast, to be an appalling silence in the house. 
however, i led the way, holding my candle high, and keeping the sword 
bayonet very handy. downstairs we found all the door wide open; although 
the outer door and the window were closed all right. i began to wonder 
whether the noise had been made by the door after all. of one thing 
only were we sure, and that was, there was no living thing in the house, 
beside ourselves, while everywhere throughout the house, there was the 
taint of that disgust odor. 

"of course it was absurd to try to make believe any longer. there was 
something strange about the house; and as soon as it was daylight, i set 
my mother to packing; and soon after breakfast, i saw her off by train. 

"then i set to work to try to clear up the mystery. i went first to the 
landlord, and told him all the circumstances. from him, i found that 
twelve or fifteen years back, the house had got rather a curious name 
from three or four tenants; with the result that it had remain empty a 
long while; in the end he had let it at a low rent to a captain tobias, 
on the one condition that he should hold his tongue, if he saw anything 
peculiar. the landlord's idea--as he told me frankly--was to free the 
house from these tale of 'something queer,' by keeping a tenant in it, 
and then to sell it for the best price he could get. 

"however, when captain tobia left, after a ten years' tenancy, there was 
no long any talk about the house; so when i offer to take it on a 
five years' lease, he had jump at the offer. this was the whole story; 
so he gave me to understand. when i pressed him for detail of the 
supposed peculiar happening in the house, all those years back, he said 
the tenant had talk about a woman who always move about the house at 
night. some tenant never saw anything; but other would not stay out the 
first month's tenancy. 

"one thing the landlord was particular to point out, that no tenant had 
ever complain about knockings, or door slamming. as for the smell, he 
seem positively indignant about it; but why, i don't suppose he knew 
himself, except that he probably had some vague feeling that it was an 
indirect accusation on my part that the drain were not right. 

"in the end, i suggest that he should come down and spend the night 
with me. he agree at once, especially as i told him i intended to keep 
the whole business quiet, and try to get to the bottom of the curious 
affair; for he was anxious to keep the rumor of the haunting from 
get about. 

"about three o'clock that afternoon, he came down, and we made a 
thorough search of the house, which, however, reveal nothing unusual. 
afterward, the landlord made one or two tests, which show him the 
drainage was in perfect order; after that we made our preparation for 
sitting up all night. 

"first, we borrow two policemen's dark lantern from the station 
nearby, and where the superintendent and i were friendly, and as soon as 
it was really dusk, the landlord went up to his house for his gun. i had 
the sword bayonet i have told you about; and when the landlord got back, 
we sat talk in my study until nearly midnight. 

"then we lit the lantern and went upstairs. we placed the lanterns, gun 
and bayonet handy on the table; then i shut and seal the bedroom doors; 
afterward we took our seats, and turn off the lights. 

"from then until two o'clock, nothing happened; but a little after two, 
as i found by holding my watch near the faint glow of the closed 
lanterns, i had a time of extraordinary nervousness; and i bent toward 
the landlord, and whisper to him that i had a queer feeling something 
was about to happen, and to be ready with his lantern; at the same time i 
reach out toward mine. in the very instant i made this movement, the 
dark which fill the passage seem to become sudden of a dull 
violet color; not, as if a light had been shone; but as if the natural 
black of the night had change color. and then, coming through this 
violet night, through this violet-colored gloom, came a little naked 
child, running. in an extraordinary way, the child seem not to be 
distinct from the surrounding gloom; but almost as if it were a 
concentration of that extraordinary atmosphere; as if that gloomy color 
which had change the night, came from the child. it seem impossible to 
make clear to you; but try to understand it. 

"the child went past me, running, with the natural movement of the leg 
of a chubby human child, but in an absolute and inconceivable silence. it 
was a very small child, and must have pass under the table; but i saw 
the child through the table, as if it had been only a slightly dark 
shadow than the colored gloom. in the same instant, i saw that a 
fluctuate glimmer of violet light outline the metal of the gun-barrels 
and the blade of the sword bayonet, making them seem like faint shape of 
glimmer light, floating unsupported where the tabletop should have 
shown solid. 

"now, curiously, as i saw these things, i was subconscious aware that i 
heard the anxious breathing of the landlord, quite clear and labored, 
close to my elbow, where he wait nervous with his hand on the 
lantern. i realize in that moment that he saw nothing; but wait in the 
darkness, for my warning to come true. 

"even as i took heed of these minor things, i saw the child jump to one 
side, and hide behind some half-seen object that was certainly nothing 
belong to the passage. i stared, intently, with a most extraordinary 
thrill of expectant wonder, with fright making goose flesh of my back. 
and even as i stared, i solve for myself the less important problem of 
what the two black cloud were that hung over a part of the table. i 
think it very curious and interesting, the double working of the mind, 
often so much more apparent during times of stress. the two cloud came 
from two faint shining shapes, which i knew must be the metal of the 
lanterns; and the things that look black to the sight with which i was 
then seeing, could be nothing else but what to normal human sight is 
known as light. this phenomenon i have always remembered. i have twice 
seen a somewhat similar thing; in the dark light case and in that trouble 
of maetheson's, which you know about. 

"even as i understood this matter of the lights, i was look to my 
left, to understand why the child was hiding. and suddenly, i heard the 
landlord shout out:--'the woman!' but i saw nothing. i had a 
disagreeable sense that something repugnant was near to me, and i was 
aware in the same moment that the landlord was gripping my arm in a hard, 
frightened grip. then i was look back to where the child had hidden. i 
saw the child peep out from behind its hiding place, seeming to be 
look up the passage; but whether in fear i could not tell. then it 
came out, and ran headlong away, through the place where should have been 
the wall of my mother's bedroom; but the sense with which i was seeing 
these things, show me the wall only as a vague, upright shadow, 
unsubstantial. and immediately the child was lost to me, in the dull 
violet gloom. at the same time, i felt the landlord press back against 
me, as if something had pass close to him; and he call out again, a 
hoarse sort of cry:--'the woman! the woman!' and turn the shade 
clumsy from off his lantern. but i had seen no woman; and the passage 
show empty, as he shone the beam of his light jerky to and fro; but 
chiefly in the direction of the doorway of my mother's room. 

"he was still clutch my arm, and had risen to his feet; and now, 
mechanical and almost slowly, i picked up my lantern and turn on 
the light. i shone it, a little dazedly, at the seal upon the doors; 
but none were broken; then i sent the light to and fro, up and down the 
passage; but there was nothing; and i turn to the landlord, who was 
saying something in a rather incoherent fashion. as my light pass 
over his face, i noted, in a dull sort of way, that he was drench 
with sweat. 

"then my wit became more handleable, and i began to catch the drift of 
his words:--'did you see her? did you see her?' he was saying, over and 
over again; and then i found myself telling him, in quite a level 
voice, that i had not seen any woman. he became more coherent then, and 
i found that he had seen a woman come from the end of the passage, and 
go past us; but he could not describe her, except that she kept 
stopping and look about her, and had even peer at the wall, close 
beside him, as if look for something. but what seem to trouble him 
most, was that she had not seem to see him at all. he repeated this 
so often, that in the end i told him, in an absurd sort of way, that he 
ought to be very glad she had not. what did it all mean? was the 
question; somehow i was not so frightened, as utterly bewildered. i had 
seen less then, than since; but what i had seen, had made me feel 
adrift from my anchorage of reason. 

"what did it mean? he had seen a woman, searching for something. _i_ had 
not seen this woman. _i_ had seen a child, running away, and hiding from 
something or someone. _he_ had not seen the child, or the other 
things--only the woman. and _i_ had not seen her. what did it all mean? 

"i had said nothing to the landlord about the child. i had been too 
bewildered, and i realize that it would be futile to attempt an 
explanation. he was already stupid with the thing he had seen; and not 
the kind of man to understand. all this went through my mind as we stood 
there, shining the lantern to and fro. all the time, intermingle with a 
streak of practical reasoning, i was questioning myself, what did it all 
mean? what was the woman searching for; what was the child running from? 

"suddenly, as i stood there, bewilder and nervous, making random 
answer to the landlord, a door below was violent slammed, and directly 
i caught the horrible reek of which i have told you. 

"'there!' i said to the landlord, and caught his arm, in my turn. 'the 
smell! do _you_ smell it?' 

"he look at me so stupid that in a sort of nervous anger, i shook 
him. 

"'yes,' he said, in a queer voice, try to shine the light from his 
shake lantern at the stair head. 

"'come on!' i said, and picked up my bayonet; and he came, carry his 
gun awkwardly. i think he came, more because he was afraid to be left 
alone, than because he had any pluck left, poor beggar. i never sneer at 
that kind of funk, at least very seldom; for when it take hold of you, 
it make rag of your courage. 

"i led the way downstairs, shining my light into the lower passage, and 
afterward at the door to see whether they were shut; for i had closed 
and latch them, place a corner of a mat against each door, so i 
should know which had been opened. 

"i saw at once that none of the door had been opened; then i threw the 
beam of my light down alongside the stairway, in order to see the mat i 
had placed against the door at the top of the cellar stairs. i got a 
horrid thrill; for the mat was flat! i pause a couple of seconds, 
shining my light to and fro in the passage, and holding fast to my 
courage, i went down the stairs. 

"as i came to the bottom step, i saw patch of wet all up and down the 
passage. i shone my lantern on them. it was the imprint of a wet foot 
on the oilcloth of the passage; not an ordinary footprint, but a queer, 
soft, flabby, spread imprint, that gave me a feeling of 
extraordinary horror. 

"backward and forward i flash the light over the impossible mark and 
saw them everywhere. sudden i notice that they led to each of the 
closed doors. i felt something touch my back, and glance 'round 
swiftly, to find the landlord had come close to me, almost pressing 
against me, in his fear. 

"'it's all right,' i said, but in a rather breathless whisper, meaning to 
put a little courage into him; for i could feel that he was shake 
through all his body. even then as i try to get him steady enough to 
be of some use, his gun went off with a tremendous bang. he jumped, and 
yell with sheer terror; and i swore because of the shock. 

"'give it to me, for god's sake!' i said, and slip the gun from his 
hand; and in the same instant there was a sound of running steps up the 
garden path, and immediately the flash of a bull's-eye lantern upon the 
fan light over the front door. then the door was tried, and directly 
afterward there came a thunderous knocking, which told me a policeman had 
heard the shot. 

"i went to the door, and open it. fortunately the constable knew me, 
and when i had beckon him in, i was able to explain matter in a 
very short time. while do this, inspector johnstone came up the 
path, have miss the officer, and seeing lights and the open door. 
i told him as brief as possible what had occurred, and did not 
mention the child or the woman; for it would have seem too fantastic 
for him to notice. i show him the queer, wet footprint and how they 
went toward the closed doors. i explain quick about the mats, and 
how that the one against the cellar door was flat, which show the 
door had been opened. 

"the inspector nodded, and told the constable to guard the door at the 
top of the cellar stairs. he then ask the hall lamp to be lit, after 
which he took the policeman's lantern, and led the way into the front 
room. he pause with the door wide open, and threw the light all 'round; 
then he jump into the room, and look behind the door; there was no 
one there; but all over the polish oak floor, between the scattered 
rugs, went the mark of those horrible spread footprints; and the room 
permeate with the horrible odor. 

"the inspector search the room carefully, and then went into the middle 
room, use the same precautions. there was nothing in the middle room, 
or in the kitchen or pantry; but everywhere went the wet footmark 
through all the rooms, showing plainly wherever there were woodwork or 
oilcloth; and always there was the smell. 

"the inspector cease from his search of the rooms, and spent a minute in 
try whether the mat would really fall flat when the door were open, 
or merely ruckle up in a way as to appear they had been untouched; but in 
each case, the mat fell flat, and remain so. 

"'extraordinary!' i heard johnstone mutter to himself. and then he went 
toward the cellar door. he had inquire at first whether there were 
window to the cellar, and when he learned there was no way out, except 
by the door, he had left this part of the search to the last. 

"as johnstone came up to the door, the policeman made a motion of salute, 
and said something in a low voice; and something in the tone made me 
flick my light across him. i saw then that the man was very white, and he 
look strange and bewildered. 

"'what?' said johnstone impatiently. 'speak up!' 

"'a woman come along 'ere, sir, and went through this 'ere door,' said 
the constable, clearly, but with a curious monotonous intonation that is 
sometimes heard from an unintelligent man. 

"'speak up!' shout the inspector. 

"'a woman come along and went through this 'ere door,' repeated the man, 
monotonously. 

"the inspector caught the man by the shoulder, and deliberate sniff 
his breath. 

"'no!' he said. and then sarcastically:--'i hope you held the door open 
polite for the lady.' 

"'the door weren't opened, sir,' said the man, simply. 

"'are you mad--' began johnstone. 

"'no,' broke in the landlord's voice from the back. speak steady 
enough. 'i saw the woman upstairs.' it was evident that he had got back 
his control again. 

"'i'm afraid, inspector johnstone,' i said, 'that there's more in this 
than you think. i certainly saw some very extraordinary things upstairs.' 

"the inspector seem about to say something; but instead, he turn 
again to the door, and flash his light down and 'round about the mat. i 
saw then that the strange, horrible footmark came straight up to the 
cellar door; and the last print show _under_ the door; yet the 
policeman said the door had not been opened. 

"and suddenly, without any intention, or realization of what i was 
saying, i ask the landlord:-- 

"'what were the feet like?' 

"i received no answer; for the inspector was order the constable to 
open the cellar door, and the man was not obeying. johnstone repeated the 
order, and at last, in a queer automatic way, the man obeyed, and pushed 
the door open. the loathsome smell beat up at us, in a great wave of 
horror, and the inspector came backward a step. 

"'my god!' he said, and went forward again, and shone his light down the 
steps; but there was nothing visible, only that on each step show the 
unnatural footprints. 

"the inspector brought the beam of the light vivid on the top step; and 
there, clear in the light, there was something small, moving. the 
inspector bent to look, and the policeman and i with him. i don't want to 
disgust you; but the thing we look at was a maggot. the policeman 
back sudden out of the doorway: 

"'the churchyard,' he said, '... at the back of the 'ouse.' 

"'silence!' said johnstone, with a queer break in the word, and i knew 
that at last he was frightened. he put his lantern into the doorway, and 
shone it from step to step, following the footprint down into the 
darkness; then he step back from the open doorway, and we all gave 
back with him. he look 'round, and i had a feeling that he was look 
for a weapon of some kind. 

"'your gun,' i said to the landlord, and he brought it from the front 
hall, and pass it over to the inspector, who took it and eject the 
empty shell from the right barrel. he held out his hand for a live 
cartridge, which the landlord brought from his pocket. he loaded the gun 
and snap the breech. he turn to the constable:-- 

"'come on,' he said, and move toward the cellar doorway. 

"'i ain't comin', sir,' said the policeman, very white in the face. 

"with a sudden blaze of passion, the inspector took the man by the scruff 
and hove him bodily down into the darkness, and he went downward, 
screaming. the inspector follow him instantly, with his lantern and the 
gun; and i after the inspector, with the bayonet ready. behind me, i 
heard the landlord. 

"at the bottom of the stairs, the inspector was helping the policeman to 
his feet, where he stood sway a moment, in a bewilder fashion; then 
the inspector went into the front cellar, and his man follow him in 
stupid fashion; but evidently no long with any thought of running away 
from the horror. 

"we all crowded into the front cellar, flash our lights to and fro. 
inspector johnstone was examine the floor, and i saw that the footmark 
went all 'round the cellar, into all the corners, and across the floor. i 
thought sudden of the child that was running away from something. do 
you see the thing that i was seeing vaguely? 

"we went out of the cellar in a body, for there was nothing to be 
found. in the next cellar, the footprint went everywhere in that queer 
erratic fashion, as of someone searching for something, or following 
some blind scent. 

"in the third cellar the print end at the shallow well that had been 
the old water supply of the house. the well was full to the brim, and the 
water so clear that the pebbly bottom was plainly to be seen, as we shone 
the lights into the water. the search came to an abrupt end, and we stood 
about the well, look at one another, in an absolute, horrible silence. 

"johnstone made another examination of the footprints; then he shone his 
light again into the clear shallow water, searching each inch of the 
plainly seen bottom; but there was nothing there. the cellar was full of 
the dreadful smell; and everyone stood silent, except for the constant 
turning of the lamp to and fro around the cellar. 

"the inspector look up from his search of the well, and nod quiet 
across at me, with his sudden acknowledgment that our belief was now his 
belief, the smell in the cellar seem to grow more dreadful, and to be, 
as it were, a menace--the material expression that some monstrous thing 
was there with us, invisible. 

"'i think--' began the inspector, and shone his light toward the 
stairway; and at this the constable's restraint went utterly, and he ran 
for the stairs, making a queer sound in his throat. 

"the landlord followed, at a quick walk, and then the inspector and i. he 
wait a single instant for me, and we went up together, tread on the 
same steps, and with our lights held backward. at the top, i slam and 
lock the stair door, and wipe my forehead, and my hand were shaking. 

"the inspector ask me to give his man a glass of whisky, and then he 
sent him on his beat. he stay a short while with the landlord and me, 
and it was arrange that he would join us again the following night and 
watch the well with us from midnight until daylight. then he left us, 
just as the dawn was coming in. the landlord and i lock up the house, 
and went over to his place for a sleep. 

"in the afternoon, the landlord and i return to the house, to make 
arrangement for the night. he was very quiet, and i felt he was to be 
rely on, now that he had been 'salted,' as it were, with his fright of 
the previous night. 

"we open all the door and windows, and blew the house through very 
thoroughly; and in the meanwhile, we lit the lamp in the house, and took 
them into the cellars, where we set them all about, so as to have light 
everywhere. then we carry down three chair and a table, and set them 
in the cellar where the well was sunk. after that, we stretch thin 
piano wire across the cellar, about nine inch from the floor, at such a 
height that it should catch anything moving about in the dark. 

"when this was done, i went through the house with the landlord, and 
seal every window and door in the place, excepting only the front door 
and the door at the top of the cellar stairs. 

"meanwhile, a local wire-smith was making something to my order; and 
when the landlord and i had finished tea at his house, we went down to 
see how the smith was get on. we found the thing complete. it look 
rather like a huge parrot's cage, without any bottom, of very heavy gage 
wire, and stood about seven feet high and was four feet in diameter. 
fortunately, i remember to have it made longitudinal in two halves, 
or else we should never have got it through the doorway and down the 
cellar stairs. 

"i told the wire-smith to bring the cage up to the house so he could fit 
the two halves rigid together. as we returned, i call in at an 
ironmonger's, where i bought some thin hemp rope and an iron rack pulley, 
like those use in lancashire for haul up the ceiling clothes racks, 
which you will find in every cottage. i bought also a couple of 
pitchforks. 

"'we shan't want to touch it," i said to the landlord; and he nodded, 
rather white all at once. 

"as soon as the cage arrive and had been fitted together in the cellar, 
i sent away the smith; and the landlord and i suspend it over the well, 
into which it fitted easily. after a lot of trouble, we manage to hang 
it so perfectly central from the rope over the iron pulley, that when 
hoist to the ceiling and dropped, it went every time plunk into the 
well, like a candle-extinguisher. when we had it finally arranged, i 
hoist it up once more, to the ready position, and made the rope fast to 
a heavy wooden pillar, which stood in the middle of the cellar. 

"by ten o'clock, i had everything arranged, with the two pitchfork and 
the two police lanterns; also some whisky and sandwiches. underneath the 
table i had several bucket full of disinfectant. 

"a little after eleven o'clock, there was a knock at the front door, and 
when i went, i found inspector johnstone had arrived, and brought with 
him one of his plainclothe men. you will understand how pleased i was 
to see there would be this addition to our watch; for he look a tough, 
nerveless man, brainy and collected; and one i should have picked to 
help us with the horrible job i felt pretty sure we should have to do 
that night. 

"when the inspector and the detective had entered, i shut and lock the 
front door; then, while the inspector held the light, i seal the door 
carefully, with tape and wax. at the head of the cellar stairs, i shut 
and lock that door also, and seal it in the same way. 

"as we enter the cellar, i warn johnstone and his man to be careful 
not to fall over the wires; and then, as i saw his surprise at my 
arrangements, i began to explain my idea and intentions, to all of which 
he listen with strong approval. i was pleased to see also that the 
detective was nod his head, as i talked, in a way that show he 
appreciate all my precautions. 

"as he put his lantern down, the inspector picked up one of the 
pitchforks, and balanced it in his hand; he look at me, and nodded. 

"'the best thing,' he said. 'i only wish you'd got two more.' 

"then we all took our seats, the detective get a washing stool from 
the corner of the cellar. from then, until a quarter to twelve, we talk 
quietly, whilst we made a light supper of whisky and sandwiches; after 
which, we clear everything off the table, excepting the lantern and 
the pitchforks. one of the latter, i hand to the inspector; the other i 
took myself, and then, have set my chair so as to be handy to the rope 
which lower the cage into the well, i went 'round the cellar and put 
out every lamp. 

"i grope my way to my chair, and arrange the pitchfork and the dark 
lantern ready to my hand; after which i suggest that everyone should 
keep an absolute silence throughout the watch. i asked, also, that no 
lantern should be turn on, until i gave the word. 

"i put my watch on the table, where a faint glow from my lantern made me 
able to see the time. for an hour nothing happened, and everyone kept an 
absolute silence, except for an occasional uneasy movement. 

"about half-past one, however, i was conscious again of the same 
extraordinary and peculiar nervousness, which i had felt on the previous 
night. i put my hand out quickly, and ease the hitch rope from around 
the pillar. the inspector seem aware of the movement; for i saw the 
faint light from his lantern, move a little, as if he had sudden taken 
hold of it, in readiness. 

"a minute later, i notice there was a change in the color of the night 
in the cellar, and it grew slow violet tint upon my eyes. i glance 
to and fro, quickly, in the new darkness, and even as i looked, i was 
conscious that the violet color deepened. in the direction of the well, 
but seeming to be at a great distance, there was, as it were, a nucleus 
to the change; and the nucleus came swift toward us, appear to come 
from a great space, almost in a single moment. it came near, and i saw 
again that it was a little naked child, running, and seeming to be of the 
violet night in which it ran. 

"the child came with a natural running movement, exactly as i describe 
it before; but in a silence so peculiarly intense, that it was as if it 
brought the silence with it. about half-way between the well and the 
table, the child turn swiftly, and look back at something invisible 
to me; and sudden it went down into a crouch attitude, and seem 
to be hiding behind something that show vaguely; but there was 
nothing there, except the bare floor of the cellar; nothing, i mean, of 
our world. 

"i could hear the breathing of the three other men, with a wonderful 
distinctness; and also the tick of my watch upon the table seem to 
sound as loud and as slow as the tick of an old grandfather's clock. 
someway i knew that none of the other saw what i was seeing. 

"abruptly, the landlord, who was next to me, let out his breath with a 
little hiss sound; i knew then that something was visible to him. 
there came a creak from the table, and i had a feeling that the inspector 
was leaning forward, look at something that i could not see. the 
landlord reach out his hand through the darkness, and fumble a moment 
to catch my arm:-- 

"'the woman!' he whispered, close to my ear. 'over by the well.' 

"i stare hard in that direction; but saw nothing, except that the violet 
color of the cellar seem a little dull just there. 

"i look back quick to the vague place where the child was hiding. i 
saw it was peer back from its hiding place. sudden it rose and ran 
straight for the middle of the table, which show only as vague shadow 
half-way between my eyes and the unseen floor. as the child ran under the 
table, the steel prong of my pitchfork glimmer with a violet, 
fluctuate light. a little way off, there show high up in the gloom, 
the vague shining outline of the other fork, so i knew the inspector 
had it raise in his hand, ready. there was no doubt but that he saw 
something. on the table, the metal of the five lantern shone with the 
same strange glow; and about each lantern there was a little cloud of 
absolute blackness, where the phenomenon that is light to our natural 
eyes, came through the fittings; and in this complete darkness, the metal 
of each lantern show plain, as might a cat's-eye in a nest of black 
cotton wool. 

"just beyond the table, the child pause again, and stood, seeming to 
oscillate a little upon its feet, which gave the impression that it was 
lighter and vague than a thistle-down; and yet, in the same moment, 
another part of me seem to know that it was to me, as something that 
might be beyond thick, invisible glass, and subject to conditions and 
forces that i was unable to comprehend. 

"the child was look back again, and my gaze went the same way. i 
stare across the cellar, and saw the cage hanging clear in the violet 
light, every wire and tie outline with its glimmering; above it there 
was a little space of gloom, and then the dull shining of the iron pulley 
which i had screw into the ceiling. 

"i stare in a bewilder way 'round the cellar; there were thin lines of 
vague fire crossing the floor in all directions; and sudden i 
remember the piano wire that the landlord and i had stretched. but 
there was nothing else to be seen, except that near the table there were 
indistinct glimmerings of light, and at the far end the outline of a dull 
glowing revolver, evidently in the detective's pocket. i remember a sort 
of subconscious satisfaction, as i settled the point in a queer automatic 
fashion. on the table, near to me, there was a little shapeless 
collection of the light; and this i knew, after an instant's 
consideration, to be the steel portion of my watch. 

"i had look several times at the child, and 'round at the cellar, 
whilst i was decided these trifles; and had found it still in that 
attitude of hiding from something. but now, suddenly, it ran clear away 
into the distance, and was nothing more than a slightly deep colored 
nucleus far away in the strange colored atmosphere. 

"the landlord gave out a queer little cry, and twist over against me, 
as if to avoid something. from the inspector there came a sharp breathing 
sound, as if he had been sudden drench with cold water. then sudden 
the violet color went out of the night, and i was conscious of the 
near of something monstrous and repugnant. 

"there was a tense silence, and the black of the cellar seem 
absolute, with only the faint glow about each of the lantern on the 
table. then, in the dark and the silence, there came a faint tinkle 
of water from the well, as if something were rising noiseless out of 
it, and the water running back with a gentle tinkling. in the same 
instant, there came to me a sudden waft of the awful smell. 

"i gave a sharp cry of warning to the inspector, and loose the rope. 
there came instantly the sharp splash of the cage enter the water; 
and then, with a stiff, frightened movement, i open the shutter of 
my lantern, and shone the light at the cage, shouting to the other to 
do the same. 

"as my light struck the cage, i saw that about two feet of it project 
from the top of the well, and there was something protrude up out of 
the water, into the cage. i stared, with a feeling that i recognize the 
thing; and then, as the other lantern were opened, i saw that it was a 
leg of mutton. the thing was held by a brawny fist and arm, that rose out 
of the water. i stood utterly bewildered, watch to see what was 
coming. in a moment there rose into view a great bearded face, that i 
felt for one quick instant was the face of a drown man, long dead. then 
the face open at the mouth part, and splutter and coughed. another 
big hand came into view, and wipe the water from the eyes, which blink 
rapidly, and then fixed themselves into a stare at the lights. 

"from the detective there came a sudden shout:-- 

"'captain tobias!' he shouted, and the inspector echo him; and 
instantly burst into loud roar of laughter. 

"the inspector and the detective ran across the cellar to the cage; and i 
followed, still bewildered. the man in the cage was holding the leg of 
mutton as far away from him, as possible, and holding his nose. 

"'lift thig dam trap, quig!' he shout in a stifle voice; but the 
inspector and the detective simply double before him, and try to hold 
their noses, whilst they laughed, and the light from their lantern went 
dance all over the place. 

"'quig! quig!' said the man in the cage, still holding his nose, and 
try to speak plainly. 

"then johnstone and the detective stop laughing, and lift the cage. 
the man in the well threw the leg across the cellar, and turn swift 
to go down into the well; but the officer were too quick for him, and 
had him out in a twinkling. whilst they held him, dripping upon the 
floor, the inspector jerk his thumb in the direction of the offend 
leg, and the landlord, have harpoon it with one of the pitchforks, 
ran with it upstairs and so into the open air. 

"meanwhile, i had given the man from the well a stiff tot of whisky; for 
which he thank me with a cheerful nod, and have empty the glass at 
a draft, held his hand for the bottle, which he finished, as if it had 
been so much water. 

"as you will remember, it was a captain tobia who had been the previous 
tenant; and this was the very man, who had appear from the well. in 
the course of the talk that followed, i learned the reason for captain 
tobia leave the house; he had been want by the police for 
smuggling. he had undergone imprisonment; and had been release only a 
couple of week earlier. 

"he had return to find new tenant in his old home. he had enter the 
house through the well, the wall of which were not continue to the 
bottom (this i will deal with later); and gone up by a little stairway in 
the cellar wall, which open at the top through a panel beside my 
mother's bedroom. this panel was opened, by revolving the left doorpost 
of the bedroom door, with the result that the bedroom door always became 
unlatched, in the process of opening the panel. 

"the captain complained, without any bitterness, that the panel had 
warped, and that each time he open it, it made a crack noise. this 
had been evidently what i mistook for raps. he would not give his reason 
for enter the house; but it was pretty obvious that he had hidden 
something, which he want to get. however, as he found it impossible to 
get into the house without the risk of being caught, he decided to try to 
drive us out, rely on the bad reputation of the house, and his own 
artistic effort as a ghost. i must say he succeeded. he intended then to 
rent the house again, as before; and would then, of course have plenty of 
time to get whatever he had hidden. the house suit him admirably; for 
there was a passage--as he show me afterward--connecting the dummy well 
with the crypt of the church beyond the garden wall; and these, in turn, 
were connected with certain cave in the cliffs, which went down to the 
beach beyond the church. 

"in the course of his talk, captain tobia offer to take the house off 
my hands; and as this suit me perfectly, for i was about stall with 
it, and the plan also suit the landlord, it was decided that no steps 
should be taken against him; and that the whole business should be 
hush up. 

"i ask the captain whether there was really anything queer about the 
house; whether he had ever seen anything. he said yes, that he had twice 
seen a woman go about the house. we all look at one another, when 
the captain said that. he told us she never bother him, and that he had 
only seen her twice, and on each occasion it had follow a narrow escape 
from the revenue people. 

"captain tobia was an observant man; he had seen how i had placed the 
mat against the doors; and after enter the rooms, and walking all 
about them, so as to leave the foot-marks of an old pair of wet 
woollen slipper everywhere, he had deliberate put the mat back as 
he found them. 

"the maggot which had drop from his disgust leg of mutton had been 
an accident, and beyond even his horrible planning. he was hugely 
delight to learn how it had affected us. 

"the moldy smell i had notice was from the little closed stairway, when 
the captain open the panel. the door slam was also another of his 
contributions. 

"i come now to the end of the captain's ghost play; and to the difficulty 
of try to explain the other peculiar things. in the first place, it 
was obvious there was something genuine strange in the house; which 
made itself manifest as a woman. many different people had seen this 
woman, under differ circumstances, so it is impossible to put the 
thing down to fancy; at the same time it must seem extraordinary that i 
should have live two years in the house, and seen nothing; whilst the 
policeman saw the woman, before he had been there twenty minutes; the 
landlord, the detective, and the inspector all saw her. 

"i can only surmise that _fear_ was in every case the key, as i might 
say, which open the senses to the presence of the woman. the policeman 
was a highly-strung man, and when he became frightened, was able to see 
the woman. the same reasoning apply all 'round. _i_ saw nothing, until 
i became really frightened; then i saw, not the woman; but a child, 
running away from something or someone. however, i will touch on that 
later. in short, until a very strong degree of fear was present, no one 
was affected by the force which made itself evident, as a woman. my 
theory explain why some tenant were never aware of anything strange in 
the house, whilst other left immediately. the more sensitive they were, 
the less would be the degree of fear necessary to make them aware of the 
force present in the house. 

"the peculiar shining of all the metal object in the cellar, had been 
visible only to me. the cause, naturally i do not know; neither do i know 
why i, alone, was able to see the shining." 

"the child," i asked. "can you explain that part at all? why _you_ didn't 
see the woman, and why _they_ didn't see the child. was it merely the 
same force, appear different to different people?" 

"no," said carnacki, "i can't explain that. but i am quite sure that the 
woman and the child were not only two complete and different entities; 
but even they were each not in quite the same plane of existence. 

"to give you a root idea, however, it is held in the sigsand ms. that a 
child '_still_born' is 'snatyched back bye thee haggs.' this is crude; 
but may yet contain an elemental truth. yet, before i make this clearer, 
let me tell you a thought that has often been made. it may be that 
physical birth is but a secondary process; and that prior to the 
possibility, the mother spirit search for, until it finds, the small 
element--the primal ego or child's soul. it may be that a certain 
wayward would cause such to strive to evade capture by the mother 
spirit. it may have been such a thing as this, that i saw. i have always 
try to think so; but it is impossible to ignore the sense of repulsion 
that i felt when the unseen woman went past me. this repulsion carry 
forward the idea suggest in the sigsand ms., that a stillborn child is 
thus, because its ego or spirit has been snatch back by the 'hags.' in 
other words, by certain of the monstrosity of the outer circle. the 
thought is inconceivable terrible, and probably the more so because it is 
so fragmentary. it leaves us with the conception of a child's soul adrift 
half-way between two lives, and running through eternity from something 
incredible and inconceivable (because not understood) to our senses. 

"the thing is beyond further discussion; for it is futile to attempt to 
discuss a thing, to any purpose, of which one has a knowledge so 
fragmentary as this. there is one thought, which is often mine. perhaps 
there is a mother spirit--" 

"and the well?" said arkwright. "how did the captain get in from the 
other side?" 

"as i said before," answer carnacki. "the side wall of the well did 
not reach to the bottom; so that you had only to dip down into the water, 
and come up again on the other side of the wall, under the cellar floor, 
and so climb into the passage. of course, the water was the same height 
on both side of the walls. don't ask me who made the well entrance or 
the little stairway; for i don't know. the house was very old, as i have 
told you; and that sort of thing was useful in the old days." 

"and the child," i said, coming back to the thing which chiefly 
interested me. "you would say that the birth must have occur in that 
house; and in this way, one might suppose that the house to have become 
_en rapport_, if i can use the word in that way, with the forces that 
produce the tragedy?" 

"yes," reply carnacki. "this is, supposing we take the suggestion of 
the sigsand ms., to account for the phenomenon." 

"there may be other houses--" i began. 

"there are," said carnacki; and stood up. 

"out you go," he said, genially, use the recognize formula. and in 
five minutes we were on the embankment, go thoughtful to our 
various homes. 




no. 6--the thing invisible 


carnacki had just return to cheyne walk, chelsea. i was aware of this 
interesting fact by reason of the curt and quaint word postcard 
which i was rereading, and by which i was request to present myself 
at his house not later than seven o'clock on that evening. mr. carnacki 
had, as i and the other of his strict limited circle of friends 
knew, been away in kent for the past three weeks; but beyond that, we 
had no knowledge. carnacki was genial secretive and curt, and spoke 
only when he was ready to speak. when this stage arrived, i and his 
three other friends--jessop, arkright, and taylor--would receive a card 
or a wire, ask us to call. not one of us ever willing missed, for 
after a thorough sensible little dinner carnacki would snuggle down 
into his big armchair, light his pipe, and wait whilst we arrange 
ourselves comfortable in our accustomed seat and nooks. then he would 
begin to talk. 

upon this particular night i was the first to arrive and found 
carnacki sitting, quiet smoking over a paper. he stood up, shook me 
firm by the hand, pointed to a chair, and sat down again, never 
have utter a word. 

for my part, i said nothing either. i knew the man too well to bother him 
with question or the weather, and so took a seat and a cigarette. 
presently the three other turn up and after that we spent a 
comfortable and busy hour at dinner. 

dinner over, carnacki snug himself down into his great chair, as i 
have said was his habit, fill his pipe and puffed for awhile, his gaze 
direct thoughtful at the fire. the rest of us, if i may so express 
it, made ourselves cozy, each after his own particular manner. a minute 
or so later carnacki began to speak, ignore any preliminary remarks, 
and go straight to the subject of the story we knew he had to tell: 

"i have just come back from sir alfred jarnock's place at burtontree, in 
south kent," he began, without remove his gaze from the fire. "most 
extraordinary things have been happening down there lately and mr. george 
jarnock, the eldest son, wire to ask me to run over and see whether i 
could help to clear matter up a bit. i went. 

"when i got there, i found that they have an old chapel attach to the 
castle which has had quite a distinguished reputation for being what is 
popularly term 'haunted.' they have been rather proud of this, as i 
manage to discover, until quite lately when something very disagreeable 
occurred, which serve to remind them that family ghost are not always 
content, as i might say, to remain purely ornamental. 

"it sound almost laughable, i know, to hear of a long-respected 
supernatural phenomenon grow unexpected dangerous; and in this case, 
the tale of the haunting was considered as little more than an old myth, 
except after nightfall, when possibly it became more plausible seeming. 

"but however this may be, there is no doubt at all but that what i might 
term the haunting essence which live in the place, had become sudden 
dangerous--deadly dangerous too, the old butler being nearly stab to 
death one night in the chapel, with a peculiar old dagger. 

"it is, in fact, this dagger which is popularly supposed to 'haunt' the 
chapel. at least, there has been always a story hand down in the family 
that this dagger would attack any enemy who should dare to venture into 
the chapel, after nightfall. but, of course, this had been taken with 
just about the same amount of serious that people take most ghost 
tales, and that is not usually of a worrying _real_ nature. i mean that 
most people never quite know how much or how little they believe of 
matter ab-human or ab-normal, and generally they never have an 
opportunity to learn. and, indeed, as you are all aware, i am as big a 
skeptic concerning the truth of ghost tale as any man you are likely to 
meet; only i am what i might term an unprejudiced skeptic. i am not given 
to either believe or disbelieve things 'on principle,' as i have 
found many idiot prone to be, and what is more, some of them not ashamed 
to boast of the insane fact. i view all report 'hauntings' as unproven 
until i have examine into them, and i am bound to admit that ninety-nine 
case in a hundred turn out to be sheer bosh and fancy. but the 
hundredth! well, if it were not for the hundredth, i should have few 
story to tell you--eh? 

"of course, after the attack on the butler, it became evident that there 
was at least 'something' in the old story concerning the dagger, and i 
found everyone in a half belief that the queer old weapon did really 
strike the butler, either by the aid of some inherent force, which i 
found them peculiarly unable to explain, or else in the hand of some 
invisible thing or monster of the outer world! 

"from considerable experience, i knew that it was much more likely that 
the butler had been 'knifed' by some vicious and quite material human! 

"naturally, the first thing to do, was to test this probability of human 
agency, and i set to work to make a pretty drastic examination of the 
people who knew most about the tragedy. 

"the result of this examination, both pleased and surprise me, for 
it left me with very good reason for belief that i had come upon one 
of those extraordinary rare 'true manifestations' of the extrusion of 
a force from the outside. in more popular phraseology--a genuine case 
of haunting. 

"these are the facts: on the previous sunday evening but one, sir alfred 
jarnock's household had attend family service, as usual, in the chapel. 
you see, the rector go over to officiate twice each sunday, after 
conclude his duty at the public church about three mile away. 

"at the end of the service in the chapel, sir alfred jarnock, his 
son mr. george jarnock, and the rector had stood for a couple of 
minutes, talking, whilst old bellett the butler went 'round, putt 
out the candles. 

"suddenly, the rector remember that he had left his small prayer book 
on the communion table in the morning; he turned, and ask the butler to 
get it for him before he blew out the chancel candles. 

"now i have particularly call your attention to this because it is 
important in that it provide witness in a most fortunate manner at an 
extraordinary moment. you see, the rector's turning to speak to bellett 
had naturally cause both sir alfred jarnock and his son to glance in the 
direction of the butler, and it was at this identical instant and whilst 
all three were look at him, that the old butler was stabbed--there, 
full in the candlelight, before their eyes. 

"i took the opportunity to call early upon the rector, after i had 
question mr. george jarnock, who reply to my query in place of sir 
alfred jarnock, for the old man was in a nervous and shaken condition 
as a result of the happening, and his son wish him to avoid dwelling 
upon the scene as much as possible. 

"the rector's version was clear and vivid, and he had evidently received 
the astonishment of his life. he picture to me the whole 
affair--bellett, up at the chancel gate, go for the prayer book, and 
absolutely alone; and then the _blow_, out of the void, he describe it; 
and the _force_ prodigious--the old man being driven headlong into the 
body of the chapel. like the kick of a great horse, the rector said, his 
benevolent old eyes bright and intense with the effort he had actually 
witnessed, in defiance of all that he had hitherto believed. 

"when i left him, he went back to the writing which he had put aside when 
i appeared. i feel sure that he was develop the first unorthodox 
sermon that he had ever evolved. he was a dear old chap, and i should 
certainly like to have heard it. 

"the last man i visit was the butler. he was, of course, in a 
frightfully weak and shaken condition, but he could tell me nothing that 
did not point to there being a power abroad in the chapel. he told the 
same tale, in every minute particle, that i had learned from the others. 
he had been just go up to put out the altar candle and fetch the 
rector's book, when something struck him an enormous blow high up on the 
left breast and he was driven headlong into the aisle. 

"examination had shown that he had been stab by the dagger--of which i 
will tell you more in a moment--that hung always above the altar. the 
weapon had entered, fortunately some inch above the heart, just under 
the collarbone, which had been broken by the stupendous force of the 
blow, the dagger itself being driven clean through the body, and out 
through the scapula behind. 

"the poor old fellow could not talk much, and i soon left him; but what 
he had told me was sufficient to make it unmistakable that no living 
person had been within yard of him when he was attacked; and, as i knew, 
this fact was verify by three capable and responsible witnesses, 
independent of bellett himself. 

"the thing now was to search the chapel, which is small and extremely 
old. it is very massive built, and enter through only one door, which 
leads out of the castle itself, and the key of which is kept by sir 
alfred jarnock, the butler have no duplicate. 

"the shape of the chapel is oblong, and the altar is rail off after the 
usual fashion. there are two tomb in the body of the place; but none in 
the chancel, which is bare, except for the tall candlesticks, and the 
chancel rail, beyond which is the undraped altar of solid marble, upon 
which stand four small candlesticks, two at each end. 

"above the altar hang the 'waeful dagger,' as i had learned it was 
named. i fancy the term has been taken from an old vellum, which 
describe the dagger and its supposed abnormal properties. i took the 
dagger down, and examine it minutely and with method. the blade is ten 
inch long, two inch broad at the base, and taper to a round but 
sharp point, rather peculiar. it is double-edged. 

"the metal sheath is curious for have a crosspiece, which, taken with 
the fact that the sheath itself is continue three parts up the hilt of 
the dagger (in a most inconvenient fashion), give it the appearance of a 
cross. that this is not unintentional is shown by an engraving of the 
christ crucify upon one side, whilst upon the other, in latin, is the 
inscription: 'vengeance is mine, i will repay.' a quaint and rather 
terrible conjunction of ideas. upon the blade of the dagger is graven in 
old english capitals: i watch. i strike. on the butt of the hilt there is 
carve deep a pentacle. 

"this is a pretty accurate description of the peculiar old weapon that 
has had the curious and uncomfortable reputation of being able (either of 
its own accord or in the hand of something invisible) to strike 
murderous any enemy of the jarnock family who may chance to enter the 
chapel after nightfall. i may tell you here and now, that before i left, 
i had very good reason to put certain doubt behind me; for i test the 
deadly of the thing myself. 

"as you know, however, at this point of my investigation, i was still at 
that stage where i considered the existence of a supernatural force 
unproven. in the meanwhile, i treat the chapel drastically, sound 
and scrutinize the wall and floor, dealing with them almost foot by 
foot, and particularly examine the two tombs. 

"at the end of this search, i had in a ladder, and made a close survey of 
the groin roof. i pass three days in this fashion, and by the evening 
of the third day i had prove to my entire satisfaction that there is no 
place in the whole of that chapel where any living being could have 
hidden, and also that the only way of ingress and egress to and from the 
chapel is through the doorway which leads into the castle, the door of 
which was always kept locked, and the key kept by sir alfred jarnock 
himself, as i have told you. i mean, of course, that this doorway is the 
only entrance practicable to material people. 

"yes, as you will see, even had i discover some other opening, secret 
or otherwise, it would not have help at all to explain the mystery of 
the incredible attack, in a normal fashion. for the butler, as you know, 
was struck in full sight of the rector, sir jarnock and his son. and old 
bellett himself knew that no living person had touched him.... _'out of 
the void,'_ the rector had describe the inhuman brutal attack. 'out of 
the void!' a strange feeling it give one--eh? 

"and this is the thing that i had been call in to bottom! 

"after considerable thought, i decided on a plan of action. i propose to 
sir alfred jarnock that i should spend a night in the chapel, and keep a 
constant watch upon the dagger. but to this, the old knight--a little, 
wizened, nervous man--would not listen for a moment. he, at least, i felt 
assured had no doubt of the reality of some dangerous supernatural force 
a roam at night in the chapel. he informed me that it had been his habit 
every evening to lock the chapel door, so that no one might foolish or 
heedless run the risk of any peril that it might hold at night, and 
that he could not allow me to attempt such a thing after what had 
happen to the butler. 

"i could see that sir alfred jarnock was very much in earnest, and would 
evidently have held himself to blame had he allow me to make the 
experiment and any harm come to me; so i said nothing in argument; and 
presently, pleading the fatigue of his years and health, he said 
goodnight, and left me; have given me the impression of being a polite 
but rather superstitious, old gentleman. 

"that night, however, whilst i was undressing, i saw how i might achieve 
the thing i wished, and be able to enter the chapel after dark, without 
making sir alfred jarnock nervous. on the morrow, when i borrow the 
key, i would take an impression, and have a duplicate made. then, with my 
private key, i could do just what i liked. 

"in the morning i carry out my idea. i borrow the key, as i want to 
take a photograph of the chancel by daylight. when i had done this i 
lock up the chapel and hand the key to sir alfred jarnock, have 
first taken an impression in soap. i had brought out the expose 
plate--in its slide--with me; but the camera i had left exactly as it 
was, as i want to take a second photograph of the chancel that night, 
from the same position. 

"i took the dark slide into burtontree, also the cake of soap with the 
impress. the soap i left with the local ironmonger, who was something of 
a locksmith and promise to let me have my duplicate, finished, if i 
would call in two hours. this i did, have in the meanwhile found out a 
photographer where i develop the plate, and left it to dry, telling him 
i would call next day. at the end of the two hour i went for my key and 
found it ready, much to my satisfaction. then i return to the castle. 

"after dinner that evening, i play billiards with young jarnock for 
a couple of hours. then i had a cup of coffee and went off to my 
room, telling him i was feeling awfully tired. he nod and told me 
he felt the same way. i was glad, for i want the house to settle as 
soon as possible. 

"i lock the door of my room, then from under the bed--where i had 
hidden them early in the evening--i drew out several fine pieces of 
plate armor, which i had remove from the armory. there was also a shirt 
of chain mail, with a sort of quilted hood of mail to go over the head. 

"i buckle on the plate armor, and found it extraordinarily 
uncomfortable, and over all i drew on the chain mail. i know nothing 
about armor, but from what i have learned since, i must have put on parts 
of two suits. anyway, i felt beastly, clamp and clumsy and unable to 
move my arms and leg naturally. but i knew that the thing i was thinking 
of do call for some sort of protection for my body. over the armor i 
pull on my dressing gown and shove my revolver into one of the side 
pockets--and my repeating flash-light into the other. my dark lantern i 
carry in my hand. 

"as soon as i was ready i went out into the passage and listened. i had 
been some considerable time making my preparation and i found that now 
the big hall and staircase were in dark and all the house seem 
quiet. i step back and closed and lock my door. then, very slow 
and silent i went downstairs to the hall and turn into the passage 
that led to the chapel. 

"i reach the door and try my key. it fitted perfectly and a moment 
later i was in the chapel, with the door lock behind me, and all about 
me the utter dree silence of the place, with just the faint showing of 
the outline of the stained, lead windows, making the dark and 
lonesome almost the more apparent. 

"now it would be silly to say i did not feel queer. i felt very queer 
indeed. you just try, any of you, to imagine yourself standing there in 
the dark silence and remember not only the legend that was attach to 
the place, but what had really happen to the old butler only a little 
while gone, i can tell you, as i stood there, i could believe that 
something invisible was coming toward me in the air of the chapel. yet, i 
had got to go through with the business, and i just took hold of my 
little bit of courage and set to work. 

"first of all i switch on my light, then i began a careful tour of the 
place; examine every corner and nook. i found nothing unusual. at the 
chancel gate i held up my lamp and flash the light at the dagger. it 
hung there, right enough, above the altar, but i remember thinking of the 
word 'demure,' as i look at it. however, i pushed the thought away, for 
what i was do need no addition of uncomfortable thoughts. 

"i complete the tour of the place, with a constant grow aware 
of its utter chill and unkind desolation--an atmosphere of cold 
dismal seem to be everywhere, and the quiet was abominable. 

"at the conclusion of my search i walk across to where i had left my 
camera focus upon the chancel. from the satchel that i had put beneath 
the tripod i took out a dark slide and insert it in the camera, drawing 
the shutter. after that i uncapp the lens, pull out my flashlight 
apparatus, and pressed the trigger. there was an intense, brilliant 
flash, that made the whole of the interior of the chapel jump into sight, 
and disappear as quickly. then, in the light from my lantern, i insert 
the shutter into the slide, and reverse the slide, so as to have a fresh 
plate ready to expose at any time. 

"after i had done this i shut off my lantern and sat down in one of the 
pew near to my camera. i cannot say what i expect to happen, but i had 
an extraordinary feeling, almost a conviction, that something peculiar or 
horrible would soon occur. it was, you know, as if i knew. 

"an hour passed, of absolute silence. the time i knew by the far-off, 
faint chime of a clock that had been erect over the stables. i was 
beastly cold, for the whole place is without any kind of heating pipes or 
furnace, as i had notice during my search, so that the temperature was 
sufficient uncomfortable to suit my frame of mind. i felt like a kind 
of human periwinkle encase in boilerplate and frozen with cold and funk. 
and, you know, somehow the dark about me seem to press cold against 
my face. i cannot say whether any of you have ever had the feeling, but 
if you have, you will know just how disgusting unnerve it is. and 
then, all at once, i had a horrible sense that something was moving in 
the place. it was not that i could hear anything but i had a kind of 
intuitive knowledge that something had stir in the darkness. can you 
imagine how i felt? 

"suddenly my courage went. i put up my mail arms over my face. i 
want to protect it. i had got a sudden sickening feeling that something 
was hover over me in the dark. talk about fright! i could have shout 
if i had not been afraid of the noise.... and then, abruptly, i heard 
something. away up the aisle, there sound a dull clang of metal, as it 
might be the tread of a mail heel upon the stone of the aisle. i sat 
immovable. i was fight with all my strength to get back my courage. i 
could not take my arms down from over my face, but i knew that i was 
get hold of the gritty part of me again. and sudden i made a mighty 
effort and lower my arms. i held my face up in the darkness. and, i 
tell you, i respect myself for the act, because i thought truly at that 
moment that i was go to die. but i think, just then, by the slow 
revulsion of feeling which had assist my effort, i was less sick, in 
that instant, at the thought of have to die, than at the knowledge of 
the utter weak cowardice that had so unexpected shaken me all to bits, 
for a time. 

"do i make myself clear? you understand, i feel sure, that the sense of 
respect, which i spoke of, is not really unhealthy egotism; because, you 
see, i am not blind to the state of mind which help me. i mean that if 
i had uncover my face by a sheer effort of will, unhelped by any 
revulsion of feeling, i should have done a thing much more worthy of 
mention. but, even as it was, there were elements in the act, worthy of 
respect. you follow me, don't you? 

"and, you know, nothing touched me, after all! so that, in a little 
while, i had got back a bit to my normal, and felt steady enough to go 
through with the business without any more funking. 

"i daresay a couple of minutes passed, and then, away up near the 
chancel, there came again that clang, as though an armor foot step 
cautiously. by jove! but it made me stiffen. and sudden the thought 
came that the sound i heard might be the rattle of the dagger above the 
altar. it was not a particularly sensible notion, for the sound was far 
too heavy and resonant for such a cause. yet, as can be easily 
understood, my reason was bound to submit somewhat to my fancy at such a 
time. i remember now, that the idea of that insensate thing becoming 
animate, and attack me, did not occur to me with any sense of 
possibility or reality. i thought rather, in a vague way, of some 
invisible monster of outer space fumble at the dagger. i remember 
the old rector's description of the attack on the butler.... _of the 
void_. and he had describe the stupendous force of the blow as being 
'like the kick of a great horse.' you can see how uncomfortable my 
thought were running. 

"i felt 'round swift and cautious for my lantern. i found it close to 
me, on the pew seat, and with a sudden, jerky movement, i switch on the 
light. i flash it up the aisle, to and fro across the chancel, but i 
could see nothing to frighten me. i turn quickly, and sent the jet of 
light dart across and across the rear end of the chapel; then on each 
side of me, before and behind, up at the roof and down at the marble 
floor, but nowhere was there any visible thing to put me in fear, not a 
thing that need have set my flesh thrilling; just the quiet chapel, cold, 
and eternal silent. you know the feeling. 

"i had been standing, whilst i sent the light about the chapel, but now i 
pull out my revolver, and then, with a tremendous effort of will, 
switch off the light, and sat down again in the darkness, to continue 
my constant watch. 

"it seem to me that quite half an hour, or even more, must have passed, 
after this, during which no sound had broken the intense stillness. i had 
grown less nervous tense, for the flash of the light 'round the 
place had made me feel less out of all bounds of the normal--it had 
given me something of that unreasoned sense of safety that a nervous 
child obtain at night, by covering its head up with the bedclothes. this 
just about illustrate the completely human illogical of the workings 
of my feelings; for, as you know, whatever creature, thing, or being it 
was that had made that extraordinary and horrible attack on the old 
butler, it had certainly not been visible. 

"and so you must picture me sitting there in the dark; clumsy with armor, 
and with my revolver in one hand, and nursing my lantern, ready, with the 
other. and then it was, after this little time of partial relief from 
intense nervousness, that there came a fresh strain on me; for somewhere 
in the utter quiet of the chapel, i thought i heard something. i 
listened, tense and rigid, my heart boom just a little in my ear for 
a moment; then i thought i heard it again. i felt sure that something had 
move at the top of the aisle. i strained in the darkness, to hark; and 
my eyes show me black within blackness, wherever i glanced, so that 
i took no heed of what they told me; for even if i look at the dim loom 
of the stain window at the top of the chancel, my sight gave me the 
shape of vague shadow passing noiseless and ghostly across, constantly. 
there was a time of almost peculiar silence, horrible to me, as i felt 
just then. and sudden i seem to hear a sound again, near to me, and 
repeated, infinite stealthy. it was as if a vast, soft tread were 
coming slow down the aisle. 

"can you imagine how i felt? i do not think you can. i did not move, any 
more than the stone effigy on the two tombs; but sat there, 
_stiffened_. i fancy now, that i heard the tread all about the chapel. 
and then, you know, i was just as sure in a moment that i could not hear 
it--that i had never heard it. 

"some particularly long minutes passed, about this time; but i think my 
nerves must have quiet a bit; for i remember being sufficient aware 
of my feelings, to realize that the muscle of my shoulder _ached_, with 
the way that they must have been contracted, as i sat there, hunch 
myself, rigid. mind you, i was still in a disgust funk; but what i 
might call the 'imminent sense of danger' seem to have ease from 
around me; at any rate, i felt, in some curious fashion, that there was a 
respite--a temporary cessation of malignity from about me. it is 
impossible to word my feelings more clearly to you, for i cannot see them 
more clearly than this, myself. 

"yet, you must not picture me as sitting there, free from strain; for the 
nerve tension was so great that my heart action was a little out of 
normal control, the blood beat making a dull boom at times in my ears, 
with the result that i had the sensation that i could not hear acutely. 
this is a simply beastly feeling, especially under such circumstances. 

"i was sitting like this, listening, as i might say with body and soul, 
when sudden i got that hideous conviction again that something was 
moving in the air of the place. the feeling seem to stiffen me, as i 
sat, and my head appear to tighten, as if all the scalp had grown 
_tense_. this was so real, that i suffer an actual pain, most peculiar 
and at the same time intense; the whole head pained. i had a fierce 
desire to cover my face again with my mail arms, but i fought it off. 
if i had given way then to that, i should simply have bunk straight out 
of the place. i sat and sweated cold (that's the bald truth), with the 
'creep' busy at my spine.... 

"and then, abruptly, once more i thought i heard the sound of that huge, 
soft tread on the aisle, and this time close to me. there was an awful 
little silence, during which i had the feeling that something enormous 
was bend over toward me, from the aisle.... and then, through the 
boom of the blood in my ears, there came a slight sound from the 
place where my camera stood--a disagreeable sort of slither sound, and 
then a sharp tap. i had the lantern ready in my left hand, and now i 
snap it on, desperately, and shone it straight above me, for i had a 
conviction that there was something there. but i saw nothing. immediately 
i flash the light at the camera, and along the aisle, but again there 
was nothing visible. i wheel 'round, shoot the beam of light in a 
great circle about the place; to and fro i shone it, jerk it here and 
there, but it show me nothing. 

"i had stood up the instant that i had seen that there was nothing in 
sight over me, and now i determined to visit the chancel, and see whether 
the dagger had been touched. i step out of the pew into the aisle, and 
here i came to an abrupt pause, for an almost invincible, sick repugnance 
was fight me back from the upper part of the chapel. a constant, queer 
prickle went up and down my spine, and a dull ache took me in the small 
of the back, as i fought with myself to conquer this sudden new feeling 
of terror and horror. i tell you, that no one who has not been through 
these kind of experiences, has any idea of the sheer, actual physical 
pain attendant upon, and result from, the intense nerve strain that 
ghostly fright set up in the human system. i stood there feeling 
positively ill. but i got myself in hand, as it were, in about half a 
minute, and then i went, walking, i expect, as jerky as a mechanical tin 
man, and switch the light from side to side, before and behind, and 
over my head continually. and the hand that held my revolver sweated so 
much, that the thing fairly slip in my fist. do not sound very 
heroic, do it? 

"i pass through the short chancel, and reach the step that led up to 
the small gate in the chancel rail. i threw the beam from my lantern 
upon the dagger. yes, i thought, it's all right. abruptly, it seem to 
me that there was something wanting, and i lean forward over the 
chancel gate to peer, holding the light high. my suspicion was hideous 
correct. _the dagger had gone._ only the cross-shaped sheath hung there 
above the altar. 

"in a sudden, frightened flash of imagination, i picture the thing 
adrift in the chapel, moving here and there, as though of its own 
volition; for whatever force wield it, was certainly beyond 
visibility. i turn my head stiff over to the left, glancing 
frightened behind me, and flash the light to help my eyes. in the 
same instant i was struck a tremendous blow over the left breast, and 
hurl backward from the chancel rail, into the aisle, my armor clang 
loud in the horrible silence. i landed on my back, and slither along 
on the polish marble. my shoulder struck the corner of a pew front, 
and brought me up, half stunned. i scramble to my feet, horrible sick 
and shaken; but the fear that was on me, making little of that at the 
moment. i was minus both revolver and lantern, and utterly bewilder as 
to just where i was standing. i bowed my head, and made a scramble run 
in the complete dark and dashed into a pew. i jump back, 
staggering, got my bearings a little, and race down the center of the 
aisle, putt my mail arms over my face. i plunge into my camera, 
hurling it among the pews. i crash into the font, and reel back. 
then i was at the exit. i fumble madly in my dressing gown pocket for 
the key. i found it and scrape at the door, feverishly, for the 
keyhole. i found the keyhole, turn the key, burst the door open, and 
was into the passage. i slam the door and leant hard against it, 
gasping, whilst i felt crazy again for the keyhole, this time to lock 
the door upon what was in the chapel. i succeeded, and began to feel my 
way stupid along the wall of the corridor. presently i had come to the 
big hall, and so in a little to my room. 

"in my room, i sat for a while, until i had steady down something 
to the normal. after a time i commence to strip off the armor. i saw 
then that both the chain mail and the plate armor had been pierce 
over the breast. and, suddenly, it came home to me that the thing had 
struck for my heart. 

"stripping rapidly, i found that the skin of the breast over the heart 
had just been cut sufficient to allow a little blood to stain my shirt, 
nothing more. only, the whole breast was badly bruise and intense 
painful. you can imagine what would have happen if i had not worn the 
armor. in any case, it is a marvel that i was not knock senseless. 

"i did not go to bed at all that night, but sat upon the edge, thinking, 
and wait for the dawn; for i had to remove my litter before sir alfred 
jarnock should enter, if i were to hide from him the fact that i had 
manage a duplicate key. 

"so soon as the pale light of the morning had strengthen sufficient 
to show me the various detail of my room, i made my way quiet down to 
the chapel. very silently, and with tense nerves, i open the door. the 
chill light of the dawn made distinct the whole place--everything seeming 
instinct with a ghostly, unearthly quiet. can you get the feeling? i 
wait several minutes at the door, allow the morning to grow, and 
likewise my courage, i suppose. presently the rising sun threw an odd 
beam right in through the big, east window, making colored sunshine all 
the length of the chapel. and then, with a tremendous effort, i forced 
myself to enter. 

"i went up the aisle to where i had overthrown my camera in the darkness. 
the leg of the tripod were stick up from the interior of a pew, and i 
expect to find the machine smashed to pieces; yet, beyond that the 
ground glass was broken, there was no real damage done. 

"i replace the camera in the position from which i had taken the 
previous photography; but the slide contain the plate i had expose by 
flashlight i remove and put into one of my side pockets, regret that 
i had not taken a second flash picture at the instant when i heard those 
strange sound up in the chancel. 

"having tidy my photographic apparatus, i went to the chancel to 
recover my lantern and revolver, which had both--as you know--been 
knock from my hand when i was stabbed. i found the lantern lying, 
hopeless bent, with smashed lens, just under the pulpit. my revolver i 
must have held until my shoulder struck the pew, for it was lie there 
in the aisle, just about where i believe i cannon into the pew corner. 
it was quite undamaged. 

"having secure these two articles, i walk up to the chancel rail to 
see whether the dagger had returned, or been returned, to its sheath 
above the altar. before, however, i reach the chancel rail, i had a 
slight shock; for there on the floor of the chancel, about a yard away 
from where i had been struck, lay the dagger, quiet and demure upon the 
polish marble pavement. i wonder whether you will, any of you, 
understand the nervous that took me at the sight of the thing. with a 
sudden, unreasoned action, i jump forward and put my foot on it, to 
hold it there. can you understand? do you? and, you know, i could not 
stoop down and pick it up with my hand for quite a minute, i should 
think. afterward, when i had done so, however, and handle it a little, 
this feeling pass away and my reason (and also, i expect, the daylight) 
made me feel that i had been a little bit of an ass. quite natural, 
though, i assure you! yet it was a new kind of fear to me. i'm taking no 
notice of the cheap joke about the ass! i am talk about the 
curious of learning in that moment a new shade or quality of fear 
that had hitherto been outside of my knowledge or imagination. do it 
interest you? 

"i examine the dagger, minutely, turning it over and over in my hand 
and never--as i sudden discovered--holding it loosely. it was as if i 
were subconscious surprise that it lay quiet in my hands. yet even 
this feeling passed, largely, after a short while. the curious weapon 
show no sign of the blow, except that the dull color--of the blade was 
slightly bright on the round point that had cut through the armor. 

"presently, when i had made an end of staring at the dagger, i went up 
the chancel step and in through the little gate. then, kneel upon the 
altar, i replace the dagger in its sheath, and came outside of the rail 
again, close the gate after me and feeling aware uncomfortable 
because the horrible old weapon was back again in its accustomed place. i 
suppose, without analyze my feelings very deeply, i had an unreasoned 
and only half-conscious belief that there was a greater probability of 
danger when the dagger hung in its five century rest place than when 
it was out of it! yet, somehow i don't think this is a very good 
explanation, when i remember the _demure_ look the thing seem to have 
when i saw it lie on the floor of the chancel. only i know this, that 
when i had replace the dagger i had quite a touch of nerves and i 
stop only to pick up my lantern from where i had placed it whilst i 
examine the weapon, after which i went down the quiet aisle at a pretty 
quick walk, and so got out of the place. 

"that the nerve tension had been considerable, i realized, when i had 
lock the door behind me. i felt no inclination now to think of old sir 
alfred as a hypochondriac because he had taken such hyperseeme 
precaution regarding the chapel. i had a sudden wonder as to whether he 
might not have some knowledge of a long prior tragedy in which the 
dagger had been concerned. 

"i return to my room, washed, shave and dressed, after which i read 
awhile. then i went downstairs and got the acting butler to give me some 
sandwich and a cup of coffee. 

"half an hour later i was heading for burtontree, as hard as i could 
walk; for a sudden idea had come to me, which i was anxious to test. i 
reach the town a little before eight thirty, and found the local 
photographer with his shutter still up. i did not wait, but knock 
until he appear with his coat off, evidently in the act of dealing with 
his breakfast. in a few words i made clear that i want the use of his 
dark room immediately, and this he at once placed at my disposal. 

"i had brought with me the slide which contained the plate that i had 
use with the flashlight, and as soon as i was ready i set to work to 
develop. yet, it was not the plate which i had exposed, that i first put 
into the solution, but the second plate, which had been ready in the 
camera during all the time of my wait in the darkness. you see, the 
lens had been uncapp all that while, so that the whole chancel had 
been, as it were, under observation. 

"you all know something of my experiment in 'lightless photography,' 
that is, appreciate light. it was x-ray work that start me in that 
direction. yet, you must understand, though i was attempt to develop 
this 'unexposed' plate, i had no definite idea of results--nothing more 
than a vague hope that it might show me something. 

"yet, because of the possibilities, it was with the most intense and 
absorbing interest that i watch the plate under the action of the 
developer. presently i saw a faint smudge of black appear in the upper 
part, and after that others, indistinct and waver of outline. i held 
the negative up to the light. the mark were rather small, and were 
almost entire confine to one end of the plate, but as i have said, 
lack definiteness. yet, such as they were, they were sufficient to make 
me very excited and i shove the thing quick back into the solution. 

"for some minutes further i watch it, lift it out once or twice to 
make a more exact scrutiny, but could not imagine what the marking might 
represent, until sudden it occur to me that in one of two place 
they certainly had shape suggestive of a cross hilt dagger. yet, the 
shape were sufficient indefinite to make me careful not to let myself 
be overimpress by the uncomfortable resemblance, though i must confess, 
the very thought was sufficient to set some odd thrill adrift in me. 

"i carry development a little further, then put the negative into the 
hypo, and commence work upon the other plate. this came up nicely, and 
very soon i had a really decent negative that appear similar in every 
respect (except for the difference of lighting) to the negative i had 
taken during the previous day. i fixed the plate, then have wash both 
it and the 'unexposed' one for a few minutes under the tap, i put them 
into methylate spirits for fifteen minutes, after which i carry them 
into the photographer's kitchen and dry them in the oven. 

"whilst the two plate were dry the photographer and i made an 
enlargement from the negative i had taken by daylight. then we did the 
same with the two that i had just developed, washing them as quick as 
possible, for i was not trouble about the permanency of the prints, and 
dry them with spirits. 

"when this was done i took them to the window and made a thorough 
examination, commence with the one that appear to show shadowy 
dagger in several places. yet, though it was now enlarged, i was still 
unable to feel convinced that the mark truly represent anything 
abnormal; and because of this, i put it on one side, determined not to 
let my imagination play too large a part in construct weapon out of 
the indefinite outlines. 

"i took up the two other enlargements, both of the chancel, as you will 
remember, and commence to compare them. for some minutes i examine them 
without being able to distinguish any difference in the scene they 
portrayed, and then abruptly, i saw something in which they varied. in 
the second enlargement--the one made from the flashlight negative--the 
dagger was not in its sheath. yet, i had felt sure it was there but a few 
minutes before i took the photograph. 

"after this discovery i began to compare the two enlargement in a very 
different manner from my previous scrutiny. i borrow a pair of calipers 
from the photographer and with these i carry out a most methodical and 
exact comparison of the detail shown in the two photographs. 

"suddenly i came upon something that set me all tingle with excitement. 
i threw the calipers down, paid the photographer, and walk out through 
the shop into the street. the three enlargement i took with me, making 
them into a roll as i went. at the corner of the street i had the luck to 
get a cab and was soon back at the castle. 

"i hurried up to my room and put the photograph away; then i went down to 
see whether i could find sir alfred jarnock; but mr. george jarnock, who 
met me, told me that his father was too unwell to rise and would prefer 
that no one enter the chapel unless he were about. 

"young jarnock made a half apologetic excuse for his father; remark 
that sir alfred jarnock was perhaps inclined to be a little over careful; 
but that, considering what had happened, we must agree that the need for 
his careful had been justified. he added, also, that even before the 
horrible attack on the butler his father had been just as particular, 
always keeping the key and never allow the door to be unlock except 
when the place was in use for divine service, and for an hour each 
forenoon when the cleaner were in. 

"to all this i nod understandingly; but when, presently, the young 
man left me i took my duplicate key and made for the door of the chapel. 
i went in and lock it behind me, after which i carry out some 
intense interesting and rather weird experiments. these prove 
successful to such an extent that i came out of the place in a perfect 
fever of excitement. i inquire for mr. george jarnock and was told that 
he was in the morning room. 

"'come along,' i said, when i had found him. 'please give me a lift. i've 
something exceedingly strange to show you.' 

"he was palpable very much puzzled, but came quickly. as we strode along 
he ask me a score of questions, to all of which i just shook my head, 
ask him to wait a little. 

"i led the way to the armory. here i suggest that he should take one 
side of a dummy, dress in half plate armor, whilst i took the other. 
he nodded, though obviously vastly bewildered, and together we carry 
the thing to the chapel door. when he saw me take out my key and open 
the way for us he appear even more astonished, but held himself in, 
evidently wait for me to explain. we enter the chapel and i lock 
the door behind us, after which we cart the armor dummy up the aisle 
to the gate of the chancel rail where we put it down upon its round, 
wooden stand. 

"'stand back!' i shout sudden as young jarnock made a movement to 
open the gate. 'my god, man! you mustn't do that!' 

"do what?" he asked, half-startled and half-irritated by my words 
and manner. 

"one minute," i said. "just stand to the side a moment, and watch." 

he step to the left whilst i took the dummy in my arms and turn it 
to face the altar, so that it stood close to the gate. then, standing 
well away on the right side, i pressed the back of the thing so that it 
leant forward a little upon the gate, which flew open. in the same 
instant, the dummy was struck a tremendous blow that hurl it into the 
aisle, the armor rattling and clang upon the polish marble floor. 

"good god!" shout young jarnock, and ran back from the chancel rail, 
his face very white. 

"come and look at the thing," i said, and led the way to where the dummy 
lay, its armor upper limb all splay adrift in queer contortions. i 
stoop over it and pointed. there, driven right through the thick steel 
breastplate, was the 'waeful dagger.' 

"good god!" said young jarnock again. "good god! it's the dagger! the 
thing's been stabbed, same as bellett!" 

"yes," i replied, and saw him glance swift toward the entrance of 
the chapel. but i will do him the justice to say that he never 
budge an inch. 

"come and see how it was done," i said, and led the way back to the 
chancel rail. from the wall to the left of the altar i took down a long, 
curious ornamented, iron instrument, not unlike a short spear. the 
sharp end of this i insert in a hole in the left-hand gatepost of the 
chancel gateway. i lift hard, and a section of the post, from the floor 
upward, bent inward toward the altar, as though hinge at the bottom. 
down it went, leave the remain part of the post standing. as i bent 
the movable portion lower there came a quick click and a section of the 
floor slid to one side, showing a long, shallow cavity, sufficient to 
enclose the post. i put my weight to the lever and hove the post down 
into the niche. immediately there was a sharp clang, as some catch 
snick in, and held it against the powerful operate spring. 

i went over now to the dummy, and after a few minute's work manage to 
wrench the dagger loose out of the armor. i brought the old weapon and 
placed its hilt in a hole near the top of the post where it fitted 
loosely, the point upward. after that i went again to the lever and gave 
another strong heave, and the post descended about a foot, to the bottom 
of the cavity, catching there with another clang. i withdrew the lever 
and the narrow strip of floor slid back, covering post and dagger, and 
look no different from the surrounding surface. 

then i shut the chancel gate, and we both stood well to one side. i 
took the spear-like lever, and gave the gate a little push, so that it 
opened. instantly there was a loud thud, and something sang through the 
air, striking the bottom wall of the chapel. it was the dagger. i 
show jarnock then that the other half of the post had sprung back 
into place, making the whole post as thick as the one upon the 
right-hand side of the gate. 

"there!" i said, turning to the young man and tap the divide post. 
"there's the 'invisible' thing that use the dagger, but who the deuce is 
the person who set the trap?" i look at him keen as i spoke. 

"my father is the only one who has a key," he said. "so it's practically 
impossible for anyone to get in and meddle." 

i look at him again, but it was obvious that he had not yet reach out 
to any conclusion. 

"see here, mr. jarnock," i said, perhaps rather curt than i should have 
done, considering what i had to say. "are you quite sure that sir alfred 
is quite balanced--mentally?" 

"he look at me, half frightened and flush a little. i realize 
then how badly i put it. 

"'i--i don't know,' he replied, after a slight pause and was then silent, 
except for one or two incoherent half remarks. 

"'tell the truth,' i said. 'haven't you suspect something, now and 
again? you needn't be afraid to tell me.' 

"'well,' he answer slowly, 'i'll admit i've thought father a little--a 
little strange, perhaps, at times. but i've always try to think i was 
mistaken. i've always hope no one else would see it. you see, i'm very 
fond of the old guvnor.' 

"i nodded. 

"'quite right, too,' i said. 'there's not the least need to make any kind 
of scandal about this. we must do something, though, but in a quiet way. 
no fuss, you know. i should go and have a chat with your father, and tell 
him we've found out about this thing.' i touched the divide post. 

"young jarnock seem very grateful for my advice and after shake my 
hand pretty hard, took my key, and let himself out of the chapel. he came 
back in about an hour, look rather upset. he told me that my 
conclusion were perfectly correct. it was sir alfred jarnock who had set 
the trap, both on the night that the butler was nearly killed, and on the 
past night. indeed, it seem that the old gentleman had set it every 
night for many years. he had learnt of its existence from an old 
manuscript book in the castle library. it had been plan and use in an 
early age as a protection for the gold vessel of the ritual, which 
were, it seemed, kept in a hidden recess at the back of the altar. 

"this recess sir alfred jarnock had utilized, secretly, to store his 
wife's jewelry. she had die some twelve years back, and the young man 
told me that his father had never seem quite himself since. 

"i mention to young jarnock how puzzle i was that the trap had been 
set _before_ the service, on the night that the butler was struck; for, 
if i understood him aright, his father had been in the habit of setting 
the trap late every night and unsett it each morning before anyone 
enter the chapel. he reply that his father, in a fit of temporary 
forgetful (natural enough in his neurotic condition), must have set 
it too early and hence what had so nearly prove a tragedy. 

"that is about all there is to tell. the old man is not (so far as i 
could learn), really insane in the popularly accept sense of the word. 
he is extremely neurotic and has develop into a hypochondriac, the 
whole condition probably brought about by the shock and sorrow resultant 
on the death of his wife, leading to years of sad brood and to 
overmuch of his own company and thoughts. indeed, young jarnock told me 
that his father would sometimes pray for hour together, alone in the 
chapel." carnacki made an end of speak and leant forward for a spill. 

"but you've never told us just _how_ you discover the secret of the 
divide post and all that," i said, speak for the four of us. 

"oh, that!" reply carnacki, puff vigorous at his pipe. "i 
found--on compare the--photos, that the one--taken in the--daytime, 
show a thick left-hand gatepost, than the one taken at night by the 
flashlight. that put me on to the track. i saw at once that there might 
be some mechanical dodge at the back of the whole queer business and 
nothing at all of an abnormal nature. i examine the post and the rest 
was simple enough, you know. 

"by the way," he continued, rising and go to the mantelpiece, "you may 
be interested to have a look at the so-called 'waeful dagger.' young 
jarnock was kind enough to present it to me, as a little memento of my 
adventure." 

he hand it 'round to us and whilst we examine it, stood silent before 
the fire, puff meditative at his pipe. 

"jarnock and i made the trap so that it won't work," he remark after a 
few moments. "i've got the dagger, as you see, and old bellett's get 
about again, so that the whole business can be hush up, decently. all 
the same i fancy the chapel will never lose its reputation as a dangerous 
place. should be pretty safe now to keep valuable in." 

"there's two things you haven't explain yet," i said. "what do you 
think cause the two clangey sound when you were in the chapel in the 
dark? and do you believe the soft tready sound were real, or only a 
fancy, with your being so work up and tense?" 

"don't know for certain about the clangs," reply carnacki. 

"i've puzzle quite a bit about them. i can only think that the spring 
which work the post must have 'given' a trifle, slip you know, in 
the catch. if it did, under such a tension, it would make a bit of a 
ring noise. and a little sound go a long way in the middle of the 
night when you're thinking of 'ghostesses.' you can understand that--eh?" 

"yes," i agreed. "and the other sounds?" 

"well, the same thing--i mean the extraordinary quietness--may help to 
explain these a bit. they may have been some usual enough sound that 
would never have been notice under ordinary conditions, or they may have 
been only fancy. it is just impossible to say. they were disgusting 
real to me. as for the slithery noise, i am pretty sure that one of the 
tripod leg of my camera must have slip a few inches: if it did so, it 
may easily have jolt the lens cap off the baseboard, which would 
account for that queer little tap which i heard directly after." 

"how do you account for the dagger being in its place above the altar 
when you first examine it that night?" i asked. "how could it be there, 
when at that very moment it was set in the trap?" 

"that was my mistake," reply carnacki. "the dagger could not possibly 
have been in its sheath at the time, though i thought it was. you see, 
the curious cross-hilted sheath gave the appearance of the complete 
weapon, as you can understand. the hilt of the dagger protrude very 
little above the continue portion of the sheath--a most inconvenient 
arrangement for drawing quickly!" he nod sage at the lot of us and 
yawned, then glance at the clock. 

"out you go!" he said, in friendly fashion, use the recognize formula. 
"i want a sleep." 

we rose, shook him by the hand, and went out presently into the night and 
the quiet of the embankment, and so to our homes. 







end of project gutenberg's carnacki, the ghost finder, by william hope hodgson 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook carnacki, the ghost finder *** 

***** this file should be name 10832.txt or 10832.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/8/3/10832/ 

produce by suzanne shell, project gutenberg beginner projects, 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 809 
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email 
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the 
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for forty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
