the project gutenberg ebook, visible and invisible, by e. f. (edward 
frederic) benson 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 




title: visible and invisible 


author: e. f. (edward frederic) benson 



release date: september 22, 2019 [ebook #60339] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook visible and invisible*** 


e-text prepared by tim lindell, david e. brown, and the online distribute 
proofread team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page image digitize by the 
google books library project (http://books.google.com) and generous made 
available by hathitrust digital library (https://www.hathitrust.org/) 



note: image of the original page are available through 
hathitrust digital library. see 
https://catalog.hathitrust.org/record/008921437 


transcriber’s note: 

italicize text is surround by underscores: _italics_. 





visible and invisible 

by 

e. f. benson . . author of 

“dodo wonders,” “miss mapp,” “colin,” etc. :: :: 






london: hutchinson and co. 
paternoster row, e.c. 

print in great britain 
at the pitman press, bath 




contents 


page 

“and the dead spake----” 7 

the outcast 37 

the horror-horn 63 

machaon 83 

negotium perambulan 107 

at the farmhouse 131 

inscrutable decree 155 

the garden 177 

mr. tilly’s sÉance 199 

mrs. amworth 223 

in the tube 247 

roderick’s story 269 




“and the dead spake----” 




“and the dead spake----” 


there is not in all london a quiet spot, or one, apparently, more 
withdrawn from the heat and bustle of life than newsome terrace. it is 
a cul-de-sac, for at the upper end the roadway between its two lines 
of square, compact little residence is brought to an end by a high 
brick wall, while at the lower end, the only access to it is through 
newsome square, that small discreet oblong of georgia houses, a relic 
of the time when kensington was a suburban village sunder from the 
metropolis by a stretch of pasture stretch to the river. both 
square and terrace are most inconvenient situated for those whose 
ideal environment include a rank of taxicab immediately opposite 
their door, a spate of ’buses roaring down the street, and a procession 
of underground trains, accessible by a station a few yard away, 
shake and rattling the cutlery and silver on their dine tables. in 
consequence newsome terrace had come, two years ago, to be inhabit 
by leisurely and retired folk or by those who wish to pursue their 
work in quiet and tranquillity. children with hoop and scooter are 
phenomena rarely encounter in the terrace and dogs are equally 
uncommon. 

in front of each of the couple of dozen house of which the terrace 
is compose lie a little square of railing garden, in which you 
may often see the middle-aged or elderly mistress of the residence 
horticulture employed. by five o’clock of a winter’s evening 
the pavement will generally be empty of all passenger except the 
policeman, who with felt step, at interval throughout the night, 
peer with his bull’s-eye into these small front gardens, and never 
find anything more suspicious there than an early crocus or an 
aconite. for by the time it is dark the inhabitant of the terrace have 
got themselves home, where behind drawn curtains and bolt shutter 
they will pass a domestic and uninterrupted evening. no funeral (up to 
the time i speak of) had i ever seen leave the terrace, no marriage 
party had strew its pavement with confetti, and perambulator were 
unknown. it and its inhabitant seem to be quiet mellow like 
bottle of sound wine. no doubt there was store within them the 
sunshine and summer of youth long past, and now, doze in a cool 
place, they wait for the turn of the key in the cellar door, and the 
entry of one who would draw them forth and see what they were worth. 

yet, after the time of which i shall now speak, i have never 
pass down its pavement without wonder whether each house, so 
seemingly-tranquil, is not, like some dynamo, soft and smooth 
bring into being vast and terrible forces, such as those i once 
saw at work in the last house at the upper end of the terrace, the 
quietest, you would have said, of all the row. had you observe it with 
continuous scrutiny, for all the length of a summer day, it is quite 
possible that you might have only seen issue from it in the morning 
an elderly woman whom you would have rightly conjecture to be the 
housekeeper, with her basket for marketing on her arm, who return 
an hour later. except for her the entire day might often pass without 
there being either ingress or egress from the door. occasional a 
middle-aged man, lean and wiry, came swift down the pavement, but 
his exit was by no means a daily occurrence, and indeed when he did 
emerge, he broke the almost universal usage of the terrace, for his 
appearances took place, when such there were, between nine and ten in 
the evening. at that hour sometimes he would come round to my house 
in newsome square to see if i was at home and inclined for a talk a 
little later on. for the sake of air and exercise he would then have an 
hour’s tramp through the lit and noisy streets, and return about ten, 
still pale and unflushed, for one of those talks which grew to have 
an absorbing fascination for me. more rarely through the telephone i 
propose that i should drop in on him: this i did not often do, since i 
found that if he did not come out himself, it imply that he was busy 
with some investigation, and though he made me welcome, i could easily 
see that he burn for my departure, so that he might get busy with his 
battery and pieces of tissue, hot on the track of discovery that 
never yet had present themselves to the mind of man as coming within 
the horizon of possibility. 

my last sentence may have led the reader to guess that i am indeed 
speak of none other than that recluse and mysterious physicist sir 
james horton, with whose death a hundred half-hewn avenue into the 
dark forest from which life come must wait completion till another 
pioneer as bold as he take up the axe which hitherto none but 
himself has been able to wield. probably there was never a man to whom 
humanity owe more, and of whom humanity knew less. he seem utterly 
independent of the race to whom (though indeed with no service of love) 
he devoted himself: for years he live aloof and apart in his house 
at the end of the terrace. men and women were to him like fossil to 
the geologist, things to be tap and hammer and dissect and 
studied with a view not only to the reconstruction of past ages, but 
to construction in the future. it is known, for instance, that he made 
an artificial being form of the tissue, still living, of animal 
lately killed, with the brain of an ape and the heart of a bullock, 
and a sheep’s thyroid, and so forth. of that i can give no first-hand 
account; horton, it is true, told me something about it, and in his 
will direct that certain memoranda on the subject should on his death 
be sent to me. but on the bulky envelope there is the direction, “not 
to be open till january, 1925.” he spoke with some reserve and, so i 
think, with slight horror at the strange things which had happen on 
the completion of this creature. it evidently made him uncomfortable 
to talk about it, and for that reason i fancy he put what was then a 
rather remote date to the day when his record should reach my eye. 
finally, in these preliminaries, for the last five years before the 
war, he had scarcely entered, for the sake of companionship, any 
house other than his own and mine. ours was a friendship date from 
school-days, which he had never suffer to drop entirely, but i doubt 
if in those years he spoke except on matter of business to half a 
dozen other people. he had already retired from surgical practice in 
which his skill was unapproached, and most completely now did he avoid 
the slightest intercourse with his colleagues, whom he regard as 
ignorant pedant without courage or the rudiments of knowledge. now 
and then he would write an epoch-making little monograph, which he 
flung to them like a bone to a starve dog, but for the most part, 
utterly absorb in his own investigations, he left them to grope along 
unaided. he frankly told me that he enjoy talk to me about such 
subjects, since i was utterly unacquainted with them. it clarify his 
mind to be oblige to put his theory and guess and confirmation 
with such simplicity that anyone could understand them. 

i well remember his coming in to see me on the evening of the 4th of 
august, 1914. 

“so the war has broken out,” he said, “and the street are impassable 
with excited crowds. odd, isn’t it? just as if each of us already was 
not a far more murderous battlefield than any which can be conceive 
between war nations.” 

“how’s that?” said i. 

“let me try to put it plainly, though it isn’t that i want to talk 
about. your blood is one eternal battlefield. it is full of army 
eternal march and counter-marching. as long as the army friendly 
to you are in a superior position, you remain in good health; if a 
detachment of microbe that, if suffer to establish themselves, 
would give you a cold in the head, entrench themselves in your mucous 
membrane, the commander-in-chief send a regiment down and drive them 
out. he doesn’t give his orders from your brain, mind you--those aren’t 
his headquarters, for your brain know nothing about the landing of the 
enemy till they have made good their position and given you a cold.” 

he pause a moment. 

“there isn’t one headquarters inside you,” he said, “there are many. 
for instance, i kill a frog this morning; at least most people would 
say i kill it. but had i kill it, though its head lay in one place 
and its sever body in another? not a bit: i had only kill a piece 
of it. for i open the body afterwards and took out the heart, which 
i put in a sterilise chamber of suitable temperature, so that it 
wouldn’t get cold or be infect by any microbe. that was about twelve 
o’clock to-day. and when i came out just now, the heart was beating 
still. it was alive, in fact. that’s full of suggestions, you know. 
come and see it.” 

the terrace had been stir into volcanic activity by the news of war: 
the vendor of some late edition had penetrate into its quietude, and 
there were half a dozen parlour-maids flutter about like black and 
white moths. but once inside horton’s door isolation as of an arctic 
night seem to close round me. he had forgotten his latch-key, but 
his housekeeper, then newly come to him, who became so regular and 
familiar a figure in the terrace, must have heard his step, for before 
he rang the bell she had open the door, and stood with his forgotten 
latch-key in her hand. 

“thanks, mrs. gabriel,” said he, and without a sound the door shut 
behind us. both her name and face, as reproduce in some illustrate 
daily paper, seem familiar, rather terribly familiar, but before i 
had time to grope for the association, horton supply it. 

“tried for the murder of her husband six month ago,” he said. “odd 
case. the point is that she is the one and perfect housekeeper. i once 
had four servants, and everything was all mucky, as we use to say 
at school. now i live in amazing comfort and propriety with one. she 
do everything. she is cook, valet, housemaid, butler, and won’t have 
anyone to help her. no doubt she kill her husband, but she plan it 
so well that she could not be convicted. she told me quite frankly who 
she was when i engaged her.” 

of course i remember the whole trial vivid now. her husband, a 
morose, quarrelsome fellow, tipsy as often as sober, had, according 
to the defence cut his own throat while shaving; according to the 
prosecution, she had done that for him. there was the usual discrepancy 
of evidence as to whether the wound could have been self-inflicted, 
and the prosecution try to prove that the face had been lather 
after his throat had been cut. so singular an exhibition of forethought 
and nerve had hurt rather than help their case, and after prolonged 
deliberation on the part of the jury, she had been acquitted. yet not 
less singular was horton’s selection of a probable murderess, however 
efficient, as housekeeper. 

he anticipate this reflection. 

“apart from the wonderful comfort of have a perfectly appoint and 
absolutely silent house,” he said, “i regard mrs. gabriel as a sort 
of insurance against my being murdered. if you had been try for 
your life, you would take very especial care not to find yourself in 
suspicious proximity to a murder body again: no more death in your 
house, if you could help it. come through to my laboratory, and look at 
my little instance of life after death.” 

certainly it was amazing to see that little piece of tissue still 
pulsate with what must be call life; it contract and expand 
faint indeed but perceptibly, though for nine hour now it had been 
sever from the rest of the organisation. all by itself it went on 
living, and if the heart could go on living with nothing, you would 
say, to feed and stimulate its energy, there must also, so reasoned 
horton, reside in all the other vital organ of the body other 
independent focus of life. 

“of course a sever organ like that,” he said, “will run down quick 
than if it had the co-operation of the others, and presently i shall 
apply a gentle electric stimulus to it. if i can keep that glass bowl 
under which it beat at the temperature of a frog’s body, in sterilise 
air, i don’t see why it should not go on living. food--of course 
there’s the question of feed it. do you see what that open up in 
the way of surgery? imagine a shop with glass case contain healthy 
organ taken from the dead. say a man die of pneumonia. he should, as 
soon as ever the breath is out of his body, be dissected, and though 
they would, of course, destroy his lungs, as they will be full of 
pneumococci, his liver and digestive organ are probably healthy. take 
them out, keep them in a sterilise atmosphere with the temperature 
at 98·4, and sell the liver, let us say, to another poor devil who has 
cancer there. fit him with a new healthy liver, eh?” 

“and insert the brain of someone who has die of heart disease into the 
skull of a congenital idiot?” i asked. 

“yes, perhaps; but the brain’s tiresome complicated in its 
connection and the join up of the nerves, you know. surgery will 
have to learn a lot before it fit new brains in. and the brain has got 
such a lot of functions. all thinking, all invent seem to belong to 
it, though, as you have seen, the heart can get on quite well without 
it. but there are other function of the brain i want to study first. 
i’ve been try some experiment already.” 

he made some little readjust to the flame of the spirit lamp which 
kept at the right temperature the water that surround the sterilise 
receptacle in which the frog’s heart was beating. 

“start with the more simple and mechanical use of the brain,” he said. 
“primarily it is a sort of record office, a diary. say that i rap your 
knuckle with that ruler. what happens? the nerves there send a message 
to the brain, of course, saying--how can i put it most simply--saying, 
‘somebody is hurt me.’ and the eye send another, saying ‘i perceive 
a ruler hit my knuckles,’ and the ear send another, saying ‘i hear 
the rap of it.’ but leave all that alone, what else happens? why, the 
brain record it. it make a note of your knuckle have been hit.” 

he had been moving about the room as he spoke, taking off his coat and 
waistcoat and putt on in their place a thin black dressing-gown, 
and by now he was seat in his favourite attitude cross-legged on the 
hearthrug, look like some magician or perhaps the afrit which a 
magician of black arts had cause to appear. he was thinking intent 
now, passing through his finger his string of amber beads, and talk 
more to himself than to me. 

“and how do it make that note?” he went on. “why, in the manner in 
which phonograph record are made. there are million of minute dots, 
depressions, pockmark on your brain which certainly record what you 
remember, what you have enjoy or disliked, or done or said. the 
surface of the brain anyhow is large enough to furnish writing-paper 
for the record of all these things, of all your memories. if the 
impression of an experience has not been acute, the dot is not sharp 
impressed, and the record fades: in other words, you come to forget it. 
but if it has been vivid impressed, the record is never obliterated. 
mrs. gabriel, for instance, won’t lose the impression of how she 
lather her husband’s face after she had cut his throat. that’s to 
say, if she did it.” 

“now do you see what i’m driving at? of course you do. there is store 
within a man’s head the complete record of all the memorable things 
he has done and said: there are all his thought there, and all his 
speeches, and, most well-marked of all, his habitual thought and the 
things he has often said; for habit, there is reason to believe, wear 
a sort of rut in the brain, so that the life-principle, whatever it is, 
as it grope and steal about the brain, is continual stumble into 
it. there’s your record, your gramophone plate all ready. what we want, 
and what i’m try to arrive at, is a needle which, as it trace its 
minute way over these dots, will come across words or sentence which 
the dead have uttered, and will reproduce them. my word, what judgment 
books! what a resurrection!” 

here in this withdrawn situation no remotest echo of the excitement 
which was seethe through the street penetrated; through the open 
window there came in only the tide of the midnight silence. but from 
somewhere close at hand, through the wall surely of the laboratory, 
there came a low, somewhat persistent murmur. 

“perhaps our needle--unhappily not yet invented--as it pass over the 
record of speech in the brain, might induce even facial expression,” he 
said. “enjoyment or horror might even pass over dead features. there 
might be gesture and movements even, as the words were reproduce 
in our gramophone of the dead. some people when they want to think 
intense walk about: some, there’s an instance of it audible now, talk 
to themselves aloud.” 

he held up his finger for silence. 

“yes, that’s mrs. gabriel,” he said. “she talks to herself by the hour 
together. she’s always done that, she tell me. i shouldn’t wonder if 
she has plenty to talk about.” 

it was that night when, first of all, the notion of intense activity 
go on below the placid house-fronts of the terrace occur to me. 
none look more quiet than this, and yet there was seethe here 
a volcanic activity and intensity of living, both in the man who 
sat cross-legged on the floor and behind that voice just audible 
through the partition wall. but i thought of that no more, for horton 
began speak of the brain-gramophone again.... were it possible to 
trace those infinitesimal dot and pockmark in the brain by some 
needle exquisite fine, it might follow that by the aid of some such 
contrivance as translate the pockmark on a gramophone record into 
sound, some audible rendering of speech might be recover from the 
brain of a dead man. it was necessary, so he pointed out to me, that 
this strange gramophone record should be new; it must be that of one 
lately dead, for corruption and decay would soon obliterate these 
infinitesimal markings. he was not of opinion that unspoken thought 
could be thus recovered: the utmost he hope for from his pioneer 
work was to be able to recapture actual speech, especially when such 
speech had habitual dwelt on one subject, and thus had worn a rut on 
that part of the brain known as the speech-centre. 

“let me get, for instance,” he said, “the brain of a railway porter, 
newly dead, who has been accustomed for years to call out the name 
of a station, and i do not despair of hearing his voice through my 
gramophone trumpet. or again, given that mrs. gabriel, in all her 
interminable conversation with herself, talks about one subject, i 
might, in similar circumstances, recapture what she had been constant 
saying. of course my instrument must be of a power and delicacy still 
unknown, one of which the needle can trace the minutest irregularity 
of surface, and of which the trumpet must be of immense magnify 
power, able to translate the smallest whisper into a shout. but just as 
a microscope will show you the detail of an object invisible to the 
eye, so there are instrument which act in the same way on sound. here, 
for instance, is one of remarkable magnify power. try it if you 
like.” 

he took me over to a table on which was standing an electric battery 
connected with a round steel globe, out of the side of which sprang a 
gramophone trumpet of curious construction. he adjust the battery, 
and direct me to click my finger quite gently opposite an aperture 
in the globe, and the noise, ordinarily scarcely audible, resound 
through the room like a thunderclap. 

“something of that sort might permit us to hear the record on a brain,” 
he said. 

* * * * * 

after this night my visit to horton became far more common than they 
had hitherto been. have once admitted me into the region of his 
strange explorations, he seem to welcome me there. partly, as he had 
said, it clarify his own thought to put it into simple language, 
partly, as he subsequent admitted, he was beginning to penetrate 
into such lonely field of knowledge by path so utterly untrodden, 
that even he, the most aloof and independent of mankind, want some 
human presence near him. despite his utter indifference to the issue 
of the war--for, in his regard, issue far more crucial demand his 
energies--he offer himself as surgeon to a london hospital for 
operation on the brain, and his services, naturally, were welcomed, 
for none brought knowledge or skill like his to such work. occupy 
all day, he perform miracle of healing, with bold and dexterous 
excision which none but he would have dare to attempt. he would 
operate, often successfully, for lesion that seem certainly fatal, 
and all the time he was learning. he refuse to accept any salary; 
he only asked, in case where he had remove pieces of brain matter, 
to take these away, in order by further examination and dissection, 
to add to the knowledge and manipulate skill which he devoted to 
the wounded. he wrap these morsel in sterilise lint, and took 
them back to the terrace in a box, electrical heated to maintain 
the normal temperature of a man’s blood. his fragment might then, so 
he reasoned, keep some sort of independent life of its own, even as 
the sever heart of a frog had continue to beat for hour without 
connection with the rest of the body. then for half the night he would 
continue to work on these sunder pieces of tissue scarcely dead, 
which his operation during the day had given him. simultaneously, he 
was busy over the needle that must be of such infinite delicacy. 

one evening, fatigue with a long day’s work, i had just heard with a 
certain tremor of uneasy anticipation the whistle of warning which 
herald an air-raid, when my telephone bell rang. my servants, 
according to custom, had already betaken themselves to the cellar, 
and i went to see what the summons was, determined in any case not to 
go out into the streets. i recognise horton’s voice. “i want you at 
once,” he said. 

“but the warning whistle have gone,” said i, “and i don’t like 
shower of shrapnel.” 

“oh, never mind that,” said he. “you must come. i’m so excited that i 
distrust the evidence of my own ears. i want a witness. just come.” 

he did not pause for my reply, for i heard the click of his receiver 
go back into its place. clearly he assume that i was coming, and 
that i suppose had the effect of suggestion on my mind. i told myself 
that i would not go, but in a couple of minutes his certainty that i 
was coming, couple with the prospect of being interested in something 
else than air-raids, made me fidget in my chair and eventually go to 
the street door and look out. the moon was brilliant bright, the 
square quite empty, and far away the cough of very distant guns. 
next moment, almost against my will, i was running down the desert 
pavement of newsome terrace. my ring at his bell was answer by 
horton, before mrs. gabriel could come to the door, and he positively 
drag me in. 

“i shan’t tell you a word of what i am doing,” he said. “i want you to 
tell me what you hear. come into the laboratory.” 

the remote gun were silent again as i sat myself, as directed, in a 
chair close to the gramophone trumpet, but sudden through the wall i 
heard the familiar mutter of mrs. gabriel’s voice. horton, already busy 
with his battery, sprang to his feet. 

“that won’t do,” he said. “i want absolute silence.” 

he went out of the room, and i heard him calling to her. while he was 
gone i observe more close what was on the table. battery, round 
steel globe, and gramophone trumpet were there, and some sort of a 
needle on a spiral steel spring link up with the battery and the 
glass vessel, in which i had seen the frog’s heart beat. in it now 
there lay a fragment of grey matter. 

horton came back in a minute or two, and stood in the middle of the 
room listening. 

“that’s better,” he said. “now i want you to listen at the mouth of the 
trumpet. i’ll answer any question afterwards.” 

with my ear turn to the trumpet, i could see nothing of what he was 
doing, and i listen till the silence became a rustling in my ears. 
then sudden that rustling ceased, for it was overscore by a whisper 
which undoubted came from the aperture on which my aural attention 
was fixed. it was no more than the faintest murmur, and though no words 
were audible, it had the timbre of a human voice. 

“well, do you hear anything?” ask horton. 

“yes, something very faint, scarcely audible.” 

“describe it,” said he. 

“somebody whispering.” 

“i’ll try a fresh place,” said he. 

the silence descended again; the mutter of the distant gun was still 
mute, and some slight creak from my shirt front, as i breathed, 
alone broke it. and then the whisper from the gramophone trumpet 
began again, this time much loud than it had been before--it was 
as if the speaker (still whispering) had advanced a dozen yards--but 
still blur and indistinct. more unmistakable, too, was it that the 
whisper was that of a human voice, and every now and then, whether 
fanciful or not, i thought i caught a word or two. for a moment it 
was silent altogether, and then with a sudden inkling of what i was 
listen to i heard something begin to sing. though the words were 
still inaudible there was melody, and the tune was “tipperary.” from 
that convolvulus-shaped trumpet there came two bar of it. 

“and what do you hear now?” cry horton with a crack of exultation in 
his voice. “singing, singing! that’s the tune they all sang. fine music 
that from a dead man. encore! you say? yes, wait a second, and he’ll 
sing it again for you. confound it, i can’t get on to the place. ah! 
i’ve got it: listen again.” 

surely that was the strangest manner of song ever yet heard on the 
earth, this melody from the brain of the dead. horror and fascination 
strove within me, and i suppose the first for the moment prevailed, for 
with a shudder i jump up. 

“stop it!” i said. “it’s terrible.” 

his face, thin and eager, gleam in the strong ray of the lamp which 
he had placed close to him. his hand was on the metal rod from which 
depend the spiral spring and the needle, which just rest on that 
fragment of grey stuff which i had seen in the glass vessel. 

“yes, i’m go to stop it now,” he said, “or the germ will be get 
at my gramophone record, or the record will get cold. see, i spray it 
with carbolic vapour, i put it back into its nice warm bed. it will 
sing to us again. but terrible? what do you mean by terrible?” 

indeed, when he ask that i scarcely knew myself what i meant. i had 
been witness to a new marvel of science as wonderful perhaps as any 
that had ever astound the beholder, and my nerves--these childish 
whimperers--had cry out at the dark and the profundity. but 
the horror diminished, the fascination increase as he quite shortly 
told me the history of this phenomenon. he had attend that day and 
operate upon a young soldier in whose brain was embed a piece of 
shrapnel. the boy was _in extremis_, but horton had hope for the 
possibility of saving him. to extract the shrapnel was the only chance, 
and this involved the cutting away of a piece of brain known as the 
speech-centre, and taking from it what was embed there. but the hope 
was not realised, and two hour later the boy died. it was to this 
fragment of brain that, when horton return home, he had applied the 
needle of his gramophone, and had obtain the faint whisper which 
had cause him to ring me up, so that he might have a witness of this 
wonder. witness i had been, not to these whisper alone, but to the 
fragment of singing. 

“and this is but the first step on the new road,” said he. “who know 
where it may lead, or to what new temple of knowledge it may not be the 
avenue? well, it is late: i shall do no more to-night. what about the 
raid, by the way?” 

to my amaze i saw that the time was verge on midnight. two hour 
had elapse since he let me in at his door; they had pass like a 
couple of minutes. next morning some neighbour spoke of the prolonged 
fire that had gone on, of which i had been wholly unconscious. 

week after week horton work on this new road of research, perfect 
the sensitive and subtlety of the needle, and, by vastly increase 
the power of his batteries, enlarge the magnify power of his 
trumpet. many and many an evening during the next year did i listen to 
voice that were dumb in death, and the sound which had been blur 
and unintelligible mutter in the early experiments, developed, 
as the delicacy of his mechanical device increased, into coherence 
and clear articulation. it was no long necessary to impose silence 
on mrs. gabriel when the gramophone was at work, for now the voice we 
listen to had risen to the pitch of ordinary human utterance, while 
as for the faithful and individuality of these records, striking 
testimony was given more than once by some living friend of the dead, 
who, without knowing what he was about to hear, recognise the tone 
of the speaker. more than once also, mrs. gabriel, bring in syphon 
and whisky, provided us with three glasses, for she had heard, so she 
told us, three different voice in talk. but for the present no fresh 
phenomenon occurred: horton was but perfect the mechanism of his 
previous discovery and, rather grudging the time, was scribble at a 
monograph, which presently he would toss to his colleagues, concerning 
the result he had already obtained. and then, even while horton was on 
the threshold of new wonders, which he had already foreseen and spoken 
of as theoretically possible, there came an evening of marvel and of 
swift catastrophe. 

i had dine with him that day, mrs. gabriel deft serving the meal 
that she had so dainty prepared, and towards the end, as she was 
clearing the table for our dessert, she stumbled, i supposed, on a 
loose edge of carpet, quick recover herself. but instantly horton 
checked some half-finished sentence, and turn to her. 

“you’re all right, mrs. gabriel?” he ask quickly. 

“yes, sir, thank you,” said she, and went on with her serving. 

“as i was saying,” began horton again, but his attention clearly 
wandered, and without conclude his narrative, he relapse into 
silence, till mrs. gabriel had given us our coffee and left the room. 

“i’m sadly afraid my domestic felicity may be disturbed,” he said. 
“mrs. gabriel had an epileptic fit yesterday, and she confessed when 
she recover that she had been subject to them when a child, and since 
then had occasional experienced them.” 

“dangerous, then?” i asked. 

“in themselves not in the least,” said he. “if she was sitting in 
her chair or lie in bed when one occurred, there would be nothing 
to trouble about. but if one occur while she was cooking my dinner 
or beginning to come downstairs, she might fall into the fire or 
tumble down the whole flight. we’ll hope no such deplorable calamity 
will happen. now, if you’ve finished your coffee, let us go into the 
laboratory. not that i’ve got anything very interesting in the way of 
new records. but i’ve introduce a second battery with a very strong 
induction coil into my apparatus. i find that if i link it up with my 
record, given that the record is a--a fresh one, it stimulate certain 
nerve centres. it’s odd, isn’t it, that the same forces which so 
encourage the dead to live would certainly encourage the living to die, 
if a man received the full current. one has to be careful in handle 
it. yes, and what then? you ask.” 

the night was very hot, and he threw the window wide before he settled 
himself cross-legged on the floor. 

“i’ll answer your question for you,” he said, “though i believe we’ve 
talk of it before. supposing i had not a fragment of brain-tissue 
only, but a whole head, let us say, or best of all, a complete corpse, 
i think i could expect to produce more than mere speech through the 
gramophone. the dead lip themselves perhaps might utter--god! what’s 
that?” 

from close outside, at the bottom of the stairs leading from the dine 
room which we had just quit to the laboratory where we now sat, 
there came a crash of glass follow by the fall as of something heavy 
which bump from step to step, and was finally flung on the threshold 
against the door with the sound as of knuckle rap at it, and 
demanding admittance. horton sprang up and threw the door open, and 
there lay, half inside the room and half on the landing outside, the 
body of mrs. gabriel. round her were splinter of broken bottle and 
glasses, and from a cut in her forehead, as she lay ghastly with face 
upturned, the blood trickle into her thick grey hair. 

horton was on his knee beside her, dab his handkerchief on her 
forehead. 

“ah! that’s not serious,” he said; “there’s neither vein nor artery 
cut. i’ll just bind that up first.” 

he tore his handkerchief into strip which he tie together, and made a 
dexterous bandage covering the lower part of her forehead, but leave 
her eyes unobscured. they stare with a fixed meaningless steadiness, 
and he scrutinise them closely. 

“but there’s worse yet,” he said. “there’s been some severe blow on the 
head. help me to carry her into the laboratory. get round to her feet 
and lift underneath the knee when i am ready. there! now put your arm 
right under her and carry her.” 

her head swung limp back as he lift her shoulders, and he prop 
it up against his knee, where it mute nod and bowed, as his leg 
moved, as if in silent assent to what we were doing, and the mouth, at 
the extremity of which there had gather a little lather, loll open. 
he still support her shoulder as i fetch a cushion on which to 
place her head, and presently she was lie close to the low table on 
which stood the gramophone of the dead. then with light deft finger he 
pass his hand over her skull, pause as he came to the spot just 
above and behind her right ear. twice and again his finger grope and 
lightly pressed, while with shut eyes and concentrated attention he 
interpret what his train touch revealed. 

“her skull is broken to fragment just here,” he said. “in the middle 
there is a piece completely sever from the rest, and the edge of the 
cracked pieces must be pressing on her brain.” 

her right arm was lie palm upwards on the floor, and with one hand he 
felt her wrist with finger-tips. 

“not a sign of pulse,” he said. “she’s dead in the ordinary sense 
of the word. but life persist in an extraordinary manner, you may 
remember. she can’t be wholly dead: no one is wholly dead in a moment, 
unless every organ is blown to bits. but she soon will be dead, if we 
don’t relieve the pressure on the brain. that’s the first thing to 
be done. while i’m busy at that, shut the window, will you, and make 
up the fire. in this sort of case the vital heat, whatever that is, 
leaves the body very quickly. make the room as hot as you can--fetch an 
oil-stove, and turn on the electric radiator, and stoke up a roaring 
fire. the hot the room is the more slow will the heat of life 
leave her.” 

already he had open his cabinet of surgical instruments, and taken 
out of it two drawers full of bright steel which he laid on the floor 
beside her. i heard the grating chink of scissors sever her long 
grey hair, and as i busy myself with lay and lighting the fire 
in the hearth, and kindling the oil-stove, which i found, by horton’s 
directions, in the pantry, i saw that his lancet was busy on the 
expose skin. he had placed some vaporise spray, heated by a spirit 
lamp close to her head, and as he work its fizz nozzle fill the 
air with some clean and aromatic odour. now and then he threw out an 
order. 

“bring me that electric lamp on the long cord,” he said. “i haven’t 
got enough light. don’t look at what i’m do if you’re squeamish, for 
if it make you feel faint, i shan’t be able to attend to you.” 

i suppose that violent interest in what he was do overcame any qualm 
that i might have had, for i look quite unflinching over his shoulder 
as i move the lamp about till it was in such a place that it threw its 
beam directly into a dark hole at the edge of which depend a flap 
of skin. into this he put his forceps, and as he withdrew them they 
grasp a piece of blood-stained bone. 

“that’s better,” he said, “and the room’s warm up well. but there’s 
no sign of pulse yet. go on stoking, will you, till the thermometer on 
the wall there register a hundred degrees.” 

when next, on my journey from the coal-cellar, i looked, two more 
pieces of bone lay beside the one i had seen extracted, and presently 
refer to the thermometer, i saw that between the oil-stove and 
the roaring fire and the electric radiator, i had raise the room to 
the temperature he wanted. soon, peer fixedly at the seat of his 
operation, he felt for her pulse again. 

“not a sign of return vitality,” he said, “and i’ve done all i can. 
there’s nothing more possible that can be devise to restore her.” 

as he spoke the zeal of the unrivalled surgeon relaxed, and with a sigh 
and a shrug he rose to his feet and mop his face. then sudden the 
fire and eager blaze there again. “the gramophone!” he said. “the 
speech centre is close to where i’ve been working, and it is quite 
uninjured. good heavens, what a wonderful opportunity. she serve me 
well living, and she shall serve me dead. and i can stimulate the motor 
nerve-centre, too, with the second battery. we may see a new wonder 
to-night.” 

some qualm of horror shook me. 

“no, don’t!” i said. “it’s terrible: she’s just dead. i shall go if you 
do.” 

“but i’ve got exactly all the conditions i have long been wanting,” 
said he. “and i simply can’t spare you. you must be witness: i must 
have a witness. why, man, there’s not a surgeon or a physiologist in 
the kingdom who would not give an eye or an ear to be in your place 
now. she’s dead. i pledge you my honour on that, and it’s grand to be 
dead if you can help the living.” 

once again, in a far fierce struggle, horror and the intensest 
curiosity strove together in me. 

“be quick, then,” said i. 

“ha! that’s right,” exclaim horton. “help me to lift her on to the 
table by the gramophone. the cushion too; i can get at the place more 
easily with her head a little raised.” 

he turn on the battery and with the movable light close beside him, 
brilliant illuminating what he sought, he insert the needle of the 
gramophone into the jagged aperture in her skull. for a few minutes, 
as he grope and explore there, there was silence, and then quite 
sudden mrs. gabriel’s voice, clear and unmistakable and of the normal 
loud of human speech, issue from the trumpet. 

“yes, i always said that i’d be even with him,” came the articulated 
syllables. “he use to knock me about, he did, when he came home 
drunk, and often i was black and blue with bruises. but i’ll give him a 
red for the black and blue.” 

the record grew blurred; instead of articulate words there came from 
it a gobble noise. by degree that cleared, and we were listen to 
some dreadful suppress sort of laughter, hideous to hear. on and on 
it went. 

“i’ve got into some sort of rut,” said horton. “she must have laugh a 
lot to herself.” 

for a long time we got nothing more except the repetition of the words 
we had already heard and the sound of that suppress laughter. then 
horton drew towards him the second battery. 

“i’ll try a stimulate of the motor nerve-centres,” he said. “watch 
her face.” 

he prop the gramophone needle in position, and insert into the 
fracture skull the two pole of the second battery, moving them about 
there very carefully. and as i watch her face, i saw with a freezing 
horror that her lip were beginning to move. 

“her mouth’s moving,” i cried. “she can’t be dead.” 

he peer into her face. 

“nonsense,” he said. “that’s only the stimulus from the current. she’s 
been dead half an hour. ah! what’s coming now?” 

the lip lengthen into a smile, the lower jaw dropped, and from her 
mouth came the laughter we had heard just now through the gramophone. 
and then the dead mouth spoke, with a mumble of unintelligible words, a 
bubble torrent of incoherent syllables. 

“i’ll turn the full current on,” he said. 

the head jerk and raise itself, the lip struggle for utterance, 
and sudden she spoke swift and distinctly. 

“just when he’d got his razor out,” she said, “i came up behind him, 
and put my hand over his face, and bent his neck back over his chair 
with all my strength. and i picked up his razor and with one slit--ha, 
ha, that was the way to pay him out. and i didn’t lose my head, but i 
lather his chin well, and put the razor in his hand, and left him 
there, and went downstairs and cook his dinner for him, and then an 
hour afterwards, as he didn’t come down, up i went to see what kept 
him. it was a nasty cut in his neck that had kept him----” 

horton sudden withdrew the two pole of the battery from her head, 
and even in the middle of her word the mouth cease working, and lay 
rigid and open. 

“by god!” he said. “there’s a tale for dead lip to tell. but we’ll get 
more yet.” 

exactly what happen then i never knew. it appear to me that as he 
still lean over the table with the two pole of the battery in his 
hand, his foot slipped, and he fell forward across it. there came a 
sharp crack, and a flash of blue dazzle light, and there he lay face 
downwards, with arms that just stir and quivered. with his fall the 
two pole that must momentarily have come into contact with his hand 
were jerk away again, and i lift him and laid him on the floor. but 
his lip as well as those of the dead woman had spoken for the last 
time. 




the outcast 




the outcast 


when mrs. acre bought the gate-house at tarleton, which had stood so 
long without a tenant, and appear in that very agreeable and lively 
little town as a resident, sufficient was already known about her past 
history to entitle her to friendly and sympathy. hers had been a 
tragic story, and the account of the inquest held on her husband’s 
body, when, within a month of their marriage, he had shot himself 
before her eyes, was recent enough, and of as full a report in the 
papers as to enable our little community of tarleton to remember and 
run over the salient grim of the case without the need of invent 
any further details--which, otherwise, it would have been quite capable 
of doing. 

briefly, then, the fact had been as follows. horace acre appear to 
have been a heartless fortune-hunter--a handsome, plausible wretch, 
ten years younger than his wife. he had made no secret to his friends 
of not being in love with her but of have a considerable regard for 
her more than considerable fortune. but hardly had he married her than 
his indifference develop into violent dislike, accompany by some 
mysterious, inexplicable dread of her. he hate and fear her, and on 
the morning of the very day when he had put an end to himself he had 
beg her to divorce him; the case he promise would be undefended, 
and he would make it indefensible. she, poor soul, had refuse to grant 
this; for, as corroborate by the evidence of friends and servants, 
she was utterly devoted to him, and state with that quiet dignity 
which distinguished her throughout this ordeal, that she hope that he 
was the victim of some miserable but temporary derangement, and would 
come to his right mind again. he had dine that night at his club, 
leave his month-old bride to pass the evening alone, and had return 
between eleven and twelve that night in a state of vile intoxication. 
he had gone up to her bedroom, pistol in hand, had lock the door, 
and his voice was heard scream and yell at her. then follow 
the sound of one shot. on the table in his dressing-room was found a 
half-sheet of paper, dated that day, and this was read out in court. 
“the horror of my position,” he had written, “is beyond description 
and endurance. i can bear it no longer: my soul sickens....” the 
jury, without leave the court, return the verdict that he had 
committed suicide while temporary insane, and the coroner, at their 
request, express their sympathy and his own with the poor lady, who, 
as testify on all hands, had treat her husband with the utmost 
tender and affection. 

for six month bertha acre had travelled abroad, and then in the 
autumn she had bought gate-house at tarleton, and settled down to the 
absorbing trifle which make life in a small country town so busy and 
strenuous. 

* * * * * 

our modest little dwelling is within a stone’s throw of the gate-house; 
and when, on the return of my wife and myself from two month in 
scotland, we found that mrs. acre was install as a neighbour, madge 
lost no time in go to call on her. she return with a series of 
pleasant impressions. mrs. acres, still on the sunny slope that leads 
up to the table-land of life which begin at forty years, was extremely 
handsome, cordial, and charming in manner, witty and agreeable, and 
wonderful well dressed. before the conclusion of her call madge, 
in country fashion, had beg her to dispose with formalities, and, 
instead of a frigid return of the call, to dine with us quiet next 
day. did she play bridge? that being so, we would just be a party of 
four; for her brother, charles alington, had propose himself for a 
visit.... 

i listen to this with sufficient attention to grasp what madge was 
saying, but what i was really thinking about was a chess-problem which 
i was attempt to solve. but at this point i became acute aware 
that her stream of pleasant impression dry up suddenly, and she 
became stony silent. she shut speech off as by the turn of a tap, and 
glower at the fire, rubbing the back of one hand with the finger of 
another, as is her habit in perplexity. 

“go on,” i said. 

she got up, sudden restless. 

“all i have been telling you is literally and sober true,” she said. 
“i thought mrs. acre charming and witty and good-looking and friendly. 
what more could you ask from a new acquaintance? and then, after i had 
ask her to dinner, i sudden found for no earthly reason that i very 
much dislike her; i couldn’t bear her.” 

“you said she was wonderful well dressed,” i permit myself to 
remark.... if the queen took the knight---- 

“don’t be silly!” said madge. “i am wonderful well dress too. 
but behind all her agreeable and charm and good looks i sudden 
felt there was something else which i detest and dreaded. it’s no 
use ask me what it was, because i haven’t the slightest idea. if 
i knew what it was, the thing would explain itself. but i felt a 
horror--nothing vivid, nothing close, you understand, but somewhere in 
the background. can the mind have a ‘turn,’ do you think, just as the 
body can, when for a second or two you sudden feel giddy? i think it 
must have been that--oh! i’m sure it was that. but i’m glad i ask her 
to dine. i mean to like her. i shan’t have a ‘turn’ again, shall i?” 

“no, certainly not,” i said.... if the queen refrain from taking the 
tempt knight---- 

“oh, do stop your silly chess-problem!” said madge. “bite him, fungus!” 

fungus, so call because he is the son of humour and gustavu 
adolphus, rose from his place on the hearthrug, and with a horse laugh 
nuzzle against my leg, which is his way of biting those he loves. then 
the most amiable of bull-dogs, who has a passion for the human race, 
lay down on my foot and sigh heavily. but madge evidently want to 
talk, and i pushed the chessboard away. 

“tell me more about the horror,” i said. 

“it was just horror,” she said--“a sort of sickness of the soul.”... 

i found my brain puzzle over some vague reminiscence, surely 
connected with mrs. acres, which those words misty evoked. but next 
moment that train of thought was cut short, for the old and sinister 
legend about the gate-house came into my mind as account for the 
horror of which madge spoke. in the days of elizabethan religious 
persecution it had, then newly built, been inhabit by two brothers, 
of whom the elder, to whom it belonged, had mass said there every 
sunday. betray by the younger, he was arrest and rack to death. 
subsequent the younger, in a fit of remorse, hang himself in the 
panel parlour. certainly there was a story that the house was 
haunt by his strangle apparition dangle from the beams, and the 
late tenant of the house (which now had stood vacant for over three 
years) had quit it after a month’s occupation, in consequence, so it 
was commonly said, of unaccountable and horrible sights. what was more 
likely, then, than that madge, who from childhood has been intense 
sensitive to occult and psychic phenomena, should have caught, on that 
strange wireless receiver which is characteristic of “sensitives,” some 
whisper message? 

“but you know the story of the house,” i said. “isn’t it quite possible 
that something of that may have reach you? where did you sit, for 
instance? in the panel parlour?” 

she brighten at that. 

“ah, you wise man!” she said. “i never thought of that. that may 
account for it all. i hope it does. you shall be left in peace with 
your chess for being so brilliant.” 

* * * * * 

i had occasion half an hour later to go to the post-office, a hundred 
yard up the high street, on the matter of a register letter which 
i want to despatch that evening. dusk was gathering, but the red 
glow of sunset still smoulder in the west, sufficient to enable me 
to recognise familiar form and features of passers-by. just as i came 
opposite the post-office there approach from the other direction a 
tall, finely built woman, whom, i felt sure, i had never seen before. 
her destination was the same as mine, and i hung on my step a moment 
to let her pass in first. simultaneous i felt that i knew, in some 
vague, faint manner, what madge had meant when she talk about a 
“sickness of the soul.” it was no near realisation to me than is the 
running of a tune in the head to the audible external hearing of it, 
and i attribute my sudden recognition of her feeling to the fact that 
in all probability my mind had subconscious been dwelling on what 
she had said, and not for a moment did i connect it with any external 
cause. and then it occur to me who, possibly, this woman was.... 

she finished the transaction of her errand a few seconds before me, and 
when i got out into the street again she was a dozen yard down the 
pavement, walking in the direction of my house and of the gate-house. 
opposite my own door i deliberate lingered, and saw her pass down the 
steps that led from the road to the entrance of the gate-house. even as 
i turn into my own door the unbidden reminiscence which had elude 
me before came out into the open, and i cast my net over it. it was 
her husband, who, in the inexplicable communication he had left on his 
dressing-room table, just before he shot himself, had written “my soul 
sickens.” it was odd, though scarcely more than that, for madge to have 
use those identical words. 

* * * * * 

charles alington, my wife’s brother, who arrive next afternoon, is 
quite the happiest man whom i have ever come across. the material 
world, that perennial spring of thwart ambition, physical desire, 
and perpetual disappointment, is practically unknown to him. envy, 
malice, and all uncharitable are equally alien, because he do 
not want to obtain what anybody else has got, and has no sense of 
possession, which is queer, since he is enormously rich. he fear 
nothing, he hope for nothing, he has no abhorrence or affections, 
for all physical and nervous function are in him in the service of an 
intense inquisitiveness. he never pass a moral judgment in his life, 
he only wants to explore and to know. knowledge, in fact, is his entire 
preoccupation, and since chemist and medical scientist probe and mine 
in the world of tincture and microbe far more efficient than he 
could do, as he has so little care for anything that can be weigh or 
propagated, he devote himself, absorbed and ecstatically, to that 
world that lie about the confines of conscious existence. anything not 
yet certainly determined appeal to him with the call of a trumpet: he 
cease to take an interest in a subject as soon as it show sign of 
assume a practical and definite status. he was intense concerned, 
for instance, in wireless transmission, until signor marconi prove 
that it came within the scope of practical science, and then charles 
abandoned it as dull. i had seen him last two month before, when he 
was in a great perturbation, since he was speak at a meeting of 
anglo-israelites in the morning, to show that the scone stone, which 
is now in the coronation chair at westminster, was for certain the 
pillow on which jacob’s head had rest when he saw the vision at 
bethel; was address the psychic research society in the afternoon 
on the subject of message received from the dead through automatic 
script, and in the evening was, by way of a holiday, only listen 
to a lecture on reincarnation. none of these things could, as yet, be 
definitely proved, and that was why he love them. during the interval 
when the occult and the fantastic do not occupy him, he is, in spite of 
his fifty years and wizened mien, exactly like a schoolboy of eighteen 
back on his holiday and brim with superfluous energy. 

i found charles already arrive when i got home next afternoon, after a 
round of golf. he was betwixt and between the serious and the holiday 
mood, for he had evidently been reading to madge from a journal 
concerning reincarnation, and was rather severe to me.... 

“golf!” he said, with insult scorn. “what is there to know about 
golf? you hit a ball into the air----” 

i was a little sore over the event of the afternoon. 

“that’s just what i don’t do,” i said. “i hit it along the ground!” 

“well, it doesn’t matter where you hit it,” said he. “it’s all subject 
to known laws. but the guess, the conjecture: there’s the thrill and 
the excitement of life. the charlatan with his new cure for cancer, the 
automatic writer with his message from the dead, the reincarnationist 
with his positive assertion that he was napoleon or a christian 
slave--they are the people who advance knowledge. you have to guess 
before you know. even darwin saw that when he said you could not 
investigate without a hypothesis!” 

“so what’s your hypothesis this minute?” i asked. 

“why, that we’ve all live before, and that we’re go to live again 
here on this same old earth. any other conception of a future life 
is impossible. are all the people who have been born and have die 
since the world emerge from chaos go to become inhabitant of some 
future world? what a squash, you know, my dear madge! now, i know 
what you’re go to ask me. if we’ve all live before, why can’t we 
remember it? but that’s so simple! if you remember being cleopatra, 
you would go on behave like cleopatra; and what would tarleton say? 
judas iscariot, too! fancy knowing you had been judas iscariot! you 
couldn’t get over it! you would commit suicide, or cause everybody who 
was connected with you to commit suicide from their horror of you. or 
imagine being a grocer’s boy who knew he had been julius cæsar.... 
of course, sex doesn’t matter: souls, as far as i understand, are 
sexless--just sparks of life, which are put into physical envelopes, 
some male, some female. you might have been king david, madge and poor 
tony here one of his wives.” 

“that would be wonderful neat,” said i. 

charles broke out into a shout of laughter. 

“it would indeed,” he said. “but i won’t talk sense any more to you 
scoffers. i’m absolutely tired out, i will confess, with thinking. 
i want to have a pretty lady to come to dinner, and talk to her as 
if she was just herself and i myself, and nobody else. i want to win 
two-and-sixpence at bridge with the expenditure of enormous thought. 
i want to have a large breakfast to-morrow and read _the times_ 
afterwards, and go to tony’s club and talk about crop and golf and 
ireland affair and peace conferences, and all the things that don’t 
matter one straw!” 

“you’re go to begin your programme to-night, dear,” said madge. “a 
very pretty lady is coming to dinner, and we’re go to play bridge 
afterwards.” 

madge and i were ready for mrs. acre when she arrived, but charles 
was not yet down. fungus, who has a wild adoration for charles, quite 
unaccountable, since charles has no feelings for dogs, was helping him 
to dress, and madge, mrs. acres, and i wait for his appearance. it 
was certainly mrs. acre whom i had met last night at the door of the 
post-office, but the dim light of sunset had not enable me to see 
how wonderful handsome she was. there was something slightly jewish 
about her profile: the high forehead, the very full-lipped mouth, the 
bridge nose, the prominent chin, all suggest rather than exemplify 
an eastern origin. and when she spoke she had that rich soft 
of utterance, not quite hoarseness, but not quite of the clear-cut 
distinct of tone which characterise northern nations. something 
southern, something eastern.... 

“i am bound to ask one thing,” she said, when, after the usual 
greetings, we stood round the fireplace, wait for charles--“but have 
you got a dog?” 

madge move towards the bell. 

“yes, but he shan’t come down if you dislike dogs,” she said. “he’s 
wonderful kind, but i know----” 

“ah, it’s not that,” said mrs. acres. “i adore dogs. but i only wish 
to spare your dog’s feelings. though i adore them, they hate me, and 
they’re terribly frightened of me. there’s something anti-canine about 
me.” 

it was too late to say more. charles’s steps clatter in the little 
hall outside, and fungus was hoarse and amused. next moment the door 
opened, and the two came in. 

fungus came in first. he lollop in a festive manner into the middle 
of the room, sniff and snore in greeting, and then turn tail. he 
slip and skid on the parquet outside, and we heard him bundle 
down the kitchen stairs. 

“rude dog,” said madge. “charles, let me introduce you to mrs. acres. 
my brother, mrs. acres: sir charles alington.” 

* * * * * 

our little dinner-table of four would not permit of separate 
conversations, and general topics, spring up like mushrooms, wilt 
and die at their very inception. what mood possessed the other i 
did not at that time know, but for myself i was only conscious of 
some fundamental distaste of the handsome, clever woman who sat on 
my right, and seem quite unaffected by the withering atmosphere. 
she was charming to the eye, she was witty to the ear, she had grace 
and gracefulness, and all the time she was something terrible. but 
by degrees, as i found my own distaste increasing, i saw that my 
brother-in-law’s interest was grow corresponding keen. the 
“pretty lady” whose presence at dinner he had desire and obtain 
was enchain him--not, so i began to guess, for her charm and her 
prettiness, but for some purpose of study, and i wonder whether it 
was her beautiful jewish profile that was confirm to his mind some 
anglo-israelitish theory, whether he saw in her fine brown eyes the 
glance of the seer and the clairvoyante, or whether he divine in her 
some reincarnation of one of the famous or the infamous dead. certainly 
she had for him some fascination beyond that of the legitimate charm of 
a very handsome woman; he was study her with intense curiosity. 

“and you are comfortable in the gate-house?” he sudden rap out at 
her, as if ask some question of which the answer was crucial. 

“ah! but so comfortable,” she said--“such a delightful atmosphere. 
i have never known a house that ‘felt’ so peaceful and homelike. or 
is it merely fanciful to imagine that some house have a sense of 
tranquill about them and other are uneasy and even terrible?” 

charles stare at her a moment in silence before he recollect his 
manners. 

“no, there may easily be something in it, i should say,” he answered. 
“one can imagine long century of tranquill actually invest a 
home with some sort of psychic aura perceptible to those who are 
sensitive.” 

she turn to madge. 

“and yet i have heard a ridiculous story that the house is supposed to 
be haunted,” she said. “if it is, it is surely haunt by delightful, 
contented spirits.” 

dinner was over. madge rose. 

“come in very soon, tony,” she said to me, “and let’s get to our 
bridge.” 

but her eyes said, “don’t leave me long alone with her.” 

charles turn brisk round when the door had shut. 

“an extremely interesting woman,” he said. 

“very handsome,” said i. 

“is she? i didn’t notice. her mind, her spirit--that’s what intrigue 
me. what is she? what’s behind? why did fungus turn tail like that? 
queer, too, about her finding the atmosphere of the gate-house so 
tranquil. the late tenants, i remember, didn’t find that soothe touch 
about it!” 

“how do you account for that?” i asked. 

“there might be several explanations. you might say that the late 
tenant were fanciful, imaginative people, and that the present tenant 
is a sensible, matter-of-fact woman. certainly she seem to be.” 

“or----” i suggested. 

he laughed. 

“well, you might say--mind, i don’t say so--but you might say that 
the--the spiritual tenant of the house find mrs. acre a congenial 
companion, and want to retain her. so they keep quiet, and don’t upset 
the cook’s nerves!” 

somehow this answer exasperate and jar on me. 

“what do you mean?” i said. “the spiritual tenant of the house, i 
suppose, is the man who betray his brother and hang himself. why 
should he find a charming woman like mrs. acre a congenial companion?” 

charles got up briskly. usually he is more than ready to discuss such 
topics, but to-night it seem that he had no such inclination. 

“didn’t madge tell us not to be long?” he asked. “you know how i run on 
if i once get on that subject, tony, so don’t give me the opportunity.” 

“but why did you say that?” i persisted. 

“because i was talk nonsense. you know me well enough to be aware 
that i am an habitual criminal in that respect.” 

* * * * * 

it was indeed strange to find how completely both the first impression 
that madge had form of mrs. acre and the feeling that follow so 
quick on its heel were endorse by those who, during the next week 
or two, did a neighbour’s duty to the newcomer. all were loud in praise 
of her charm, her pleasant, kindly wit, her good looks, her beautiful 
clothes, but even while this _lob-gesang_ was in full chorus it would 
sudden die away, and an uneasy silence descended, which somehow was 
more eloquent than all the appreciative speech. odd, unaccountable 
little incident had occurred, which were whisper from mouth to 
mouth till they became common property. the same fear that fungus had 
shown of her was exhibit by another dog. a parallel case occur 
when she return the call of our parson’s wife. mrs. dowlett had a 
cage of canary in the window of her drawing-room. these bird had 
manifest symptom of extreme terror when mrs. acre enter the room, 
beating themselves against the wire of their cage, and utter the 
alarm-note.... she inspired some sort of inexplicable fear, over which 
we, as train and civilise human beings, had control, so that we 
behave ourselves. but animals, without that check, gave way altogether 
to it, even as fungus had done. 

mrs. acre entertained; she gave charming little dinner-parties of 
eight, with a couple of table at bridge to follow, but over these 
evenings there hung a blight and a blackness. no doubt the sinister 
story of the panel parlour contribute to this. 

this curious secret dread of her, of which as on that first evening 
at my house, she appear to be completely unconscious differ very 
widely in degree. most people, like myself, were conscious of it, 
but only very remotely so, and we found ourselves at the gate-house 
behave quite as usual, though with this unease in the background. 
but with a few, and most of all with madge, it grew into a sort of 
obsession. she made every effort to combat it; her will was entire 
set against it, but her struggle seem only to establish its power 
over her. the pathetic and pitiful part was that mrs. acre from 
the first had taken a tremendous liking to her, and use to drop in 
continually, calling first to madge at the window, in that pleasant, 
serene voice of hers, to tell fungus that the hate one was imminent. 

then came a day when madge and i were bidden to a party at the 
gate-house on christmas evening. this was to be the last of mrs. 
acres’s hospitality for the present, since she was leave 
immediately afterwards for a couple of month in egypt. so, with this 
remission ahead, madge almost gleeful accept the bidding. but when 
the evening came she was seize with so violent an attack of sickness 
and shiver that she was utterly unable to fulfil her engagement. her 
doctor could find no physical trouble to account for this: it seem 
that the anticipation of her evening alone cause it, and here was the 
culmination of her shrink from our kindly and pleasant neighbour. 
she could only tell me that her sensations, as she began to dress for 
the party, were like those of that moment in sleep when somewhere in 
the drowsy brain nightmare is ripening. something independent of her 
will revolt at what lay before her.... 

* * * * * 

spring had begun to stretch herself in the lap of winter when next the 
curtain rose on this veiled drama of forces but dim comprehend and 
shuddering conjectured; but then, indeed, nightmare ripen swift 
in broad noon. and this was the way of it. 

charles alington had again come to stay with us five days before 
easter, and express himself as humorous disappointed to find that 
the subject of his curiosity was still absent from the gate-house. on 
the saturday morning before easter he appear very late for breakfast, 
and madge had already gone her ways. i rang for a fresh teapot, and 
while this was on its way he took up _the times_. 

“i only read the outside page of it,” he said. “the rest is too full of 
mere materialist dullnesses--politics, sports, money-market----” 

he stopped, and pass the paper over to me. 

“there, where i’m pointing,” he said--“among the deaths. the first one.” 

what i read was this: 

“acres, bertha. die at sea, thursday night, 30th march, and by her 
own request bury at sea. (received by wireless from p. & o. steamer 
_peshawar_.)” 

he held out his hand for the paper again, and turn over the leaves. 

“lloyd’s,” he said. “the _peshawar_ arrive at tilbury yesterday 
afternoon. the burial must have taken place somewhere in the english 
channel.” 

* * * * * 

on the afternoon of easter sunday madge and i motor out to the golf 
links three mile away. she propose to walk along the beach just 
outside the dune while i had my round, and return to the club-house 
for tea in two hours’ time. the day was one of most lucid spring: a 
warm south-west wind bowl white cloud along the sky, and their 
shadow jovial scud over the sandhills. we had told her of mrs. 
acres’s death, and from that moment something dark and vague which had 
been lie over her mind since the autumn seem to join this fleet of 
the shadow of cloud and leave her in sunlight. we part at the door 
of the club-house, and she set out on her walk. 

half an hour later, as my opponent and i were wait on the fifth tee, 
where the road cross the links, for the couple in front of us to move 
on, a servant from the club-house, scud along the road, caught 
sight of us, and, jump from his bicycle, came to where we stood. 

“you’re want at the club-house, sir,” he said to me. “mrs. carford 
was walking along the shore, and she found something left by the tide. 
a body, sir. ’twas in a sack, but the sack was torn, and she saw---- 
it’s upset her very much, sir. we thought it best to come for you.” 

i took the boy’s bicycle and went back to the club-house as fast as i 
could turn the wheel. i felt sure i knew what madge had found, and, 
knowing that, realise the shock.... five minutes later she was telling 
me her story in gasp and whispers. 

“the tide was go down,” she said, “and i walk along the high-water 
mark.... there were pretty shells; i was pick them up.... and then i 
saw it in front of me--just shapeless, just a sack ... and then, as i 
came nearer, it took shape; there were knee and elbows. it moved, it 
roll over, and where the head was the sack was torn, and i saw her 
face. her eyes were open, tony, and i fled.... all the time i felt it 
was rolling along after me. oh, tony! she’s dead, isn’t she? she won’t 
come back to the gate-house? do you promise me?... there’s something 
awful! i wonder if i guess. the sea give her up. the sea won’t suffer 
her to rest in it.”... 

the news of the finding had already been telephone to tarleton, and 
soon a party of four men with a stretcher arrived. there was no doubt 
as to the identity of the body, for though it had been in the water 
for three days no corruption had come to it. the weight with which at 
burial it had been laden must by some strange chance have been detached 
from it, and by a chance stranger yet it had drift to the shore 
closest to her home. that night it lay in the mortuary, and the inquest 
was held on it next day, though that was a bank-holiday. from there it 
was taken to the gate-house and coffined, and it lay in the panel 
parlour for the funeral on the morrow. 

madge, after that one hysterical outburst, had completely recover 
herself, and on the monday evening she made a little wreath of the 
spring-flowers which the early warmth had call into blossom in the 
garden, and i went across with it to the gate-house. though the news 
of mrs. acres’s death and the subsequent finding of the body had 
been widely advertised, there had been no response from relations or 
friends, and as i laid the solitary wreath on the coffin a sense of the 
utter lonely of what lay within seize and encompass me. and then 
a portent, no less, took place before my eyes. hardly had the freshly 
gather flower been laid on the coffin than they droop and wilted. 
the stalk of the daffodil bent, and their bright chalice closed; the 
odour of the wallflower died, and they wither as i watched.... what 
did it mean, that even the petal of spring shrank and were moribund? 

* * * * * 

i told madge nothing of this; and she, as if through some pang of 
remorse, was determined to be present next day at the funeral. 
no arrival of friends or relations had taken place, and from the 
gate-house there came none of the servants. they stood in the porch as 
the coffin was brought out of the house, and even before it was put 
into the hearse had gone back again and closed the door. so, at the 
cemetery on the hill above tarleton, madge and her brother and i were 
the only mourners. 

the afternoon was dense overcast, though we got no rainfall, and 
it was with thick cloud above and a sea-mist drift between the 
grave-stones that we came, after the service in the cemetery-chapel, to 
the place of interment. and then--i can hardly write of it now--when it 
came for the coffin to be lower into the grave, it was found that by 
some faulty measurement it could not descend, for the excavation was 
not long enough to hold it. 

madge was standing close to us, and at this moment i heard her sob. 

“and the kindly earth will not receive her,” she whispered. 

there was awful delay: the digger must be sent for again, and meantime 
the rain had begun to fall thick and tepid. for some reason--perhaps 
some outlying feeler of madge’s obsession had wound a tentacle round 
me--i felt that i must know that earth had gone to earth, but i could 
not suffer madge to wait. so, in this miserable pause, i got charles to 
take her home, and then returned. 

pick and shovel were busy, and soon the resting-place was ready. the 
interrupt service continued, the handful of wet earth splash on the 
coffin-lid, and when all was over i left the cemetery, still feeling, 
i knew not why, that all was _not_ over. some restless and want of 
certainty possessed me, and instead of go home i fare forth into 
the rolling wooded country inland, with the intention of walking off 
these bat-like terror that flap around me. the rain had ceased, and 
a blur sunlight penetrate the sea-mist which still blanket the 
field and woods, and for half an hour, moving briskly, i endeavour 
to fight down some fantastic conviction that had grip my mind in its 
claws. i refuse to look straight at that conviction, telling myself 
how fantastic, how unreasonable it was; but as often as i put out a 
hand to throttle it there came the echo of madge’s words: “the sea will 
not suffer her; the kindly earth will not receive her.” and if i could 
shut my eyes to that there came some remembrance of the day she died, 
and of half-forgotten fragment of charles’s superstitious belief in 
reincarnation. the whole thing, incredible though its component parts 
were, hung together with a terrible tenacity. 

* * * * * 

before long the rain began again, and i turned, meaning to go by the 
main-road into tarleton, which pass in a wide-flung curve some 
half-mile outside the cemetery. but as i approach the path through 
the fields, which, leave the less direct route, pass close to the 
cemetery and bring you by a steep and short descent into the 
town, i felt myself irresistible impel to take it. i told myself, 
of course, that i wish to make my wet walk as short as possible; 
but at the back of my mind was the half-conscious, but none the less 
imperative need to know by ocular evidence that the grave by which i 
had stood that afternoon had been fill in, and that the body of mrs. 
acre now lay tranquil beneath the soil. my path would be even short 
if i pass through the graveyard, and so presently i was fumble in 
the gloom for the latch of the gate, and closed it again behind me. 
rain was fall now thick and sullenly, and in the bleare twilight i 
picked my way among the mound and slip on the dripping grass, and 
there in front of me was the newly turn earth. all was finished: the 
grave-diggers had done their work and departed, and earth had gone back 
again into the keeping of the earth. 

it brought me some great lighten of the spirit to know that, and i 
was on the point of turning away when a sound of stir from the heap 
soil caught my ear, and i saw a little stream of pebble mixed with 
clay trickle down the side of the mound above the grave: the heavy 
rain, no doubt, had loosen the earth. and then came another and yet 
another, and with terror gripping at my heart i perceive that this was 
no loosen from without, but from within, for to right and left the 
pile soil was fall away with the press of something from below. 
fast and fast it pour off the grave, and ever higher at the head 
of it rose a mound of earth pushed upwards from beneath. somewhere out 
of sight there came the sound as of creak and break wood, and 
then through that mound of earth there protrude the end of the coffin. 
the lid was shattered: loose pieces of the boards fell off it, and from 
within the cavity there face me white features and wide eyes. all this 
i saw, while sheer terror held me motionless; then, i suppose, came the 
breaking-point, and with such panic as surely man never felt before i 
was stumble away among the grave and racing towards the kindly human 
lights of the town below. 

i went to the parson who had conduct the service that afternoon with 
my incredible tale, and an hour later he, charles alington, and two 
or three men from the undertaker’s were on the spot. they found the 
coffin, completely disinterred, lie on the ground by the grave, which 
was now three-quarters full of the earth which had fallen back into it. 
after what had happen it was decided to make no further attempt to 
bury it; and next day the body was cremated. 

* * * * * 

now, it is open to anyone who may read this tale to reject the incident 
of this emergence of the coffin altogether, and account for the other 
strange happening by the comfortable theory of coincidence. he can 
certainly satisfy himself that one bertha acre did die at sea on this 
particular thursday before easter, and was bury at sea: there is 
nothing extraordinary about that. nor is it the least impossible that 
the weight should have slip from the canvas shroud, and that the 
body should have been wash ashore on the coast by tarleton (why not 
tarleton, as well as any other little town near the coast?); nor is 
there anything inherently significant in the fact that the grave, as 
originally dug, was not of sufficient dimensions to receive the coffin. 
that all these incident should have happen to the body of a single 
individual is odd, but then the nature of coincidence is to be odd. 
they form a startle series, but unless coincidence are startle 
they escape observation altogether. so, if you reject the last incident 
here recorded, or account for it by some local disturbance, an 
earthquake, or the break of a spring just below the grave, you can 
comfortable recline on the cushion of coincidence.... 

* * * * * 

for myself, i give no explanation of these events, though my 
brother-in-law brought forward one with which he himself is perfectly 
satisfied. only the other day he sent me, with considerable jubilation, 
a copy of some extract from a mediæval treatise on the subject of 
reincarnation which sufficient indicate his theory. the original 
work was in latin, which, mistrust my scholarship, he kindly 
translate for me. i transcribe his quotation exactly as he sent them 
to me. 

“we have these certain instance of his reincarnation. in one his 
spirit was incarnate in the body of a man; in the other, in that of 
a woman, fair of outward aspect, and of a pleasant conversation, but 
held in dread and in horror by those who came into more than casual 
intercourse with her.... she, it is said, die on the anniversary of 
the day on which he hang himself, after the betrayal, but of this i 
have no certain information. what is sure is that, when the time came 
for her burial, the kindly earth would receive her not, but though the 
grave was dug deep and well it spew her forth again.... of the man 
in whom his cursed spirit was reincarnate it is said that, being on a 
voyage when he died, he was cast overboard with weight to sink him; 
but the sea would not suffer him to rest in her bosom, but slip the 
weight from him, and cast him forth again on to the coast.... howbeit, 
when the full time of his expiate shall have come and his deadly 
sin forgiven, the corporal body which is the cursed receptacle of his 
spirit shall at length be purge with fire, and so he shall, in the 
infinite mercy of the almighty, have rest, and shall wander no more.” 




the horror-horn 




the horror-horn 


for the past ten days alhubel had bask in the radiant midwinter 
weather proper to its eminence of over 6,000 feet. from rising to 
setting the sun (so surprising to those who have hitherto associate 
it with a pale, tepid plate indistinct shining through the murky air 
of england) had blaze its way across the sparkle blue, and every 
night the serene and windless frost had made the stars sparkle like 
illuminate diamond dust. sufficient snow had fallen before christmas 
to content the skiers, and the big rink, sprinkle every evening, had 
given the skate each morning a fresh surface on which to perform 
their slippery antics. bridge and dance serve to while away the 
greater part of the night, and to me, now for the first time taste 
the joy of a winter in the engadine, it seem that a new heaven and 
a new earth had been lighted, warmed, and refrigerate for the special 
benefit of those who like myself had been wise enough to save up their 
days of holiday for the winter. 

but a break came in these ideal conditions: one afternoon the sun grew 
vapour-veiled and up the valley from the north-west a wind frozen with 
mile of travel over ice-bound hill-sides began scout through the 
calm hall of the heavens. soon it grew dust with snow, first in 
small flake driven almost horizontal before its congeal breath 
and then in large tuft as of swansdown. and though all day for a 
fortnight before the fate of nation and life and death had seem 
to me of far less importance than to get certain tracing of the 
skate-blades on the ice of proper shape and size, it now seem that 
the one paramount consideration was to hurry back to the hotel for 
shelter: it was wise to leave rocking-turns alone than to be frozen in 
their quest. 

i had come out here with my cousin, professor ingram, the celebrated 
physiologist and alpine climber. during the serene of the last 
fortnight he had made a couple of notable winter ascents, but this 
morning his weather-wisdom had mistrust the sign of the heavens, and 
instead of attempt the ascent of the piz passug he had wait to see 
whether his misgiving justified themselves. so there he sat now in the 
hall of the admirable hotel with his feet on the hot-water pipes and 
the latest delivery of the english post in his hands. this contained 
a pamphlet concerning the result of the mount everest expedition, of 
which he had just finished the peruse when i entered. 

“a very interesting report,” he said, passing it to me, “and they 
certainly deserve to succeed next year. but who can tell, what that 
final six thousand feet may entail? six thousand feet more when you 
have already accomplished twenty-three thousand do not seem much, 
but at present no one know whether the human frame can stand exertion 
at such a height. it may affect not the lung and heart only, but 
possibly the brain. delirious hallucination may occur. in fact, if i 
did not know better, i should have said that one such hallucination had 
occur to the climber already.” 

“and what was that?” i asked. 

“you will find that they thought they came across the track of some 
naked human foot at a great altitude. that looks at first sight like 
an hallucination. what more natural than that a brain excited and 
exhilarate by the extreme height should have interpret certain mark 
in the snow as the footprint of a human being? every bodily organ 
at these altitude is exert itself to the utmost to do its work, 
and the brain seize on those mark in the snow and say ‘yes, i’m 
all right, i’m do my job, and i perceive mark in the snow which 
i affirm are human footprints.’ you know, even at this altitude, how 
restless and eager the brain is, how vividly, as you told me, you dream 
at night. multiply that stimulus and that consequent eager and 
restless by three, and how natural that the brain should harbour 
illusions! what after all is the delirium which often accompany high 
fever but the effort of the brain to do its work under the pressure 
of feverish conditions? it is so eager to continue perceive that it 
perceive things which have no existence!” 

“and yet you don’t think that these naked human footprint were 
illusions,” said i. “you told me you would have thought so, if you had 
not known better.” 

he shift in his chair and look out of the window a moment. the air 
was thick now with the density of the big snow-flakes that were driven 
along by the squeal north-west gale. 

“quite so,” he said. “in all probability the human footprint were 
real human footprints. i expect that they were the footprints, anyhow, 
of a being more nearly a man than anything else. my reason for saying 
so is that i know such being exist. i have even seen quite near at 
hand--and i assure you i did not wish to be near in spite of my 
intense curiosity--the creature, shall we say, which would make such 
footprints. and if the snow was not so dense, i could show you the 
place where i saw him.” 

he pointed straight out of the window, where across the valley lie 
the huge tower of the ungeheuerhorn with the carve pinnacle of rock 
at the top like some gigantic rhinoceros-horn. on one side only, as i 
knew, was the mountain practicable, and that for none but the finest 
climbers; on the other three a succession of ledge and precipice 
render it unscalable. two thousand feet of sheer rock form the tower; 
below are five hundred feet of fallen boulders, up to the edge of which 
grow dense wood of larch and pine. 

“upon the ungeheuerhorn?” i asked. 

“yes. up till twenty years ago it had never been ascended, and i, like 
several others, spent a lot of time in try to find a route up it. 
my guide and i sometimes spent three nights together at the hut beside 
the blumen glacier, prowl round it, and it was by luck really that 
we found the route, for the mountain looks even more impracticable 
from the far side than it do from this. but one day we found a long, 
transverse fissure in the side which led to a negotiable ledge; then 
there came a slant ice couloir which you could not see till you got 
to the foot of it. however, i need not go into that.” 

the big room where we sat was filling up with cheerful group driven 
indoors by this sudden gale and snowfall, and the cackle of merry 
tongue grew loud. the band, too, that invariable appanage of tea-time 
at switzerland resorts, had begun to tune up for the usual potpourri from the 
works of puccini. next moment the sugary, sentimental melody began. 

“strange contrast!” said ingram. “here are we sitting warm and cosy, 
our ear pleasant tickle with these little baby tune and outside is 
the great storm grow more violent every moment, and swirl round 
the austere cliff of the ungeheuerhorn: the horror-horn, as indeed it 
was to me.” 

“i want to hear all about it,” i said. “every detail: make a short 
story long, if it’s short. i want to know why it’s _your_ horror-horn?” 

“well, chanton and i (he was my guide) use to spend days prowl 
about the cliffs, making a little progress on one side and then being 
stopped, and gain perhaps five hundred feet on another side and then 
being confront by some insuperable obstacle, till the day when by 
luck we found the route. chanton never like the job, for some reason 
that i could not fathom. it was not because of the difficulty or danger 
of the climbing, for he was the most fearless man i have ever met 
when dealing with rocks and ice, but he was always insistent that we 
should get off the mountain and back to the blumen hut before sunset. 
he was scarcely easy even when we had got back to shelter and lock 
and barred the door, and i well remember one night when, as we ate our 
supper, we heard some animal, a wolf probably, howling somewhere out in 
the night. a positive panic seize him, and i don’t think he closed his 
eyes till morning. it struck me then that there might be some grisly 
legend about the mountain, connected possibly with its name, and next 
day i ask him why the peak was call the horror-horn. he put the 
question off at first, and said that, like the schreckhorn, its name 
was due to its precipice and fall stones; but when i pressed him 
further he acknowledge that there was a legend about it, which his 
father had told him. there were creatures, so it was supposed, that 
live in its caves, things human in shape, and covered, except for 
the face and hands, with long black hair. they were dwarf in size, 
four feet high or thereabouts, but of prodigious strength and agility, 
remnant of some wild primeval race. it seem that they were still 
in an upward stage of evolution, or so i guessed, for the story ran 
that sometimes girl had been carry off by them, not as prey, and 
not for any such fate as for those capture by cannibals, but to be 
bred from. young men also had been rape by them, to be mate with 
the female of their tribe. all this look as if the creatures, as i 
said, were tend towards humanity. but naturally i did not believe a 
word of it, as applied to the conditions of the present day. century 
ago, conceivably, there may have been such beings, and, with the 
extraordinary tenacity of tradition, the news of this had been hand 
down and was still current round the hearth of the peasants. as for 
their numbers, chanton told me that three had been once seen together 
by a man who owe to his swift on ski had escape to tell the 
tale. this man, he averred, was no other than his grandfather, who 
had been benighted one winter evening as he pass through the dense 
wood below the ungeheuerhorn, and chanton supposed that they had 
been driven down to these lower altitude in search of food during 
severe winter weather, for otherwise the record sight of them 
had always taken place among the rocks of the peak itself. they had 
pursue his grandfather, then a young man, at an extraordinarily swift 
canter, running sometimes upright as men run, sometimes on all-fours 
in the manner of beasts, and their howl were just such as that we had 
heard that night in the blumen hut. such at any rate was the story 
chanton told me, and, like you, i regard it as the very moonshine 
of superstition. but the very next day i had reason to reconsider my 
judgment about it. 

“it was on that day that after a week of exploration we hit on the 
only route at present known to the top of our peak. we start as soon 
as there was light enough to climb by, for, as you may guess, on very 
difficult rocks it is impossible to climb by lantern or moonlight. 
we hit on the long fissure i have spoken of, we explore the ledge 
which from below seem to end in nothingness, and with an hour’s 
step-cutting ascend the couloir which led upwards from it. from there 
onwards it was a rock-climb, certainly of considerable difficulty, but 
with no heart-breaking discovery ahead, and it was about nine in the 
morning that we stood on the top. we did not wait there long, for that 
side of the mountain is rake by fall stone loosened, when the sun 
grow hot, from the ice that hold them, and we made haste to pass the 
ledge where the falls are most frequent. after that there was the long 
fissure to descend, a matter of no great difficulty, and we were at 
the end of our work by midday, both of us, as you may imagine, in the 
state of the highest elation. 

“a long and tiresome scramble among the huge boulder at the foot of 
the cliff then lay before us. here the hill-side is very porous and 
great cave extend far into the mountain. we had unroped at the base of 
the fissure, and were pick our way as seem good to either of us 
among these fallen rocks, many of them big than an ordinary house, 
when, on coming round the corner of one of these, i saw that which 
made it clear that the story chanton had told me were no figment of 
traditional superstition. 

“not twenty yard in front of me lay one of the being of which he 
had spoken. there it sprawl naked and bask on its back with face 
turn up to the sun, which its narrow eyes regard unwinking. in form 
it was completely human, but the growth of hair that cover limb and 
trunk alike almost completely hid the sun-tanned skin beneath. but its 
face, save for the down on its cheek and chin, was hairless, and i 
look on a countenance the sensual and malevolent bestiality of which 
froze me with horror. had the creature been an animal, one would have 
felt scarcely a shudder at the gross animalism of it; the horror lay in 
the fact that it was a man. there lay by it a couple of gnaw bones, 
and, its meal finished, it was lazy licking its protuberant lips, 
from which came a purr murmur of content. with one hand it scratch 
the thick hair on its belly, in the other it held one of these bones, 
which presently split in half beneath the pressure of its finger and 
thumb. but my horror was not base on the information of what happen 
to those men whom these creature caught, it was due only to my 
proximity to a thing so human and so infernal. the peak, of which the 
ascent had a moment ago fill us with such elated satisfaction, became 
to me an ungeheuerhorn indeed, for it was the home of being more awful 
than the delirium of nightmare could ever have conceived. 

“chanton was a dozen pace behind me, and with a backward wave of 
my hand i cause him to halt. then withdraw myself with infinite 
precaution, so as not to attract the gaze of that bask creature, 
i slip back round the rock, whisper to him what i had seen, and 
with blanch face we made a long detour, peer round every corner, 
and crouch low, not knowing that at any step we might not come upon 
another of these beings, or that from the mouth of one of these cave 
in the mountain-side there might not appear another of those hairless 
and dreadful faces, with perhaps this time the breast and insignia of 
womanhood. that would have been the worst of all. 

“luck favoured us, for we made our way among the boulder and shift 
stones, the rattle of which might at any moment have betray us, 
without a repetition of my experience, and once among the tree we ran 
as if the fury themselves were in pursuit. well now did i understand, 
though i dare say i cannot convey, the qualm of chanton’s mind when he 
spoke to me of these creatures. their very humanity was what made them 
so terrible, the fact that they were of the same race as ourselves, but 
of a type so abysmal degrade that the most brutal and inhuman of men 
would have seem angel in comparison.” 

the music of the small band was over before he had finished the 
narrative, and the chatter group round the tea-table had dispersed. 
he pause a moment. 

“there was a horror of the spirit,” he said, “which i experienced 
then, from which, i verily believe, i have never entire recovered. 
i saw then how terrible a living thing could be, and how terrible, in 
consequence, was life itself. in us all i suppose lurk some inherit 
germ of that ineffable bestiality, and who know whether, sterile as it 
has apparently become in the course of centuries, it might not fructify 
again. when i saw that creature sun itself, i look into the abyss 
out of which we have crawled. and these creature are try to crawl 
out of it now, if they exist any longer. certainly for the last twenty 
years there has been no record of their being seen, until we come to 
this story of the footprint seen by the climber on everest. if that 
is authentic, if the party did not mistake the footprint of some bear, 
or what not, for a human tread, it seem as if still this bestrande 
remnant of mankind is in existence.” 

now, ingram, had told his story well; but sitting in this warm 
and civilise room, the horror which he had clearly felt had not 
communicate itself to me in any very vivid manner. intellectually, i 
agreed, i could appreciate his horror, but certainly my spirit felt no 
shudder of interior comprehension. 

“but it is odd,” i said, “that your keen interest in physiology did 
not disperse your qualms. you were looking, so i take it, at some form 
of man more remote probably than the earliest human remains. did not 
something inside you say ‘this is of absorbing significance’?” 

he shook his head. 

“no: i only want to get away,” said he. “it was not, as i have told 
you, the terror of what according to chanton’s story, might await us if 
we were captured; it was sheer horror at the creature itself. i quake 
at it.” 

* * * * * 

the snowstorm and the gale increase in violence that night, and i 
slept uneasily, pluck again and again from slumber by the fierce 
battle of the wind that shook my window as if with an imperious 
demand for admittance. it came in billowy gusts, with strange noise 
intermingle with it as for a moment it abated, with fluting and 
moan that rose to shriek as the fury of it returned. these noises, 
no doubt, mingle themselves with my drowse and sleepy consciousness, 
and once i tore myself out of nightmare, imagine that the creature 
of the horror-horn had gain footing on my balcony and were rattling 
at the window-bolts. but before morning the gale had die away, and i 
awoke to see the snow fall dense and fast in a windless air. for 
three days it continued, without intermission, and with its cessation 
there came a frost such as i have never felt before. fifty degree were 
register one night, and more the next, and what the cold must have 
been on the cliff of the ungeheuerhorn i cannot imagine. sufficient, 
so i thought, to have made an end altogether of its secret inhabitants: 
my cousin, on that day twenty years ago, had miss an opportunity for 
study which would probably never fall again either to him or another. 

i received one morning a letter from a friend saying that he had 
arrive at the neighbouring winter resort of st. luigi, and propose 
that i should come over for a morning’s skate and lunch afterwards. 
the place was not more than a couple of mile off, if one took the path 
over the low, pine-clad foot-hills above which lay the steep wood 
below the first rocky slope of the ungeheuerhorn; and accordingly, 
with a knapsack contain skate on my back, i went on ski over the 
wooded slope and down by an easy descent again on to st. luigi. the 
day was overcast, cloud entire obscure the higher peak though the 
sun was visible, pale and unluminous, through the mists. but as the 
morning went on, it gain the upper hand, and i slid down into st. 
luigi beneath a sparkle firmament. we skate and lunched, and then, 
since it look as if thick weather was coming up again, i set out 
early about three o’clock for my return journey. 

hardly had i got into the wood when the cloud gather thick above, 
and streamer and skein of them began to descend among the pine 
through which my path thread its way. in ten minutes more their 
opacity had so increase that i could hardly see a couple of yard in 
front of me. very soon i became aware that i must have got off the 
path, for snow-cowled shrub lay directly in my way, and, casting 
back to find it again, i got altogether confuse as to direction. 
but, though progress was difficult, i knew i had only to keep on 
the ascent, and presently i should come to the brow of these low 
foot-hills, and descend into the open valley where alhubel stood. so 
on i went, stumble and slide over obstacles, and unable, owe to 
the thickness of the snow, to take off my skis, for i should have sunk 
over the knee at each step. still the ascent continued, and look at 
my watch i saw that i had already been near an hour on my way from st. 
luigi, a period more than sufficient to complete my whole journey. but 
still i stuck to my idea that though i had certainly stray far from 
my proper route a few minutes more must surely see me over the top of 
the upward way, and i should find the ground decline into the next 
valley. about now, too, i notice that the mists were grow suffuse 
with rose-colour, and, though the inference was that it must be close 
on sunset, there was consolation in the fact that they were there and 
might lift at any moment and disclose to me my whereabouts. but the 
fact that night would soon be on me made it needful to bar my mind 
against that despair of lonely which so eats out the heart of a man 
who is lost in wood or on mountain-side, that, though still there is 
plenty of vigour in his limbs, his nervous force is sapped, and he can 
do no more than lie down and abandon himself to whatever fate may await 
him.... and then i heard that which made the thought of lonely seem 
bliss indeed, for there was a worse fate than loneliness. what i heard 
resemble the howl of a wolf, and it came from not far in front of me 
where the ridge--was it a ridge?--still rose higher in vestment of 
pines. 

from behind me came a sudden puff of wind, which shook the frozen snow 
from the droop pine-branches, and swept away the mists as a broom 
sweep the dust from the floor. radiant above me were the unclouded 
skies, already charged with the red of the sunset, and in front i 
saw that i had come to the very edge of the wood through which i had 
wander so long. but it was no valley into which i had penetrated, 
for there right ahead of me rose the steep slope of boulder and rocks 
soar upwards to the foot of the ungeheuerhorn. what, then, was that 
cry of a wolf which had made my heart stand still? i saw. 

not twenty yard from me was a fallen tree, and leaning against the 
trunk of it was one of the denizen of the horror-horn, and it was a 
woman. she was envelop in a thick growth of hair grey and tufted, 
and from her head it stream down over her shoulder and her bosom, 
from which hung wither and pendulous breasts. and look on her 
face i comprehend not with my mind alone, but with a shudder of my 
spirit, what ingram had felt. never had nightmare fashion so terrible 
a countenance; the beauty of sun and stars and of the beast of the 
field and the kindly race of men could not atone for so hellish an 
incarnation of the spirit of life. a fathomless bestiality model the 
slaver mouth and the narrow eyes; i look into the abyss itself 
and knew that out of that abyss on the edge of which i lean the 
generation of men had climbed. what if that ledge crumble in front of 
me and pitch me headlong into its nethermost depths?... 

in one hand she held by the horn a chamois that kick and struggled. 
a blow from its hindleg caught her wither thigh, and with a grunt 
of anger she seize the leg in her other hand, and, as a man may pull 
from its sheath a stem of meadow-grass, she pluck it off the body, 
leave the torn skin hanging round the gape wound. then putt the 
red, bleeding member to her mouth she suck at it as a child suck a 
stick of sweetmeat. through flesh and gristle her short, brown teeth 
penetrated, and she lick her lip with a sound of purring. then 
drop the leg by her side, she look again at the body of the prey 
now quiver in its death-convulsion, and with finger and thumb gouge 
out one of its eyes. she snap her teeth on it, and it cracked like a 
soft-shelled nut. 

it must have been but a few seconds that i stood watch her, in 
some indescribable catalepsy of terror, while through my brain there 
peal the panic-command of my mind to my stricken limb “begone, 
begone, while there is time.” then, recover the power of my joint 
and muscles, i try to slip behind a tree and hide myself from this 
apparition. but the woman--shall i say?--must have caught my stir of 
movement, for she raise her eyes from her living feast and saw me. she 
crane forward her neck, she drop her prey, and half rising began to 
move towards me. as she did this, she open her mouth, and gave forth 
a howl such as i had heard a moment before. it was answer by another, 
but faint and distantly. 

slide and slipping, with the toe of my ski tripping in the 
obstacle below the snow, i plunge forward down the hill between 
the pine-trunks. the low sun already sink behind some rampart of 
mountain in the west redden the snow and the pine with its ultimate 
rays. my knapsack with the skate in it swung to and fro on my back, 
one ski-stick had already been twitch out of my hand by a fallen 
branch of pine, but not a second’s pause could i allow myself to 
recover it. i gave no glance behind, and i knew not at what pace my 
pursuer was on my track, or indeed whether any pursue at all, for my 
whole mind and energy, now working at full power again under the stress 
of my panic, was devoted to get away down the hill and out of the 
wood as swift as my limb could bear me. for a little while i heard 
nothing but the hiss snow of my headlong passage, and the rustle of 
the cover undergrowth beneath my feet, and then, from close at hand 
behind me, once more the wolf-howl sound and i heard the plunge of 
footstep other than my own. 

the strap of my knapsack had shifted, and as my skate swung to and fro 
on my back it chafe and pressed on my throat, hinder free passage 
of air, of which, god knew, my labour lung were in dire need, and 
without pause i slip it free from my neck, and held it in the hand 
from which my ski-stick had been jerked. i seem to go a little more 
easily for this adjustment, and now, not so far distant, i could see 
below me the path from which i had strayed. if only i could reach that, 
the smooth go would surely enable me to out-distance my pursuer, 
who even on the rough ground was but slow overhaul me, and at 
the sight of that riband stretch unimpeded downhill, a ray of hope 
pierce the black panic of my soul. with that came the desire, keen 
and insistent, to see who or what it was that was on my tracks, and 
i spare a backward glance. it was she, the hag whom i had seen at 
her gruesome meal; her long grey hair flew out behind her, her mouth 
chatter and gibbered, her finger made grab movements, as if 
already they closed on me. 

but the path was now at hand, and the near of it i suppose made me 
incautious. a hump of snow-covered bush lay in my path, and, thinking 
i could jump over it, i trip and fell, smother myself in snow. i 
heard a maniac noise, half scream, half laugh, from close behind, and 
before i could recover myself the grab finger were at my neck, as 
if a steel vice had closed there. but my right hand in which i held my 
knapsack of skate was free, and with a blind back-handed movement i 
whirl it behind me at the full length of its strap, and knew that my 
desperate blow had found its billet somewhere. even before i could look 
round i felt the grip on my neck relax, and something subside into the 
very bush which had entangle me. i recover my feet and turned. 

there she lay, twitch and quivering. the heel of one of my skate 
piercing the thin alpaca of the knapsack had hit her full on the 
temple, from which the blood was pouring, but a hundred yard away i 
could see another such figure coming downwards on my tracks, leap 
and bounding. at that panic rose again within me, and i sped off down 
the white smooth path that led to the lights of the village already 
beckoning. never once did i pause in my headlong going: there was no 
safety until i was back among the haunt of men. i flung myself against 
the door of the hotel, and scream for admittance, though i had but to 
turn the handle and enter; and once more as when ingram had told his 
tale, there was the sound of the band, and the chatter of voices, and 
there, too, was he himself, who look up and then rose swift to his 
feet as i made my clatter entrance. 

“i have seen them too,” i cried. “look at my knapsack. is there not 
blood on it? it is the blood of one of them, a woman, a hag, who tore 
off the leg of a chamois as i looked, and pursue me through the 
accursed wood. i----” 

whether it was i who spun round, or the room which seem to spin 
round me, i knew not, but i heard myself falling, collapse on the 
floor, and the next time that i was conscious at all i was in bed. 
there was ingram there, who told me that i was quite safe, and another 
man, a stranger, who prick my arm with the nozzle of a syringe, and 
reassure me.... 

a day or two later i gave a coherent account of my adventure, and three 
or four men, armed with guns, went over my traces. they found the bush 
in which i had stumbled, with a pool of blood which had soaked into 
the snow, and, still following my ski-tracks, they came on the body 
of a chamois, from which had been torn one of its hindleg and one 
eye-socket was empty. that is all the corroboration of my story that i 
can give the reader, and for myself i imagine that the creature which 
pursue me was either not kill by my blow or that her fellow remove 
her body.... anyhow, it is open to the incredulous to prowl about 
the cave of the ungeheuerhorn, and see if anything occur that may 
convince them. 




machaon 




machaon 


i was return at the close of the short winter day from my visit to 
st. james’s hospital, where my old servant parkes, who had been in my 
service for twenty years, was lying. i had sent him there three days 
before, not for treatment, but for observation, and this afternoon i 
had gone up to london, to hear the doctor’s report on the case. he told 
me that park was suffering from an internal tumour, the nature of 
which could not be diagnose for certain, but all the symptom pointed 
directly to its being cancerous. that, however, must not be regard 
as proved; it could only be prove by an exploratory operation to 
reveal the nature and the extent of the growth, which must then, if 
possible, be excised. it might involve, so my old friend godfrey syme 
told me, certain tissue and would be found to be inoperable, but he 
hope this would not be the case, and that it would be possible to 
remove it: removal gave the only chance of recovery. it was fortunate 
that the patient had been sent for examination in an early stage, for 
thus the chance of success were much greater than if the growth had 
been one of long standing. park was not, however, in a fit state to 
stand the operation at once; a recuperative week or ten days in bed was 
advisable. in these circumstances syme recommend that he should not 
be told at once what lay in front of him. 

“i can see that he is a nervous fellow,” he said, “and to lie in bed 
thinking of what he has got to face will probably undo all the good 
that lie in bed will bring to him. you don’t get use to the idea of 
being cut open; the more you think about it, the more intolerable it 
becomes. if that sort of adventure face me, i should infinite prefer 
not to be told about it until they came to give me the anæsthetic. 
naturally, he will have to consent to the operation, but i shouldn’t 
tell him anything about it till the day before. he’s not married, i 
think, is he?” 

“no: he’s alone in the world,” said i. “he’s been with me twenty years.” 

“yes, i remember park almost as long as i remember you. but that’s 
all i can recommend. of course, if the pain became severe, it might be 
better to operate sooner, but at present he suffer hardly at all, and 
he sleep well, so the nurse tell me.” 

“and there’s nothing else that you can try for it?” i asked. 

“i’ll try anything you like, but it will be perfectly useless. i’ll 
let him have any quack nostrum you and he wish, as long as it doesn’t 
injure his health, or make you put off the operation. there are x-rays 
and ultra-violet rays, and violet leaves and radium; there are fresh 
cure for cancer discover every day, and what’s the result? they 
only make people put off the operation till it’s no long possible to 
operate. naturally, i will welcome any further opinion you want.” 

now godfrey syme is easily the first authority on this subject, and 
has a far higher percentage of cure to his credit than anyone else. 

“no, i don’t want any fresh opinion,” said i. 

“very well, i’ll have him careful watched. by the way, can’t you stop 
in town and dine with me? there are one or two people coming, and among 
them a perfectly mad spiritualist who has more message from the other 
world than i ever get on my telephone. trunk-calls, eh? i wonder where 
the exchange is. do come! you like cranks, i know!” 

“i can’t, i’m afraid,” said i. “i’ve a couple of guest coming to stay 
with me to-day down in the country. they are both cranks: one’s a 
medium.” 

he laughed. 

“well, i can only offer you one crank, and you’ve got two,” he said. “i 
must get back to the wards. i’ll write to you in about a week’s time 
or so, unless there’s any urgent which i don’t foresee, and i should 
suggest your coming up to tell parkes. good-bye.” 

i caught my train at char cross with about three seconds to spare, 
and we slid clank out over the bridge through the cold, dense air. 
snow had been fall intermittent since morning, and when we got 
out of the grime and fog of london, it was lie thick on field 
and hedgerow, retard by its reflection of such light as linger 
the oncoming of darkness, and give to the landscape an aloof and 
lonely austerity. all day i had felt that drowsy which accompany 
snowfall, and sometimes, half lose myself in a doze, my mind crept, 
like a thing crawl about in the dark, over what godfrey syme had 
told me. for all these years parkes, as much friend as servant, had 
given me his faithful and devotion, and now, in return for that, 
all that apparently i could do was to tell him of his plight. it was 
clear, from what the surgeon had said, that he expect a serious 
disclosure, and i knew from the experience of two friends of mine who 
had been in his condition what might be expect of this “exploratory 
operation.” exactly similar had been these cases; there was clear 
evidence of an internal growth possibly not malignant, and in each case 
the same dismal sequence had followed. the growth had been removed, and 
within a couple of month there had been a recrudescence of it. indeed, 
surgery had prove no more than a pruning-knife, which had stimulate 
that which the surgeon had hope to extirpate into swift activity. 
and that apparently was the best chance that syme held out: the rest 
of the treatment were but rubbish or quackery.... 

my mind crawl away towards another subject: probably the two visitor 
whom i expected, charles hope and the medium whom he was bring with 
him, were in the same train as i, and i ran over in my mind all that 
he had told me of mrs. forrest. it was certainly an odd story he had 
brought me two days before. mrs. forrest was a medium of considerable 
reputation in psychic circles, and had produce some very 
extraordinary book-tests which, by all accounts, seem inexplicable, 
except on a spiritualistic hypothesis, and no imputation of trickery 
had, at any rate as yet, come near her. when in trance, she spoke and 
wrote, as is invariable the case with mediums, under the direction 
of a certain “control”--that is to say, a spiritual and discarnate 
intelligence which for the time was in possession of her. but lately 
there had been sign that a fresh control had inspired her, the nature 
of whom, his name, and his identity was at present unknown. and then 
came the following queer incident. 

last week only when in trance, and apparently under the direction 
of this new control, she began describe in considerable detail a 
certain house where the control said that he had work to do. at first 
the description arouse no association in charles hope’s mind, but as 
it went on, it sudden struck him that mrs. forrest was speak of 
my house in tilling. she gave its general features, its position in a 
small town on a hill, its walled-in garden, and then went on to speak 
with great minute of a rather peculiar feature in the house. she 
describe a big room built out in the garden a few yard away from 
the house itself at right-angles to its front, and approach by half 
a dozen stone steps. there was a railing, so she said, on each side 
of them, and into the railing were twisted, like snake coils, the 
stem of a tree which bore pale mauve flowers. this was all a correct 
description of my garden room and the wistaria which writhe in and out 
of the railing which line the steps. she then went on to speak of the 
interior of the room. at one end was a fireplace, at the other a big 
bow-window look out on to the street and the front of the house, and 
there were two other window opposite each other, in one of which was a 
table, while the other, look out on to the garden, was shadow by 
the tree that twist itself about the railings. book-cases line the 
walls, and there was a big sofa at right-angles to the fire.... 

now all this, though it was a perfectly accurate description of a place 
that, as far as could be ascertained, mrs. forrest had never seen, 
might conceivable have been derive from charles hope’s mind, since he 
knew the room well, have often stay with me. but the medium add a 
detail which could not conceivable have been thus derived, for charles 
believe it to be incorrect. she said that there was a big piano near 
the bow-window, while he was sure that there was not. but oddly enough 
i had hire a piano only a week or so ago, and it stood in the place 
that she mentioned. the “control” then repeated that there was work 
for him to do in that house. there was some situation or complication 
there in which he could help, and he could “get through” better (that 
is, make a clear communication) if the medium could hold a séance 
there. charles hope then told the control that he believe he knew 
the house that he had been speak of, and promise to do his best. 
shortly afterwards mrs. forrest came out of trance, and, as usual, had 
no recollection of what had passed. 

so charles came to me with the story exactly as i have given it here, 
and though i could not think of any situation or complication in which 
an unknown control of a medium i had never seen could be of assistance, 
the whole thing (and in especial that detail about the piano) was so 
odd that i ask him to bring the medium down for a sitting or a series 
of sittings. the day of their arrival was arranged, but when three days 
ago park had to go into hospital, i was inclined to put them off. but 
a neighbour away for a week obliging lent me a parlour-maid, and i 
let the engagement stand. with regard to the situation in which the 
control would be of assistance, i can but assure the reader that as far 
as i thought about it at all, i only wonder whether it was concerned 
with a book on which i was engaged, which dealt (if i could ever 
succeed in writing it) with psychic affairs. but at present i could 
not get on with it at all. i had made half a dozen beginning which had 
all gone into the waste-paper basket. 

my guest prove not to have come by the same train as i, but arrive 
shortly before dinner-time, and after mrs. forrest had gone to her 
room, i had a few words with charles, who told me exactly how the 
situation now stood. 

“i know your caution and your captious in these affairs,” he said, 
“so i have told mrs. forrest nothing about the description she gave 
of this house, or of the reason why i ask her to come here. i said 
only, as we settled, that you were a great friend of mine and immensely 
interested in psychic affairs, but a country-mouse whom it was 
difficult to get up to town. but you would be delight if she would 
come down for a few days and give some sitting here.” 

“and do she recognise the house, do you think?” i asked. 

“no sign of it. as i told you, when she come out of trance she never 
seem to have the faintest recollection of what she has said or 
written. we shall have a séance, i hope, to-night after dinner.” 

“certainly, if she will,” said i. “i thought we had better hold it in 
the garden-room, for that was the place that was so minutely described. 
it’s quite warm there, central-heating and a fire, and it’s only half a 
dozen yard from the house. i’ve had the snow swept from the steps.” 

mrs. forrest turn out to be a very intelligent woman, well spice 
with humour, gifted with a sane appreciation of the comfort of life, 
and most agreeably furnish with the small change of talk. she 
was inclined to be stout, but carry herself with briskness, and 
neither in body nor mind did she suggest that she was one who held 
communication with the unseen: there was nothing wan or occult about 
her. her general outlook on life appear to be rather materialist 
than otherwise, and she was very interesting on the topic when, about 
half-way through dinner, the subject of her mediumship came on the 
conversational board. 

“my gifts, such as they are,” she said, “have nothing to do with this 
person who sit eat and drink and talk to you. she, as mr. 
hope may have told you, is quite expunge before the subconscious part 
of me--that is the latest notion, is it not?--gets into touch with 
discarnate intelligences. until that happens, the door is shut, and 
when it is over, the door is shut again, and i have no recollection of 
what i have said or written. the control use my hand and my voice, but 
that is all. i know no more about it than a piano on which a tune has 
been played.” 

“and there is a new control who has lately been use you?” i asked. 

she laughed. 

“you must ask mr. hope about that,” she said. “i know nothing 
whatever of it. he tell me it is so, and he tell me--don’t you, mr. 
hope?--that he hasn’t any idea who or what the new control is. i look 
forward to its development; my idea is that the control has to get use 
to me, as in learning a new instrument. i assure you i am as eager as 
anyone that he should gain facility in communication through me. i 
hope, indeed, that we are to have a séance to-night.” 

the talk veer again, and i learned that mrs. forrest had never been 
in till before, and was enchant with the snowy moonlit glance she 
had had of its narrow street and ancient residences. she liked, too, 
the atmosphere of the house: it seem tranquil and kindly; especially 
so was the little drawing-room where we had assemble before dinner. 

i glance at charles. 

“i had thought of propose that we should sit in the garden-room,” i 
said, “if you don’t mind half a dozen steps in the open. it adjoin the 
house.” 

“just as you wish,” she said, “though i think we have excellent 
conditions in here without go there.” 

this confirmed her statement that she had no idea after she had come 
out of trance what she had said, for otherwise she must have recognise 
at the mention of the garden-room her own description of it, and when 
soon after dinner we adjourn there, it was clear that, unless she 
was acting an inexplicable part, the sight of it twang no chord of 
memory. there we made the very simple arrangement to which she was 
accustomed. 

as the procedure in such sitting is possibly unfamiliar to the reader, 
i will describe quite shortly what our arrangement were. we had no 
idea what form these manifestations--if there were any--might take, 
and therefore we, charles and i, were prepared to record them on the 
spot. we three sat round a small table about a couple of yard from 
the fire, which was burning brightly; mrs. forrest seat herself in 
a big armchair. exactly in front of her on the table were a pencil 
and a block of paper in case, as often happened, the manifestation 
took the form of automatic script--writing, that is, while in a state 
of trance. charles and i sat on each side of her, also provided with 
pencil and paper in order to take down what she said if and when (as 
lawyer say) the control took possession of her. in case materialise 
spirits appeared, a phenomenon not as yet seen at her séances, our idea 
was to jot down as quick as possible whatever we saw or thought we 
saw. should there be rap or movements of furniture, we were to 
make similar note of our impressions. the lamp was then turn down, 
so that just a ring of flame encircle the wick, but the firelight was 
of sufficient brightness, as we test before the séance began, to 
enable us to write and to see what we had written. the red glow of it 
illuminate the room, and it was settled that charles should note by 
his watch the time at which anything occurred. occasionally, throughout 
the séance a bubble of coal-gas caught fire, and then the whole room 
start into strong light. i had given orders that my servant should 
not interrupt the sitting at all, unless somebody rang the bell from 
the garden-room. in that case it was to be answered. finally, before 
the séance began, we bolt all the window on the inside and lock 
the door. we took no other precaution against trickery, though, as a 
matter of fact, mrs. forrest suggest that she should be tie into her 
chair. but in the firelight any movement of hers would be so visible 
that we did not adopt this precaution. charles and i had settled to 
read to each other the note we made during the sitting, and cut out 
anything that both of us had not recorded. the accounts, therefore, of 
this sitting and of that which follow next day are found on our 
joint evidence. the sitting began. 

mrs. forrest was leaning back at ease with her eyes open and her hand 
on the arms of her chair. then her eyes closed and a violent tremble 
seize her. that passed, and shortly afterwards her head fell forward 
and her breathing became very rapid. presently that quiet to normal 
pace again, and she began to speak at first in a scarcely audible 
whisper and then in a high shrill voice, quite unlike her usual tones. 

i do not think that in all england there was a more disappointed man 
than i during the next half-hour. “starlight,” it appeared, was in 
control, and starlight was a personage of platitudes. she had been a 
nun in the time of henry vii, and her work was to help those who had 
lately pass over. she was very busy and very happy, and was in the 
third sphere where they had a great deal of beautiful music. we must 
all be good, said starlight, and it didn’t matter much whether we were 
clever or not. love was the great thing; we had to love each other 
and help each other, and death was no more than the gate of life, and 
everything would be tremendous jolly.... starlight, in fact, might be 
better describe as clap-trap, and i began thinking about parkes.... 

and then i cease to think about parkes, for the shrill morality 
of starlight ceased, and mrs. forrest’s voice change again. the 
stale facility of her utterance stop and she began to speak, quite 
unintelligibly, in a voice of low baritone range. charles lean across 
the table and whisper to me. 

“that’s the new control,” he said. 

the voice that was speak stumble and hesitated: it was like that 
of a man try to express himself in some language which he knew very 
imperfectly. sometimes it stop altogether, and in one of these 
pause i asked: 

“can you tell us your name?” 

there was no reply, but presently i saw mrs. forrest’s hand reach 
out for the pencil. charles put it into her finger and placed the 
writing-pad more handy for her. i watch the letters, in capitals, 
being traced. they were made hesitatingly, but were perfectly legible. 
“swallow,” she wrote, and again “swallow,” and stopped. 

“the bird?” i asked. 

the voice spoke in answer; now i could hear the words, utter in that 
low baritone voice. 

“no, not a bird,” it said. “not a bird, but it flies.” 

i was utterly at sea; my mind could form no conjecture whatever 
as to what was meant. and then the pencil began writing again. 
“swallow, swallow,” and then with a sudden brisk of movement, as 
if the guide intelligence had got over some difficulty, it wrote 
“swallow-tail.” 

this seem more abstruse senseless than ever. the only connection 
with swallow-tail in my mind was a swallow-tailed coat, but whoever 
heard of a swallow-tailed coat flying? 

“i’ve got it,” said charles. “swallow-tail butterfly. is it that?” 

there came three sudden rap on the table, loud and startling. these 
raps, i may explain, in the usual code mean “yes.” as if to confirm 
it the pencil began to write again, and spell out “swallow-tail 
butterfly.” 

“is that your name?” i asked. 

there was one rap, which signify “no,” follow by three, which 
means “yes.” i had not the slightest idea of what it all signify 
(indeed it seem to signify nothing at all), but the sitting had 
become extraordinarily interesting if only for its very unexpectedness. 
the control was try to establish himself by three method 
simultaneously--by the voice, by the automatic writing, and by rapping. 
but how a swallow-tail butterfly could assist in some situation which 
was now existing in my house was utterly beyond me.... then an idea 
struck me: the swallow-tail butterfly no doubt had a scientific name, 
and that we could easily ascertain, for i knew that there was on my 
shelves a copy of newman’s _butterflies and moth of great britain_, a 
sumptuous volume bound in morocco, which i had won as an entomology 
prize at school. a moment’s search gave me the book, and by the 
firelight i turn up the description of this butterfly in the index. 
its scientific name was _papilio machaon_. 

“is machaon your name?” i asked. 

the voice came clear now. 

“yes, i am machaon,” it said. 

with that came the end of the séance, which had last not more than 
an hour. whatever the power was that had made mrs. forrest speak 
in that male voice and struggle, through that roundabout method of 
“swallow, swallow-tail, machaon,” to establish its identity, it now 
began to fail. mrs. forrest’s pencil made a few illegible scribbles, 
she whisper a few inaudible words, and presently with a stretch and a 
sigh she came out of trance. we told her that the name of the control 
was established, but apparently machaon meant nothing to her. she was 
much exhausted, and very soon i took her across to the house to go to 
bed, and presently rejoin charles. 

“who was machaon, anyhow?” he asked. “he sound classical: more in your 
line than mine.” 

i remember enough greece mythology to supply elementary facts, while i 
hunt for a particular book about athens. 

“machaon was the son of asclepios,” i said, “and asclepio was the 
greece god of healing. he had precincts, hydropathic establishments, 
where people went to be cured. the roman call him aesculapius.” 

“what can he do for you then?” ask charles. “you’re fairly fit, 
aren’t you?” 

not till he spoke did a light dawn on me. though i had been thinking so 
much of park that day, i had not conscious made the connection. 

“but park isn’t,” said i. “is that possible?” 

“by jove!” said he. 

i found my book, and turn to the account of the precinct of 
asclepio in athens. 

“yes, asclepio had two sons,” i said--“machaon and podaleirios. in 
homeric times he wasn’t a god, but only a physician, and his son were 
physician too. the myth of his godhead is rather a late one----” 

i shut the book. 

“best not to read any more,” i said. “if we know all about asclepios, 
we shall possibly be suggest things to the medium’s mind. let’s 
see what machaon can tell us about himself, and we can verify it 
afterwards.” 

it was therefore with no further knowledge than this on the subject 
of machaon that we propose to hold another séance the next day. all 
morning the bitter air had been laden with snow, and now the street 
in front of my house, a by-way at the best in the slender traffic of 
the town, lay white and untrodden, save on the pavement where a few 
passenger had gone by. mrs. forrest had not appear at breakfast, and 
from then till lunch-time i sat in the bow-window of the garden-room, 
for the warmth of the central heating, of which a stack of pipes was 
there installed, and for secure the utmost benefit of light that 
penetrate this cowl of snow-laden sky, busy with belated letters. the 
drowsy that accompany snowfall weigh heavy on my faculties, 
but as far as i can assert anything, i can assert that i did not 
sleep. from one letter i went on to another, and then for the sixth 
or seventh time i try to open my story. it promise better now 
than before, and searching for a word that would not come to my pen, 
i happen to look up along the street which lay in front of me. i 
expect nothing: i was thinking of nothing but my work; probably i 
had look up like that a dozen times before, and had seen the empty 
street, with snow lie thick on the roadway. 

but now the roadway was not untenanted. someone was walking down the 
middle of it, and his aspect, incredible though it seemed, was not 
startling. why i was not startle i have no idea: i can only say that 
the vision appear perfectly natural. the figure was that of a young 
man, whose hair, black and curly, lay crisp over his forehead. a 
large white cloak reach down to his knee envelop him, and he 
had thrown the end of it over his shoulder. below his knee his leg 
and feet were bare, so too was the arm up to the elbow, with which he 
pressed his cloak to him, and there he was walking brisk down the 
snowy street. as he came directly below the window where i sat, he 
raise his head and look at me directly, and smiled. and now i saw 
his face: there was the low brow, the straight nose, the curve and 
sunny mouth, the short chin, and i thought to myself that this was none 
other than the herme of praxiteles, he whose statue at olympia make 
all those who look on it grow young again. there, anyhow, was a boyish 
greece god, step blithe and with gay, incomparable grace along 
the street, and raise his face to smile at this stolid, middle-aged 
man who blank regard him. then with the certainty of one return 
home, he mount the steps outside the front door, and seem to pass 
into and through it. certainly he was no long in the street, and, so 
real and solid-seeming had he been to my vision, that i jump up, ran 
across the few steps of garden, and went into the house, and i should 
not have been amaze if i had found him standing in the hall. but there 
was no one there, and i open the front door: the snow lay smooth 
and untrodden down the centre of the road where he had walk and on 
my doorstep. and at that moment the memory of the séance the evening 
before, about which up till now i had somehow felt distrustful and 
suspicious, pass into the realm of sober fact, for had not machaon 
just now enter my house, with a smile as of recognition on some 
friendly mission? 

we sat again that afternoon by daylight, and now, i must suppose, the 
control was more active and powerful present, for hardly had mrs. 
forrest pass into trance than the voice began, loud than it had 
been the night before, and far more distinct. he--machaon i must call 
him--seemed to be anxious to establish his identity beyond all doubt, 
like some newcomer present his credentials, and he began to speak of 
the precinct of asclepio in athens. often he hesitate for a word in 
english, often he put in a word in greek, and as he spoke, fragment of 
things i had learned when an archæological student in athens came back 
into my mind, and i knew that he was accurate describe the portico 
and the temple and the well. all this i toss to the sceptic to growl 
and worry over and tear to bits; for certainly it seem possible that 
my mind, holding these fact in its subconsciousness, was suggest 
them to the medium’s mind, who thereupon spoke of them and, convey 
them back to me, made me aware that i had known them.... my forgotten 
knowledge of these things and of the greece language came flood back 
on me, as he told us, now half in greek, and half in english, of the 
patient who came to consult the god, how they wash in the sacred 
well for purification, and lay down to sleep in the portico. they often 
dreamed, and in the interpretation of their dreams, which they told to 
the priest next day, lay the indication of the cure. or sometimes the 
god heal more directly, and accompany by the sacred snake walk 
among the sleeper and by his touch made them whole. his temple was 
hung with _ex-votos_, the gift of those whom he had cured. and at 
epidaurus, where was another shrine of his, there were great mural 
tablet recording the same.... 

then the voice stopped, and as if to prove identity by another means, 
the medium drew the pencil and paper to her, and in greece characters, 
unknown apparently to her, she trace the words “machaon, son of 
asclepios....” 

there was a pause, and i ask a direct question, which now had been 
long simmer in my mind. 

“have you come to help me about parkes?” i asked. “can you tell me what 
will cure him?” 

the pencil began to move again, tracing out character in greek. it 
wrote [greek: phengo x], and repeated it. i did not at once guess 
what it meant, and ask for an explanation. there was no answer, and 
presently the medium stirred, stretch herself and sighed, and came 
out of trance. she took up the paper on which she had written. 

“did that come through?” she asked. “and what do it mean? i don’t 
even know the characters....” 

then sudden the possible significance of [greek: phengo x] flash 
on me, and i marvel at my slowness. [greek: phengos], a beam of 
light, a ray, and the letter [greek: x], the equivalent of the english 
_x_. that had come in direct answer to my question as to what would 
cure parkes, and it was without hesitation or delay that i wrote to 
symes. i remind him that he had said that he had no objection to 
any possible remedy, provided it was not harmful, being try on his 
patient, and i ask him to treat him with x-rays. the whole sequence 
of event had been so frankly amazing, that i believe the veriest 
sceptic would not have done otherwise than i did. 

our sitting continued, but after this day we had no further evidence 
of this second control. it look as if the intelligence (even the 
most incredulous will allow me, for the sake of convenience, to call 
that intelligence machaon) that had describe this room, and told mrs. 
forrest that he had work to do here, had finished his task. machaon had 
said, or so my interpretation was, that x-rays would cure parkes. in 
justification of this view it is proper to quote from a letter which i 
got from syme a week later. 

“there is no need for you to come up to break to park that an 
operation lie in front of him. in answer to your request, and 
without a grain of faith in its success, i treat him with x-rays, 
which i assured you were useless. to-day, to speak quite frankly, 
i don’t know what to think, for the growth has been steady 
diminish in size and hardness, and it is perfectly evident that it 
is being absorb and is disappearing. 

“the treatment through which i put park is that of ----. here in 
this hospital we have had patient to whom it brought no shadow of 
benefit. often it had been continue on these delude wretch till 
any operation which might possibly have been successful was out of 
the question owe to the encroachment of the growth. but from the 
first dose of the x-rays, park began to get better, the growth was 
first arrested, and then diminished. 

“i am try to put the whole thing before you with as much 
impartial as i can command. so, on the other side, you must 
remember that parkes’s was never a prove case of cancer. i told 
you that it could not be prove till the exploratory operation took 
place. all the symptom pointed to cancer--you see, i am try to 
save my own face--but my diagnosis, though confirmed by ----, may 
have been wrong. if he only had what we call a benign tumour, the 
case is not so extraordinary; there have been plenty of case when 
a benign tumour has disappear by absorption or what not. it is 
unusual, but by no means unknown. for instance.... 

“but parkes’s case was quite different. i certainly believe he had 
a cancerous growth, and thought that an operation was inevitable if 
his life was to be saved. even then, the most i hope for was an 
alleviate of pain, as the disease progressed, and a year or two 
more, at the most, of life. instead, i apply another remedy, at 
your suggestion, and if he go on as he has been doing, the growth 
will be a nodule in another week or two, and i should expect it to 
disappear altogether. taking everything into consideration, if you 
ask me the question whether this x-ray treatment was the cause of 
the cure, i should be oblige to say ‘yes.’ i don’t believe in such 
a treatment, but i believe it is cure him. i suppose that it was 
suggest to you by a fraudulent, spiritualistic medium in a feign 
trance, who was inspired by aesculapiu or some exploded heathen 
deity, for i remember you said you were go down into the country 
for some spiritual business.... 

“well, park is get better, and i am so old-fashioned a fellow 
that i would soon a patient of mine got better by incredible 
methods, than die under my skilful knife.... of course, we train 
people know nothing, but we have to act according to the best chance 
of our ignorance. i entire believe that the knife was the only 
means of saving the man, and now, when i stand confuted, the only 
thing that i can save is my honesty, which i hereby have done. let me 
know, at your leisure, whether you just thought you would, on your 
own idea, like me to try x-rays, or whether some fake voice from the 
grave suggest it. 
“ever yours, 
“godfrey symes. 

“p.s.--if it was some beastly voice from the grave, you might tell me 
in confidence who the medium was. i want to be fair....” 

that is the story; the reader will explain it according to his 
temperament. and as i have told parkes, who is now back with me again, 
to look into the garden-room before post-time and take a register 
packet to the office, it is time that i got it ready for him. so here 
is the complete packet in manuscript, to be sent to the printer’s. 
from my window i shall see him go brisk along the street down which 
machaon walk on a snowy morning. 




negotium perambulans.... 




negotium perambulans.... 


the casual tourist in west cornwall may just possibly have noticed, 
as he bowl along over the bare high plateau between penzance and 
the land’s end, a dilapidated signpost point down a steep lane 
and bearing on its batter finger the fade inscription “polearn 
2 miles,” but probably very few have had the curiosity to traverse 
those two mile in order to see a place to which their guide-books 
award so cursory a notice. it is describe there, in a couple of 
unattractive lines, as a small fishing village with a church of no 
particular interest except for certain carve and paint wooden panel 
(originally belong to an early edifice) which form an altar-rail. 
but the church at st. creed (the tourist is reminded) has a similar 
decoration far superior in point of preservation and interest, and thus 
even the ecclesiastical disposed are not lure to polearn. so meagre 
a bait is scarce worth swallowing, and a glance at the very steep lane 
which in dry weather presents a carpet of sharp-pointed stones, and 
after rain a muddy watercourse, will almost certainly decide him not 
to expose his motor or his bicycle to risk like these in so sparse 
populate a district. hardly a house has met his eye since he left 
penzance, and the possible trundle of a puncture bicycle for half 
a dozen weary mile seem a high price to pay for the sight of a few 
paint panels. 

polearn, therefore, even in the high noon of the tourist season, is 
little liable to invasion, and for the rest of the year i do not 
suppose that a couple of folk a day traverse those two mile (long one 
at that) of steep and stony gradient. i am not forget the postman 
in this exiguous estimate, for the days are few when, leave his 
pony and cart at the top of the hill, he go as far as the village, 
since but a few hundred yard down the lane there stand a large 
white box, like a sea-trunk, by the side of the road, with a slit for 
letters and a lock door. should he have in his wallet a register 
letter or be the bearer of a parcel too large for insertion in the 
square lip of the sea-trunk, he must needs trudge down the hill and 
deliver the troublesome missive, leave it in person on the owner, and 
receiving some small reward of coin or refreshment for his kindness. 
but such occasion are rare, and his general routine is to take out 
of the box such letters as may have been deposit there, and insert 
in their place such letters as he has brought. these will be call 
for, perhaps that day or perhaps the next, by an emissary from the 
polearn post-office. as for the fishermen of the place, who, in their 
export trade, constitute the chief link of movement between polearn and 
the outside world, they would not dream of taking their catch up the 
steep lane and so, with six mile farther of travel, to the market at 
penzance. the sea route is short and easier, and they deliver their 
wares to the pier-head. thus, though the sole industry of polearn is 
sea-fishing, you will get no fish there unless you have bespoken your 
requirement to one of the fishermen. back come the trawler as empty 
as a haunt house, while their spoils are in the fish-train that is 
speeding to london. 

such isolation of a little community, continued, as it has been, for 
centuries, produce isolation in the individual as well, and nowhere 
will you find greater independence of character than among the people 
of polearn. but they are link together, so it has always seem 
to me, by some mysterious comprehension: it is as if they had all 
been initiate into some ancient rite, inspired and frame by forces 
visible and invisible. the winter storm that batter the coast, the 
vernal spell of the spring, the hot, still summers, the season of rains 
and autumnal decay, have made a spell which, line by line, has been 
communicate to them, concerning the powers, evil and good, that rule 
the world, and manifest themselves in ways benignant or terrible.... 

i came to polearn first at the age of ten, a small boy, weak and 
sickly, and threaten with pulmonary trouble. my father’s business 
kept him in london, while for me abundance of fresh air and a mild 
climate were considered essential conditions if i was to grow to 
manhood. his sister had married the vicar of polearn, richard bolitho, 
himself native to the place, and so it came about that i spent three 
years, as a pay guest, with my relations. richard bolitho own 
a fine house in the place, which he inhabit in preference to the 
vicarage, which he let to a young artist, john evans, on whom the spell 
of polearn had fallen, for from year’s beginning to year’s end he never 
left it. there was a solid roof shelter, open on one side to the 
air, built for me in the garden, and here i live and slept, passing 
scarcely one hour out of the twenty-four behind wall and windows. 
i was out on the bay with the fisher-folk, or wandering along the 
gorse-clad cliff that climb steeple to right and left of the deep 
combe where the village lay, or potter about on the pier-head, or 
bird’s-nesting in the bush with the boys of the village. except on 
sunday and for the few daily hour of my lessons, i might do what i 
pleased so long as i remain in the open air. about the lesson there 
was nothing formidable; my uncle conduct me through flowering bypath 
among the thicket of arithmetic, and made pleasant excursion into the 
elements of latin grammar, and above all, he made me daily give him an 
account, in clear and grammatical sentences, of what had been occupy 
my mind or my movements. should i select to tell him about a walk along 
the cliffs, my speech must be orderly, not vague, slip-shod note of 
what i had observed. in this way, too, he train my observation, for 
he would bid me tell him what flower were in bloom, and what bird 
hover fishing over the sea or were building in the bushes. for that 
i owe him a perennial gratitude, for to observe and to express my 
thought in the clear spoken word became my life’s profession. 

but far more formidable than my weekday task was the prescribed 
routine for sunday. some dark ember compound of calvinism and 
mysticism smoulder in my uncle’s soul, and made it a day of terror. 
his sermon in the morning scorch us with a foretaste of the eternal 
fire reserved for unrepentant sinners, and he was hardly less 
terrify at the children’s service in the afternoon. well do i 
remember his exposition of the doctrine of guardian angels. a child, 
he said, might think himself secure in such angel care, but let him 
beware of commit any of those numerous offence which would cause 
his guardian to turn his face from him, for as sure as there were 
angel to protect us, there were also evil and awful presence which 
were ready to pounce; and on them he dwelt with peculiar gusto. well, 
too, do i remember in the morning sermon his commentary on the carve 
panel of the altar-rails to which i have already alluded. there was 
the angel of the annunciation there, and the angel of the resurrection, 
but not less was there the witch of endor, and, on the fourth panel, 
a scene that concerned me most of all. this fourth panel (he came 
down from his pulpit to trace its time-worn features) represent 
the lych-gate of the church-yard at polearn itself, and indeed the 
resemblance when thus pointed out was remarkable. in the entry stood 
the figure of a robe priest holding up a cross, with which he face 
a terrible creature like a gigantic slug, that rear itself up in 
front of him. that, so ran my uncle’s interpretation, was some evil 
agency, such as he had spoken about to us children, of almost infinite 
malignity and power, which could alone be combat by firm faith and a 
pure heart. below ran the legend “_negotium perambulan in tenebris_” 
from the ninety-first psalm. we should find it translate there, “the 
pestilence that walketh in darkness,” which but feeble render the 
latin. it was more deadly to the soul than any pestilence that can 
only kill the body: it was the thing, the creature, the business that 
trafficke in the outer darkness, a minister of god’s wrath on the 
unrighteous.... 

i could see, as he spoke, the looks which the congregation exchange 
with each other, and knew that his words were evoke a surmise, a 
remembrance. nod and whisper pass between them, they understood 
to what he alluded, and with the inquisitive of boyhood i could 
not rest till i had worm the story out of my friends among the 
fisher-boys, as, next morning, we sat bask and naked in the sun 
after our bathe. one knew one bit of it, one another, but it piece 
together into a truly alarm legend. in bald outline it was as 
follows: 

a church far more ancient than that in which my uncle terrify us 
every sunday had once stood not three hundred yard away, on the shelf 
of level ground below the quarry from which its stone were hewn. the 
owner of the land had pull this down, and erect for himself a house 
on the same site out of these materials, keeping, in a very ecstasy of 
wickedness, the altar, and on this he dine and play dice afterwards. 
but as he grew old some black melancholy seize him, and he would have 
lights burning there all night, for he had deadly fear of the darkness. 
on one winter evening there sprang up such a gale as was never before 
known, which broke in the window of the room where he had supped, and 
extinguish the lamps. yell of terror brought in his servants, who 
found him lie on the floor with the blood stream from his throat. 
as they enter some huge black shadow seem to move away from him, 
crawl across the floor and up the wall and out of the broken window. 

“there he lay a-dying,” said the last of my informants, “and him 
that had been a great burly man was wither to a bag o’ skin, for 
the critter had drain all the blood from him. his last breath was 
a scream, and he holler out the same words as parson read off the 
screen.” 

“_negotium perambulan in tenebris_,” i suggest eagerly. 

“thereabouts. latin anyhow.” 

“and after that?” i asked. 

“nobody would go near the place, and the old house rot and fell in 
ruins till three years ago, when along come mr. dooliss from penzance, 
and built the half of it up again. but he don’t care much about such 
critters, nor about latin neither. he take his bottle of whisky a 
day and get drunk’s a lord in the evening. eh, i’m gwine home to my 
dinner.” 

whatever the authenticity of the legend, i had certainly heard the 
truth about mr. dooliss from penzance, who from that day became 
an object of keen curiosity on my part, the more so because the 
quarry-house adjoin my uncle’s garden. the thing that walk in 
the dark fail to stir my imagination, and already i was so use to 
sleep alone in my shelter that the night had no terror for me. but 
it would be intense exciting to wake at some timeless hour and hear 
mr. dooliss yelling, and conjecture that the thing had got him. 

but by degree the whole story fade from my mind, overscore by 
the more vivid interests of the day, and, for the last two years of 
my out-door life in the vicarage garden, i seldom thought about mr. 
dooliss and the possible fate that might await him for his temerity in 
living in the place where that thing of dark had done business. 
occasional i saw him over the garden fence, a great yellow lump of 
a man, with slow and staggering gait, but never did i set eyes on him 
outside his gate, either in the village street or down on the beach. 
he interfere with none, and no one interfere with him. if he want 
to run the risk of being the prey of the legendary nocturnal monster, 
or quiet drink himself to death, it was his affair. my uncle, so i 
gathered, had made several attempt to see him when first he came to 
live at polearn, but mr. dooliss appear to have no use for parsons, 
but said he was not at home and never return the call. 

* * * * * 

after three years of sun, wind, and rain, i had completely outgrown 
my early symptom and had become a tough, strapping youngster of 
thirteen. i was sent to eton and cambridge, and in due course ate my 
dinner and became a barrister. in twenty years from that time i was 
earn a yearly income of five figures, and had already laid by in 
sound security a sum that brought me dividend which would, for 
one of my simple taste and frugal habits, supply me with all the 
material comfort i need on this side of the grave. the great prize 
of my profession were already within my reach, but i had no ambition 
beckon me on, nor did i want a wife and children, being, i must 
suppose, a natural celibate. in fact there was only one ambition which 
through these busy years had held the lure of blue and far-off hill to 
me, and that was to get back to polearn, and live once more isolated 
from the world with the sea and the gorse-clad hill for play-fellows, 
and the secret that lurk there for exploration. the spell of it had 
been woven about my heart, and i can truly say that there had hardly 
pass a day in all those years in which the thought of it and the 
desire for it had been wholly absent from my mind. though i had been in 
frequent communication with my uncle there during his lifetime, and, 
after his death, with his widow who still live there, i had never 
been back to it since i embark on my profession, for i knew that if 
i went there, it would be a wrench beyond my power to tear myself away 
again. but i had made up my mind that when once i had provided for my 
own independence, i would go back there not to leave it again. and yet 
i did leave it again, and now nothing in the world would induce me to 
turn down the lane from the road that leads from penzance to the land’s 
end, and see the side of the combe rise steep above the roof of the 
village and hear the gull chide as they fish in the bay. one of the 
things invisible, of the dark powers, leap into light, and i saw it 
with my eyes. 

the house where i had spent those three years of boyhood had been left 
for life to my aunt, and when i made known to her my intention of 
coming back to polearn, she suggest that, till i found a suitable 
house or found her proposal unsuitable, i should come to live with her. 

“the house is too big for a lone old woman,” she wrote, “and i have 
often thought of quit and taking a little cottage sufficient for me 
and my requirements. but come and share it, my dear, and if you find 
me troublesome, you or i can go. you may want solitude--most people in 
polearn do--and will leave me. or else i will leave you: one of the 
main reason of my stopping here all these years was a feeling that i 
must not let the old house starve. house starve, you know, if they 
are not live in. they die a lingering death; the spirit in them grow 
weak and weaker, and at last fade out of them. isn’t this nonsense 
to your london notions?...” 

naturally i accept with warmth this tentative arrangement, and on an 
evening in june found myself at the head of the lane leading down to 
polearn, and once more i descended into the steep valley between the 
hills. time had stood still apparently for the combe, the dilapidated 
signpost (or its successor) pointed a rickety finger down the lane, 
and a few hundred yard farther on was the white box for the exchange 
of letters. point after remember point met my eye, and what i saw 
was not shrunk, as is often the case with the revisite scene of 
childhood, into a small scale. there stood the post-office, and there 
the church and close beside it the vicarage, and beyond, the tall 
shrubbery which separate the house for which i was bound from the 
road, and beyond that again the grey roof of the quarry-house damp and 
shining with the moist evening wind from the sea. all was exactly as i 
remember it, and, above all, that sense of seclusion and isolation. 
somewhere above the tree-tops climb the lane which join the main 
road to penzance, but all that had become immeasurable distant. the 
years that had pass since last i turn in at the well-known gate 
fade like a frosty breath, and vanish in this warm, soft air. there 
were law-courts somewhere in memory’s dull book which, if i care to 
turn the pages, would tell me that i had made a name and a great income 
there. but the dull book was closed now, for i was back in polearn, and 
the spell was woven around me again. 

and if polearn was unchanged, so too was aunt hester, who met me at the 
door. dainty and china-white she had always been, and the years had 
not age but only refined her. as we sat and talk after dinner she 
spoke of all that had happen in polearn in that score of years, and 
yet somehow the change of which she spoke seem but to confirm the 
immutable of it all. as the recollection of name came back to me, i 
ask her about the quarry-house and mr. dooliss, and her face gloom 
a little as with the shadow of a cloud on a spring day. 

“yes, mr. dooliss,” she said, “poor mr. dooliss, how well i remember 
him, though it must be ten years and more since he died. i never wrote 
to you about it, for it was all very dreadful, my dear, and i did not 
want to darken your memory of polearn. your uncle always thought that 
something of the sort might happen if he went on in his wicked, drunken 
ways, and worse than that, and though nobody knew exactly what took 
place, it was the sort of thing that might have been anticipated.” 

“but what more or less happened, aunt hester?” i asked. 

“well, of course i can’t tell you everything, for no one knew it. but 
he was a very sinful man, and the scandal about him at newlyn was 
shocking. and then he lived, too, in the quarry-house.... i wonder 
if by any chance you remember a sermon of your uncle’s when he got 
out of the pulpit and explain that panel in the altar-rails, the 
one, i mean, with the horrible creature rear itself up outside the 
lych-gate?” 

“yes, i remember perfectly,” said i. 

“ah. it made an impression on you, i suppose, and so it did on all who 
heard him, and that impression got stamp and brand on us all when 
the catastrophe occurred. somehow mr. dooliss got to hear about your 
uncle’s sermon, and in some drunken fit he broke into the church and 
smashed the panel to atoms. he seem to have thought that there was 
some magic in it, and that if he destroy that he would get rid of 
the terrible fate that was threaten him. for i must tell you that 
before he committed that dreadful sacrilege he had been a haunt man: 
he hate and fear darkness, for he thought that the creature on the 
panel was on his track, but that as long as he kept lights burning 
it could not touch him. but the panel, to his disorder mind, was 
the root of his terror, and so, as i said, he broke into the church 
and attempted--you will see why i said ‘attempted’--to destroy it. it 
certainly was found in splinter next morning, when your uncle went 
into church for matins, and knowing mr. dooliss’s fear of the panel, 
he went across to the quarry-house afterwards and tax him with its 
destruction. the man never deny it; he boast of what he had done. 
there he sat, though it was early morning, drink his whisky. 

“‘i’ve settled your thing for you,’ he said, ‘and your sermon too. a 
fig for such superstitions.’ 

“your uncle left him without answer his blasphemy, meaning to go 
straight into penzance and give information to the police about this 
outrage to the church, but on his way back from the quarry-house he 
went into the church again, in order to be able to give detail about 
the damage, and there in the screen was the panel, untouched and 
uninjured. and yet he had himself seen it smashed, and mr. dooliss had 
confessed that the destruction of it was his work. but there it was, 
and whether the power of god had mend it or some other power, who 
knows?” 

this was polearn indeed, and it was the spirit of polearn that made me 
accept all aunt hester was telling me as attested fact. it had happen 
like that. she went on in her quiet voice. 

“your uncle recognise that some power beyond police was at work, and 
he did not go to penzance or give information about the outrage, for 
the evidence of it had vanished.” 

a sudden spate of scepticism swept over me. 

“there must have been some mistake,” i said. “it hadn’t been broken....” 

she smiled. 

“yes, my dear, but you have been in london so long,” she said. “let 
me, anyhow, tell you the rest of my story. that night, for some reason, 
i could not sleep. it was very hot and airless; i dare say you will 
think that the sultry conditions account for my wakefulness. once and 
again, as i went to the window to see if i could not admit more air, i 
could see from it the quarry-house, and i notice the first time that 
i left my bed that it was blazing with lights. but the second time i 
saw that it was all in darkness, and as i wonder at that, i heard a 
terrible scream, and the moment afterwards the steps of someone coming 
at full speed down the road outside the gate. he yell as he ran; 
‘light, light!’ he call out. ‘give me light, or it will catch me!’ it 
was very terrible to hear that, and i went to rouse my husband, who was 
sleep in the dressing-room across the passage. he waste no time, 
but by now the whole village was arouse by the screams, and when he 
got down to the pier he found that all was over. the tide was low, and 
on the rocks at its foot was lie the body of mr. dooliss. he must 
have cut some artery when he fell on those sharp edge of stone, for 
he had bled to death, they thought, and though he was a big burly man, 
his corpse was but skin and bones. yet there was no pool of blood round 
him, such as you would have expected. just skin and bone as if every 
drop of blood in his body had been suck out of him!” 

she lean forward. 

“you and i, my dear, know what happened,” she said, “or at least 
can guess. god has his instrument of vengeance on those who bring 
wicked into place that have been holy. dark and mysterious are his 
ways.” 

now what i should have thought of such a story if it had been told me 
in london i can easily imagine. there was such an obvious explanation: 
the man in question had been a drunkard, what wonder if the demon of 
delirium pursue him? but here in polearn it was different. 

“and who is in the quarry-house now?” i asked. “years ago the 
fisher-boys told me the story of the man who first built it and of his 
horrible end. and now again it has happened. surely no one has venture 
to inhabit it once more?” 

i saw in her face, even before i ask that question, that somebody had 
done so. 

“yes, it is live in again,” said she, “for there is no end to the 
blindness.... i don’t know if you remember him. he was tenant of the 
vicarage many years ago.” 

“john evans,” said i. 

“yes. such a nice fellow he was too. your uncle was pleased to get so 
good a tenant. and now----” 

she rose. 

“aunt hester, you shouldn’t leave your sentence unfinished,” i said. 

she shook her head. 

“my dear, that sentence will finish itself,” she said. “but what a time 
of night! i must go to bed, and you too, or they will think we have to 
keep lights burning here through the dark hours.” 

* * * * * 

before get into bed i drew my curtains wide and open all the 
window to the warm tide of the sea air that flow soft in. look 
out into the garden i could see in the moonlight the roof of the 
shelter, in which for three years i had lived, gleam with dew. that, 
as much as anything, brought back the old days to which i had now 
returned, and they seem of one piece with the present, as if no gap 
of more than twenty years sunder them. the two flow into one like 
globule of mercury unite into a soft shining globe, of mysterious 
lights and reflections. then, raise my eyes a little, i saw against 
the black hill-side the window of the quarry-house still alight. 

morning, as is so often the case, brought no shatter of my illusion. 
as i began to regain consciousness, i fancy that i was a boy again 
waking up in the shelter in the garden, and though, as i grew more 
widely awake, i smile at the impression, that on which it was base 
i found to be indeed true. it was sufficient now as then to be here, 
to wander again on the cliffs, and hear the pop of the ripen 
seed-pods on the gorse-bushes; to stray along the shore to the 
bathing-cove, to float and drift and swim in the warm tide, and bask 
on the sand, and watch the gull fishing, to lounge on the pier-head 
with the fisher-folk, to see in their eyes and hear in their quiet 
speech the evidence of secret things not so much known to them as 
part of their instinct and their very being. there were powers and 
presence about me; the white poplar that stood by the stream that 
babble down the valley knew of them, and show a glimpse of their 
knowledge sometimes, like the gleam of their white underleaves; the 
very cobble that paved the street were soaked in it.... all that i 
want was to lie there and grow soaked in it too; unconsciously, as 
a boy, i had done that, but now the process must be conscious. i must 
know what stir of forces, fruitful and mysterious, seethe along the 
hill-side at noon, and sparkle at night on the sea. they could be 
known, they could even be control by those who were master of the 
spell, but never could they be spoken of, for they were dwell in the 
innermost, graft into the eternal life of the world. there were dark 
secret as well as these clear, kindly powers, and to these no doubt 
belong the _negotium perambulan in tenebris_ which, though of deadly 
malignity, might be regard not only as evil, but as the avenge of 
sacrilegious and impious deeds.... all this was part of the spell of 
polearn, of which the seed had long lain dormant in me. but now they 
were sprouting, and who knew what strange flower would unfold on their 
stems? 

it was not long before i came across john evans. one morning, as i lay 
on the beach, there came shamble across the sand a man stout and 
middle-aged with the face of silenus. he pause as he drew near and 
regard me from narrow eyes. 

“why, you’re the little chap that use to live in the parson’s garden,” 
he said. “don’t you recognise me?” 

i saw who it was when he spoke: his voice, i think, instruct me, and 
recognise it, i could see the features of the strong, alert young man 
in this gross caricature. 

“yes, you’re john evans,” i said. “you use to be very kind to me: you 
use to draw pictures for me.” 

“so i did, and i’ll draw you some more. been bathing? that’s a risky 
performance. you never know what lives in the sea, nor what lives on 
the land for that matter. not that i heed them. i stick to work and 
whisky. god! i’ve learned to paint since i saw you, and drink too for 
that matter. i live in the quarry-house, you know, and it’s a powerful 
thirsty place. come and have a look at my things if you’re passing. 
stay with your aunt, are you? i could do a wonderful portrait of 
her. interesting face; she know a lot. people who live at polearn get 
to know a lot, though i don’t take much stock in that sort of knowledge 
myself.” 

i do not know when i have been at once so repel and interested. 
behind the mere gross of his face there lurk something which, 
while it appalled, yet fascinate me. his thick lisp speech had the 
same quality. and his paintings, what would they be like?... 

“i was just go home,” i said. “i’ll gladly come in, if you’ll allow 
me.” 

he took me through the untended and overgrown garden into the house 
which i had never yet entered. a great grey cat was sun itself in 
the window, and an old woman was lay lunch in a corner of the cool 
hall into which the door opened. it was built of stone, and the carve 
moulding let into the walls, the fragment of gargoyle and sculpture 
images, bore testimony to the truth of its have been built out of 
the demolish church. in one corner was an oblong and carve wooden 
table litter with a painter’s apparatus and stack of canvas lean 
against the walls. 

he jerk his thumb towards a head of an angel that was built into the 
mantelpiece and giggled. 

“quite a sanctify air,” he said, “so we tone it down for the 
purpose of ordinary life by a different sort of art. have a drink? no? 
well, turn over some of my pictures while i put myself to rights.” 

he was justified in his own estimate of his skill: he could paint (and 
apparently he could paint anything), but never have i seen pictures 
so inexplicably hellish. there were exquisite study of trees, and 
you knew that something lurk in the flicker shadows. there was a 
drawing of his cat sun itself in the window, even as i had just now 
seen it, and yet it was no cat but some beast of awful malignity. there 
was a boy stretch naked on the sands, not human, but some evil thing 
which had come out of the sea. above all there were pictures of his 
garden overgrown and jungle-like, and you knew that in the bush were 
presence ready to spring out on you.... 

“well, do you like my style?” he said as he came up, glass in hand. 
(the tumbler of spirits that he held had not been diluted.) “i try to 
paint the essence of what i see, not the mere husk and skin of it, but 
its nature, where it come from and what gave it birth. there’s much 
in common between a cat and a fuchsia-bush if you look at them close 
enough. everything came out of the slime of the pit, and it’s all go 
back there. i should like to do a picture of you some day. i’d hold the 
mirror up to nature, as that old lunatic said.” 

after this first meeting i saw him occasional throughout the month 
of that wonderful summer. often he kept to his house and to his 
painting for days together, and then perhaps some evening i would find 
him lounge on the pier, always alone, and every time we met thus the 
repulsion and interest grew, for every time he seem to have gone 
farther along a path of secret knowledge towards some evil shrine 
where complete initiation await him.... and then sudden the end 
came. 

i had met him thus one evening on the cliff while the october sunset 
still burn in the sky, but over it with amazing rapid there spread 
from the west a great black of cloud such as i have never seen for 
denseness. the light was suck from the sky, the dusk fell in ever 
thick layers. he sudden became conscious of this. 

“i must get back as quick as i can,” he said. “it will be dark in a few 
minutes, and my servant is out. the lamp will not be lit.” 

he step out with extraordinary brisk for one who shamble and 
could scarcely lift his feet, and soon broke out into a stumble run. 
in the gathering dark i could see that his face was moist with the 
dew of some unspoken terror. 

“you must come with me,” he panted, “for so we shall get the lights 
burning the sooner. i cannot do without light.” 

i had to exert myself to the full to keep up with him, for terror 
wing him, and even so i fell behind, so that when i came to the 
garden gate, he was already half-way up the path to the house. i saw 
him enter, leave the door wide, and found him fumble with matches. 
but his hand so tremble that he could not transfer the light to the 
wick of the lamp. 

“but what’s the hurry about?” i asked. 

sudden his eyes focus themselves on the open door behind me, and he 
jump from his seat beside the table which had once been the altar of 
god, with a gasp and a scream. 

“no, no!” he cried. “keep it off!...” 

i turn and saw what he had seen. the thing had enter and now was 
swift slide across the floor towards him, like some gigantic 
caterpillar. a stale phosphorescent light came from it, for though the 
dusk had grown to black outside, i could see it quite distinct in 
the awful light of its own presence. from it too there came an odour 
of corruption and decay, as from slime that has long lain below water. 
it seem to have no head, but on the front of it was an orifice of 
pucker skin which open and shut and slaver at the edges. it was 
hairless, and slug-like in shape and in texture. as it advanced its 
fore-part rear itself from the ground, like a snake about to strike, 
and it fasten on him.... 

at that sight, and with the yell of his agony in my ears, the panic 
which had struck me relax into a hopeless courage, and with palsied, 
impotent hand i try to lay hold of the thing. but i could not: 
though something material was there, it was impossible to grasp it; 
my hand sunk in it as in thick mud. it was like wrestle with a 
nightmare. 

i think that but a few seconds elapse before all was over. the scream 
of the wretched man sank to moan and mutter as the thing fell 
on him: he pant once or twice and was still. for a moment long 
there came gurgle and suck noises, and then it slid out even as 
it had entered. i lit the lamp which he had fumble with, and there 
on the floor he lay, no more than a rind of skin in loose fold over 
project bones. 




at the farmhouse 




at the farmhouse 


the dusk of a november day was fall fast when john aylsford came 
out of his lodging in the cobble street and start to walk brisk 
along the road which led eastward by the shore of the bay. he had been 
at work while the daylight serve him, and now, when the gathering 
dark wean him from his easel, he was accustomed to go out for air 
and exercise and cover half a dozen mile before he return to his 
solitary supper. 

to-night there were but few folk abroad, and those scud along before 
the strong south-westerly gale which had roar and rage all day, or, 
leaning forward, beat their way against it. no fishing-boats had put 
forth on that madden sea, but had lain moor behind the quay-wall, 
toss uneasy with the backwash of the great breaker that swept 
by the pier-head. the tide was low now, and they rest on the sandy 
beach, black blot against the smooth wet surface which sombre 
reflect the last flame in the west. the sun had gone down in a wrack 
of broken and flying clouds, angry and menace with promise of a wild 
night to come. 

for many days past, at this hour john aylsford had start eastward 
for his tramp along the rough coast road by the bay. the last high 
tide had swept shingle and sand over section of it, and fragment of 
seaweed, driven by the wind, bowl along the ruts. the heavy boom of 
the breaker sound sullen in the dusk, and white tower of foam 
appear and disappear show how high they leap over the reef 
of rock beyond the headland. for half a mile or so, slant himself 
against the gale he pursue this road, then turn up a narrow muddy 
lane sunk deep between the bank on either side of it. it ran steeple 
uphill, dip down again, and join the main road inland. have 
arrive at the junction, john aylsford went eastward no more, but 
turn his steps to the west, arriving, half an hour after he had set 
out, on the top of the hill above the village he had quitted, though 
five minutes’ ascent would have taken him from his lodgings to the spot 
where he now stood look down on the scattered lights below him. the 
wind had blown all wayfarer indoors, and now in front of him the road 
that cross this high and desolate table-land, sprinkle here and 
there with lonely cottage and solitary farms, lay empty and grey 
glimmer in the wind-swept darkness, not more than faint visible. 

many times during this past month had john aylsford made this long 
detour, start eastward from the village and coming back by a wide 
circuit, and now, as on these other occasions, he pause in the black 
shelter of the hedge through which the wind hiss and whistled, 
crouch there in the shadow as if to make sure that none had follow 
him, and that the road in front lay void of passengers, for he had no 
mind to be observe by any on these journeyings. and as he pause he 
let his hate blaze up, warm him for the work the accomplishment of 
which alone could enable him to recapture any peace or profit from 
life. to-night he was determined to release himself from the millstone 
which for so many years had hung round his neck, drown him in bitter 
waters. from long brood over the idea of the deed, he had quite 
cease to feel any horror of it. the death of that drunken slut was not 
a matter for qualm or uneasiness; the world would be well rid of her, 
and he more than well. 

no spark of tender for the handsome fisher-girl who once had been 
his model and for twenty years had been his wife pierce the black 
of his purpose. just here it was that he had seen her first when on a 
summer holiday he had lodge with a couple of friends in the farmhouse 
towards which his way now lay. she was coming up the hill with the 
late sunset gilding her face, and, breathing quick from the ascent, 
had lean on the wall close by with a smile and a glance for the 
young man. she had sat to him, and the autumn brought the sequel to 
the summer in his marriage. he had bought from her uncle the little 
farmhouse where he had lodged, add to its modest accommodation a 
studio and a bedroom above it, and there he had seen the flicker of 
what had never been love, die out, and over the cold ashes of its 
ember the poisonous lichen of hatred spread fast. early in their 
married life she had taken to drink, and had sunk into a degrade of 
soul and body that seem bottomless, drag him with her, down and 
down, in the grip of a force that was hardly human in its malignity. 

often during the wretched years that follow he had try to leave 
her; he had offer to settle the farm on her and make adequate 
provision for her, but she had clung to the possession of him, not, 
it would seem, from any affection for him, but for a reason exactly 
opposite, namely, that her hatred of him fed and glut itself on the 
sight of his ruin. it was as if, in obedience to some hellish power, 
she set herself to spoil his life, his powers, his possibilities, by 
tie him to herself. and by the aid of that power, so sometimes he had 
thought, she enforce her will on him, for, plan as he might to cut the 
whole dreadful business and leave the wreck behind him, he had never 
been able to consolidate his resolve into action. there, but a few 
mile away, was the station from which ran the train that would bear 
him out of this ancient western kingdom, where the belief in spell 
and superstition grew rank as the herbage in that soft enervate air, 
and set him in the dry hard light of cities. the way lay open, but he 
could not take it; something unseen and potent, of grim inflexibility, 
held him back.... 

he had pass no one on his way here, and satisfy now that in the 
dark he could proceed without fear of being recognise if a chance 
wayfarer came from the direction in which he was going, he left the 
shelter of the hedge, and struck out into the stormy sea of that 
stupendous gale. even as a man in the grip of imminent death see his 
past life spread itself out in front of him for his final survey before 
the book is closed, so now, on the brink of the new life from which the 
deed on which he was determined alone separate him, john aylsford, as 
he battle his advance through this great tempest, turn over page 
after page of his own wretched chronicles, feeling already strange 
detached from them; it was as if he read the sordid and enslave annals 
of another, wonder at them, half-pitying, half-despising him who had 
allow himself to be bound so long in this ruinous noose. 

yes; it had been just that, a noose drawn ever tight round his neck, 
while he choke and struggle all unavailingly. but there was another 
noose which should very soon now be drawn rapid and finally tight, 
and the drawing of that in his own strong hand would free him. as he 
dwelt on that for a moment, his finger stroke and pat the hank of 
whipcord that lay white and tough in his pocket. a noose, a knot drawn 
quick taut, and he would have paid her back with justice and swift 
mercy for the long strangle which he had suffered. 

voluntary and eager at the beginning had he allow her to slip the 
noose about him, for ellen trenair’s beauty in those days, so long past 
and so everlastingly regretted, had been enough to ensnare a man. he 
had been warn at the time, by hint and half-spoken suggestion, that 
it was ill for a man to mate with a girl of that dark and ill-famed 
family, or for a woman to wed a boy in whose vein ran the blood of 
jona trenair, once methodist preacher, who learned on one all-hallows’ 
eve a dark gospel than he had ever preach before. what had happen 
to the girl who had married into that dwindle family, now all 
but extinct? one, before her marriage was a year old, had gone off 
her head, and now, a wither and ancient crone, mow and gibber 
about the street of the village, pick garbage from the gutter and 
munch it in her toothless jaws. another, ellen’s own mother, had 
been found hanging from the banister of her stairs, stark and grim. 
then there was young frank pencarris, who had wed ellen’s sister. 
he had sunk into an awful melancholy, and sat tracing on sheet of 
paper the vision that beset his eyes, headless shapes, and foam 
mouths, and the image of the spawn of hell.... john aylsford, in those 
early days, had laugh to scorn these old-wife tale of spell and 
sorceries: they belong to age long past, whereas fair ellen trenair 
was of the lovely present, and had lit desire in his heart which she 
alone could assuage. he had no use, in the bright of her eye, for 
such shadow and superstitions; her beam dispel them. 

bitter and black as midnight had his enlightenment been, darken 
through dubious dusk till the mirk of the pit itself envelop him. 
his laughter at the notion that in this twentieth century spell and 
sorcery could survive, grew silent on his lips. he had seen the 
cattle of a neighbour who had offend one whom it was wise not to 
cross, dwindle and pine, though there were rich pasture for their 
grazing, till the rib-bones stuck out like the timber of stranded 
wrecks. he had seen the spring on another farm run dry at lambing-time 
because the owner, sceptic like himself, had refuse that bounty, which 
all prudent folk paid to the wizard of mareuth, who, like ellen, was of 
the blood of jona trenair. from scorn and laughter he had waver to 
an uneasy wonder, and from wonder his mind had pass to the conviction 
that there were powers occult and terrible which strove in dark and 
prevailed, secret and spell that could send disease on man and beast, 
dark incantations, known to few, which could maim and cripple, and of 
these few his wife was one. his reason revolted, but some conviction, 
deep than reason, held its own. to such a view it seem that the 
deed he contemplate was no crime, but rather an act of obedience to 
the ordinance “thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.” and the sense of 
detachment was over that, even as over the memory that ooze up in 
his mind. somebody--not he--who had plan everything very careful 
was in the next hour go to put an end to his bondage. 

so the years had passed, he flounder ever deep in the slough into 
which he was plunged, out of which while she live he could never 
emerge. for the last year, she, weary of his perpetual presence at 
the farm, had allow him to take a lodging in the village. she did 
not loose her hold over him, for the days were few on which she did 
not come with demand for a handful of shilling to procure her the 
raw spirits which alone could slake her thirst. sometimes as he sat 
at work there in the north room look on to the small garden-yard, 
she would come lurch up the path, with her bloated crimson face set 
on the wither neck, and tap at his window with finger shrivel 
like bird’s claws. body and limb were no more than bone over which 
the wrinkle skin was stretched, but her face bulge monstrous with 
layer of fat. he would give her whatever he had about him, and if 
it was not enough, she would plant herself there, grin at him 
and wheedle him, or with scream and curse threaten him with 
such fate as he had known to overtake those who cross her will. but 
usually he gave her enough to satisfy her for that day and perhaps the 
next, for thus she would the more quick drink herself to death. yet 
death seem long in coming.... 

he remember well how first the notion of killing her came into his 
head, just a little seed, small as that of mustard, which lay long 
in barrenness. only the bare idea of it was there, like an abstract 
proposition. then imperceptible in the fruitful dark of his mind, 
it must have begun to sprout, for presently a tendril, still soft and 
white, prod out into the daylight. he almost pushed it back again, 
for fear that she, by some divine art, should probe his purpose. 
but when next she came for supplies, he saw no gleam of surmise in 
her red-rimmed eyes, and she took her money and went her way, and 
his purpose put forth another leaf, and the stem of it grew sappy. 
all autumn through it had flourished, and grown tree-like, and fresh 
ideas, fresh details, fresh precautions, flock there like building 
bird and made it gay with singing. he sat under the shadow of it and 
listen with brighten hope to their song; never had there been 
such peerless melody. they knew their tune now, there was no need for 
any further rehearsal. 

he began to wonder how soon he would be back on the road again, with 
face turn from this buffet wind, and on his way home. his business 
would not take him long; the central deed of it would be over in a 
couple of minutes, and he did not anticipate delay about the setting 
to work on it, for by seven o’clock of the evening, as well he knew, 
she was usually snore in the oblivion of complete drunkenness, 
and even if she was not as far gone as that, she would certainly be 
incapable of any serious resistance. after that, a quarter of an hour 
more would finish the job, and he would leave the house secure already 
from any chance of detection. night after night during these last ten 
days he had been up here, peer from the dark into the light 
room where she sat, then listen for her step on the stairs as 
she stumble up to bed, or hearing her snore as she slept in her 
chair below. the out-house, he knew, was well stock with paraffin; 
he need no further apparatus than the whipcord and the match he 
carry with him. then back he would go along the exact route by which 
he had come, re-entering the village again from the eastwards, in which 
direction he had set out. 

this walk of his was now a known and establish habit; half the 
village during the last week or two had seen him every evening set 
forth along the coast road, for a tramp in the dusk when the light 
fail for his painting, and had seen him come back again as they hung 
about and smoke in the warm dusk, a couple of hour later. none knew 
of his detour to the main road which took him westwards again above 
the village and so to the stretch of bleak upland along which now he 
fought his way against the gale. always round about the hour of eight 
he had enter the village again from the other side, and had stop 
and chat with the loiterers. to-night, no later than was usual, he 
would come up the cobble road again, and give “good night” to any who 
linger there outside the public-house. in this wild wind it was not 
likely that there would be such, and if so, no matter; he had been seen 
already setting forth on his usual walk by the coast of the bay, and 
if none outside saw him return, none could see the true chart of his 
walk. by eight he should be back to his supper, there would be a soused 
herring for him, and a cut of cheese, and the kettle would be singing 
on the hob for his hot whisky-toddy. he would have a keen edge for the 
enjoyment of them to-night; he would drink long health to the damn 
and the dead. not till to-morrow, probably, would the news of what had 
happen reach him, for the farmhouse lay lonely and sheltered by the 
wood of firs. however high might mount the beacon of its blazing, it 
would scarcely, screen by the tall trees, light up the western sky, 
and be seen from the village nestling below the steep hill-crest. 

by now john aylsford had come to the fir wood which border the road 
on the left, and, as he pass into its shelter, cut off from him the 
violence of the gale. all its branch were astir with the sound of 
some vexed, overhead sea, and the trunks that upheld them creak and 
groan in the fury of the tempest. somewhere behind the thick scud 
of flying cloud the moon must have risen, for the road glimmer more 
visibly, and the toss black of the branch was clear enough 
against the grey tumult overhead. behind the tempest she rode in serene 
skies, and in the murderous clarity of his mind he liken himself to 
her. just for half an hour more he would still grope and scheme and 
achieve in this hurly-burly, and then, like a balloon released, soar 
through the cloud and find serenity. a couple of hundred yard now 
would take him round the corner of the wood; from there the miry lane 
led from the high-road to the farm. 

he hasten rather than retarded his go as he drew near, for the 
wood, though it roar with the gale, began to whisper to him of 
memories. often in that summer before his marriage had he stray 
out at dusk into it, certain that before he had gone many pace he 
would see a shadow flit towards him through the firs, or hear the 
crack of dry twig in the stillness. here was their tryst; she would 
come up from the village with the excuse of bring fish to the 
farmhouse, after the boat had come in, and desert the high-road 
make a short cut through the wood. like some distant blink of lightning 
the memory of those evenings quiver distantly on his mind, and he 
quicken his step. the years that follow had kill and bury 
those recollections, but who knew what stirring of corpse and dry 
bone might not yet come to them if he linger there? he finger the 
whipcord in his pocket, and launch out, beyond the trees, into the 
full fury of the gale. 

the farmhouse was near now and in full view, a black blot against 
the clouds. a beam of light shone from an uncurtained window on the 
ground-floor, and the rest was dark. even thus had he seen it for many 
nights past, and well knew what sight would greet him as he stole up 
nearer. and even so it was to-night, for there she sat in the studio he 
had built, betwixt table and fireplace with the bottle near her, and 
her wither hand stretch out to the blaze, and the huge bloated 
face sway on her shoulders. beside her to-night were the wreck 
remains of a chair, and the first sight that he caught of her was to 
show her feed the fire with the broken pieces of it. it had been too 
troublesome to bring fresh log from the store of wood; to break up a 
chair was the easy task. 

she stir and sat more upright, then reach out for the bottle that 
stood beside her, and drank from the mouth of it. she drank and lick 
her lip and drank again, and stagger to her feet, tripping on the 
edge of the hearthrug. for the moment that seem to anger her, and 
with clench teeth and point finger she mumble at it; then once 
more she drank, and lurch forward, took the lamp from the table. 
with it in her hand she shuffle to the door, and the room was left to 
the flicker firelight. a moment afterwards, the bedroom window above 
sprang into light, an oblong of bright illumination. 

as soon as that appear he crept round the house to the door. he 
gently turn the handle of it, and found it unlocked. inside was a 
small passage entrance, on the left of which ascend the stairs to 
the bedroom above the studio. all was silent there, but from where he 
stood he could see that the door into the bedroom was open, for a shaft 
of light from the lamp she had carry up with her was shed on to the 
landing there.... everything was smooth itself out to render his 
course most easy. even the gale was his friend, for it would be bellows 
for the fire. he slip off his shoes, leave them on the mat, and 
drew the whipcord from his pocket. he made a noose in it, and began to 
ascend the stairs. they were well-built of season oak, and no creak 
betray his advance footfall. 

at the top he paused, listen for any stir of movement within, but 
there was nothing to be heard but the sound of heavy breathing from 
the bed that lay to the left of the door and out of sight. she had 
thrown herself down there, he guessed, without undressing, leave 
the lamp to burn itself out. he could see it through the open door 
already beginning to flicker; on the wall behind it were a couple of 
water-colours, pictures of his own, one of the little wall garden by 
the farm, the other of the pinewood of their tryst. well he remember 
painting them: she would sit by him as he work with prattle and 
singing. he look at them now quite detachedly; they seem to him 
wonderful good, and he envy the artist that fresh, clean skill. 
perhaps he would take them down presently and carry them away with him. 

very soft now he advanced into the room, and look round the corner 
of the door, he saw her, sprawl and fully dress on the broad 
bed. she lay on her back, eyes closed and mouth open, her dull grey 
hair spread over the pillow. evidently she had not made the bed that 
day, for she lay stretch on the crumple back-turned blankets. a 
hair-brush was on the floor beside her; it seem to have fallen from 
her hand. he move quick towards her. 

* * * * * 

he put on his shoe again when he came to the foot of the stairs, 
carry the lamp with him and the two pictures which he had taken down 
from the wall, and went into the studio. he set the lamp on the table 
and drew down the blinds, and his eye fell on the half-empty whisky 
bottle from which he had seen her drinking. though his hand was quite 
steady and his mind compose and tranquil, there was yet at the back 
of it some impression that was slow developing, and a good dose of 
spirits would no doubt expunge that. he drank half a tumbler of it raw 
and undiluted, and though it seem no more than water in his mouth, 
he soon felt that it was do its work and sponge away from his 
mind the picture that had been outline itself there. in a couple 
of minutes he was quite himself again, and could afford to wonder 
and laugh at the illusion, for it was no less than that, which had 
been gain on him. for though he could distinct remember drawing 
the noose tight, and seeing the face grow black, and struggle with 
the convulsive movements of those wither limb that soon lay quiet 
again, there had sprung up in his mind some unaccountable impression 
that what he had left there huddle on the bed was not just the bundle 
of wither limb and strangle neck, but the body of a young girl, 
smooth of skin and golden of hair, with mouth that smile drowsily. 
she had been asleep when he came in, and now was half-awake, and was 
stirring and stretch herself. in what dim region of his mind that 
image had form itself, he had no idea; all he care about now was 
that his drink had shatter it again, and he could proceed with order 
and method to make all secure. just one drop more first: how lucky it 
was that this morning he had been liberal with his money when she came 
to the village, for he would have been sorry to have gone without that 
fillip to his nerves. 

he look at his watch, and saw to his satisfaction that it was still 
only a little after seven o’clock. half an hour’s walking, with this 
gale to speed his steps, would easily carry him from door to door, 
round the detour which approach the village from the east, and a 
quarter of an hour, so he reckoned, would be sufficient to accomplish 
thorough what remain to be done here. he must not hurry and thus 
overlook some precaution needful for his safety, though, on the other 
hand, he would be glad to be gone from the house as soon as might 
be, and he proceed to set about his work without delay. there was 
brushwood and fire-kindling to be brought in from the wood-shed in 
the yard, and he made three journeys, return each time with his 
arms full, before he had brought in what he judge to be sufficient. 
most of this he pile in a loose heap in the studio; with the rest he 
ascend once more to the bedroom above and made a heap of it there in 
the middle of the floor. he took the curtains down from the windows, 
for they would make a fine wick for the paraffin, and stuff them into 
the pile. before he left, he look once more at what lay on the bed, 
and marvel at the illusion which the whisky had dispelled, and as 
he looked, the sense that he was free mount and bubble in his head. 
the thing seem scarcely human at all; it was a monster from which he 
had deliver himself, and now, with the thought of that to warm him, 
he was no long eager to get through with his work and be gone, for 
it was all part of that act of riddance which he had accomplished, and 
he glory in it. soon, when all was ready, he would come back once 
more and soak the fuel and set light to it, and purge with fire the 
corruption that lay hump on the bed. 

the fury of the gale had increase with nightfall, and as he went 
downstairs again he heard the rattle of loosen tile on the roof, and 
the crash as they shatter themselves on the cobble of the yard. at 
that a sudden misgiving made his breath to catch in his throat, as he 
picture to himself some maniac blast fall on the house and crashing 
in the wall that now tremble and shuddered. supposing the whole 
house fell, even if he escape with his life from the topple ruin, 
what would his life be worth? there would be search made in the fallen 
débris to find the body of her who lay strangle with the whipcord 
round her neck, and he picture to himself the slow, relentless march 
of justice. he had bought whipcord only yesterday at a shop in the 
village, insist on its strength and tough ... would it be wise 
now, this moment, to untie the noose and take it back with him or add 
it to his brushwood?... he pause on the staircase, ponder that; but 
his flesh quake at the thought, and master of himself though he had 
been during those few struggle minutes, he distrust his power of 
making himself handle once more that which could struggle no longer. 
but even as he try to screw his courage to the point, the violence 
of the squall passed, and the shudder house brace itself again. 
he need not fear that; the gale was his friend that would blow on the 
flames, not his enemy. the blast that trumpet overhead were the 
voice of the ally who had come to aid him. 

all was arrange then upstairs for the pour of the paraffin and the 
lighting of the pyre; it remain but to make similar disposition in 
the studio. he would stay to feed the flame till they rage beyond all 
power of extinction; and now he began to plan the line of his retreat. 
there were two door in the studio: one by the fireplace which open 
on to the little garden; the other gave into the passage entrance from 
which mount the stairs and so to the door through which he had come 
into the house. he decided to use the garden-door for his exit; but 
when he came to open it, he found that the key was stiff in the rusty 
lock, and did not yield to his efforts. there was no use in waste 
time over that; it made no difference through which door he finally 
emerged, and he began pile up his heap of wood at that end of the 
room. the lamp was burning low; but the fire, which only so few minutes 
ago she had fed with a broken chair, shone brightly, and a flaming 
ember from it would serve to set light to his conflagration. there was 
a straw mat in front of it, which would make fine kindling, and with 
these two fires, one in the bedroom upstairs and the other here, there 
would be no mistake about the incinerate of the house and all that 
it contained. his own crime, if crime it was, would perish, too, and 
all evidence thereof, victim and whipcord, and the very wall of the 
house of sin and hate. it was a great deed and a fine adventure, and 
as the liquor he had drunk began to circulate more buoyant through 
his veins, he glory at the thought of the approach consummation. 
he would slip out of the sordid tragedy of his past life, as from a 
discard garment that he threw into the bonfire he would soon kindle. 

all was ready now for the soaking of the fuel he had pile with the 
paraffin, and he went out to the shed in the yard where the barrel 
stood. a big tin ewer stood beside it, which he fill and carry 
indoors. that would be sufficient for the soaking of the pile upstairs, 
and fetching the smoky and flicker lamp from the studio, he went 
up again, and like a careful garden water some bed of choice 
blossoms, he sprinkle and pour till his ewer was empty. he gave 
but one glance to the bed behind him, where the huddle thing lay 
so quietly, and as he turned, lamp in hand, to go down again, the 
draught that came in through the window against which the gale blew, 
extinguish it. a little blue flame of burning vapour rose in the 
chimney and went out; so, have no further use for it, he pitch it 
on to the pile of soaked material. as he left the room he thought he 
heard some small stir of movement behind him, but he told himself that 
it was but something slip in the heap he had built there. 

again he went out into the storm. the cloud that scud overhead were 
thinner now, though the gale blew not less fiercely, and the blurred, 
watery moonlight was brighter. once for a moment, as he approach 
the shed, he caught sight of the full orb plunge madly among the 
stream vapours; then she was hidden again behind the wrack. close in 
front of him were the fir tree of the wood where those sweet tryst 
had been held, and once again the vision of her as she had been broke 
into his mind and the queer conviction that it was no wither and 
bloated hag, who lay on the bed upstairs but the fair, comely limb 
and the golden head. it was even more vivid now, and he made haste to 
get back to the studio, where he would find the trusty medicine that 
had dispel that vision before. he would have to make two journey 
at least with his tin ewer before he transport enough oil to feed 
the large pyre below, and so, to save time, he took the barrel off 
its stand, and roll it along the path and into the house. he pause 
at the foot of the stairs, listen to hear if anything stirred, but 
all was silent. whatever had slip up there was steady again; from 
outside only came the squeal and bellow of the wind. 

the studio was bright but fitful lit by the flame on the hearth; 
at one moment a noonday blaze there, the next but the last smoulder of 
some red sunset. it was easy to decant from the barrel into his ewer 
than carry the heavy keg and sprinkle from it, and once and once again 
he fill and empty it. one more application would be sufficient, 
and after that he could let what remain trickle out on to the floor. 
but by some awkward movement he manage to spill a splash of it down 
the front of his trousers: he must be sure, therefore (how quick his 
brain respond with counsel of precautions), to have some accident 
with his lamp when he came in to his supper, which should account for 
this little misadventure. or, probably, the wind through which he would 
presently be walking would dry it before he reach the village. 

so, for the last time with match ready in his hand, he mount the 
stairs to set light to the fuel pile in the room above. his second 
dose of whisky sang in his head, and he said to himself, smile at 
the humour of the notion, “she always like a fire in her bedroom; she 
shall have it now.” that seem a very comical idea, and it dwelt in 
his head as he struck the match which should light it for her. then, 
still grinning, he gave one glance to the bed, and the smile die on 
his face, and the wild cymbal of panic crash in his brain. the bed 
was empty; no huddle shape lay there. 

distraught with terror, he thrust the match into the soaked pile and 
the flame flared up. perhaps the body had roll off the bed. it must, 
in any case, be here somewhere, and when once the room was alight there 
would be nothing more to fear. high rose the smoky flame, and bang 
the door, he leap down the stairs to set light to the pile below and 
be gone from the house. yet, whatever monstrous miracle his eye had 
assured him of, it could not be that she still live and had left the 
place where she lay, for she had cease to breathe when the noose was 
tight round her neck, and her fight for life and air had long been 
stilled. but, if by some hideous witchcraft, she was not dead, it would 
soon be over now with her in the stupefaction of the smoke and the 
scorching flames. let be; the door was shut and she within, for him it 
remain to be finished with the business, and flee from the house of 
terror, lest he leave the sanity of his soul behind him. 

the red glare from the hearth in the studio lit his steps down the 
passage from the stairway, and already he could hear from above the 
dry crack and snap from the fire that prosper there. as he shuffle 
in, he held his hand to his head, as if pressing the brain back into 
its cool case, from which it seem eager to fly out into the welter 
of storm and fire and hideous imagination. if he could only control 
himself for a few moments more, all would be done and he would escape 
from this disorder haunt place into the night and the gale, leave 
behind him the blaze that would burn away all perilous stuff. again 
the flame broke out in the ember on the hearth, brave burning, 
and he took from the heart of the glare a fragment on which the fire 
was burst into yellow flowers. he heed not the scorching of his 
hand, for it was but for a moment that he held it, and then plunge it 
into the pile that drip with the oil he had pour on it. a tower 
of flame mounted, licking the rafter of the low ceiling, then die 
away as if suffocate by its own smoke, but crept onwards, nose its 
way along till it reach the straw mat, which blaze fiercely. that 
blaze kindle the courage in him; whatever trick his imagination had 
play on him just now, he had nothing to fear except his own terror, 
which now he master again, for nothing real could ever escape from 
the conflagration, and it was only the real that he feared. spell and 
witchcraft and superstitions, such as for the last twenty years had 
batten on him, were all enclose in that tight-drawn noose. 

it was time to be gone, for all was safe now, and the room was grow 
to oven-heat. but as he picked his way across the floor over which 
runnel of flame from the split barrel were beginning to spread this 
way and that, he heard from above the sound of a door unlatched, and 
footstep light and firm tap on the stairs. for one second the sheer 
catalepsy of panic seize him, but he recover his control, and with 
hand that grope through the thick smoke he found the door. at that 
moment the fire shot up in a blaze of blind flame, and there in the 
doorway stood ellen. it was no wither body and bloated face that 
confront him, but she with whom he had tryst in the wood, with the 
bloom of eternal youth upon her, and the smooth soft hand, on which 
was her wedding-ring, pointed at him. 

it was in vain that he call on himself to rush forward out of that 
torrid and suffocate air. the front door was open, he had but to pass 
her and speed forth safe into the night. but no power from his will 
reach his limbs; his will scream to him, “go, go! push by her: it 
is but a phantom which you fear!” but muscle and sinew were in mutiny, 
and step by step he retreat before that point finger and the 
radiant shape that advanced on him. the flame that flicker over the 
floor had discover the paraffin he had spilt, and leap up his leg. 

just one spot in his brain retain lucid from the encompass 
terror. somewhere behind that barrier of fire there was the second 
door into the garden. he had but cursory attempt to unlock its 
rusty wards; now, surely, the knowledge that there alone was escape 
would give strength to his hand. he leap backwards through the 
flames, still with eyes fixed on her who ever advanced in time with 
his retreat, and turning, wrestle and strove with the key. something 
snap in his hand, and there still in the keyhole was the bare shaft. 

holding his breath, for the heat scorch his throat, he grope towards 
where he knew was the window through which he had first seen her that 
night. the flame lick fierce round it, but there, beneath his 
hand, was the hasp, and he threw it open. at that the wind pour in as 
through the nozzle of a ply bellows, and death rose high and bright 
around him. through the flames, as he sank to the floor, a face radiant 
with revenge smile on him. 




inscrutable decree 




inscrutable decree 


i had found nothing momentous in the more august page of _the times_ 
that morning, and so, just because i was lazy and unwill to embark 
on a host of business that were wait for me, i turn to the first 
page and, beginning with the seventh column, ponder profound over 
“situations vacant,” and hope that the “gentlewoman fond of games,” 
who desire the position of governess, would find the very thing to 
suit her. i glance at the notice of lecture to be deliver under 
the auspices of various learned societies, and was thankful that i had 
not got to give or to listen to any of them. i debate over “business 
opportunities”; i vain try to conjecture clue to mysterious 
“personal” paragraphs, and, still pursue my sideways, crab-fashion 
course, came to “deaths continued.” 

there, with a shock of arrest, i saw that sybil rorke, widow of the 
late sir ernest rorke, had die at torquay, suddenly, at the age of 
thirty-two. it seem strange that there should be only this bare 
announcement concerning a woman who at one time had been so well-known 
and dazzle a figure; and turning to the obituary notices, i found 
that my inattentive skim had overlook a paragraph there of 
appreciation and regret. she had die during her sleep, and it was 
announce that an inquest would be held. my lazy then had been 
of some use, for archie rorke, distant cousin but successor to sir 
ernest’s estate and title, was arrive that evening to spend a few 
country days with me, and i was glad to have known this before he came. 
how it would affect him, or whether, indeed, it would affect him at 
all, i had no idea. 

what a mysterious affair it had been! no one, i supposed, knew the 
history of it except he, now that lady rorke was dead. if anyone knew, 
it should have been myself, and yet archie, my oldest friend, whose 
best man i was to have been, had never open his lip to a syllable of 
explanation. i knew, in fact, no whit more than the whole world knew, 
namely, that a year after sir ernest rorke’s death the engagement of 
his widow to the new baronet, sir archibald rorke, was made public, 
and that within a fortnight of the date fixed for the wedding it was 
laconic announce that the marriage would not take place. when, 
on seeing that, i rang archie up on the telephone, i was told that 
he had already left london, and he wrote to me a few days later from 
lincote--the place in hampshire, which he had inherit from his 
cousin--saying that he had nothing to tell me about the break off 
of his engagement beyond the fact that it was true. the whole--he had 
written a word and careful erase it--episode was now an excise leaf 
from his life. he was propose to stay down at lincote alone for a 
month or so, and would then turn on to the new page. 

lady rorke, so i heard, had also left london immediately and pass 
the summer in italy. then she took a furnish house in torquay, where 
she live for the remainder of the year which intervene between 
the break off of her engagement and her death. she cut herself 
completely off from all her friends--and no woman, surely, ever 
command a large host of them--saw nobody, seldom went outside her 
house and garden, and observe the same unbroken silence as did archie 
about what had happened. and now, with all her youth and charm and 
beauty, she had gone down dumb into the great silence. 

with the prospect of seeing archie that evening it was no wonder that 
the thought of lady rorke ran all day in my head like a tune heard 
long ago which now recall itself to my mind in scattered staves of 
melody. meeting and talks with her, phrase by phrase, reconstruct 
themselves, and as these memory grew definite and complete i found 
that, even as before, when i was actually experience them, there 
lurk underneath the gay rhythm and joyous something _macabre_ 
and mysterious. to-day that was accentuated, whereas before when i 
listen for it, try to isolate it from the rest and so perhaps 
dispel it, it was always overscore by some triumphant crescendo: her 
presence divert eye and ear alike. yet such a simile halts; perhaps, 
still in simile, i shall more accurate define this underlying 
“something” by saying that her presence was like some gorgeous 
rose-bush, full of flowers, and sun, and sweetness; then, even as one 
admire and applaud and inhaled, one saw that among its bud and 
blossom there emerge the spike of some other plant, bitter and 
poisonous, but grow from the same soil as the rose, and intertwine 
with it. but immediately a fresh glory met your eye, a fresh fragrance 
enchant you. 

as i rummage among my memory of her, certain scene which 
significant illustrate this curious vivid impression stir and 
made themselves manifest to me, and now they were not broken in upon 
by her presence. one such occur on the first evening that i ever 
met her, which was in the summer before the death of her husband. the 
moment that she enter the room where we were wait before dinner 
for her arrival, the stale, sultry air of a june evening grew fresh 
and effervescent; never have i come across so radiant and infectious a 
vitality. she was tall and big, with the splendour of the juno-type, 
and though she was then close on thirty, the iridescence of girlhood 
was still hers. without effort she pied-pipered a rather stodgy party 
to dance to her flutings, she cause everyone to become silly and 
pleased and full of laughter. at her bidding we indulge in ridiculous 
games, dumb-crambo, and what not, and after that the carpet was roll 
up and we caper to the strain of a gramophone. and then the incident 
occurred. 

i was standing with her, for a breath of air, on the balcony outside 
the drawing-room window which face the park. she had just made a 
great curtsey to a slip of the moon that rose above the tree and had 
borrow a shilling of me in order to turn it. 

“no, i can’t swear that i believe in moon-luck,” she said, “but after 
all it do no harm, and, in case it’s true, you can’t afford to make 
an enemy of her. ah, what’s that?” 

a thrush, attract by the lights inside, had flown between us, dashed 
itself against the window, and now lay flutter on the ground at our 
feet. instantly she was all pity and tenderness. she picked up the 
bird, examine it, and found that its wing was broken. 

“ah, poor thing!” she said. “look, its wing-bone is snapped; the end 
protrudes. and how terrify it is! what are we to do?” 

it was clear that the kindest thing to do would be to put the bird 
out of its pain, but when i suggest that, she took a step back from 
me, and cover it with her other hand. her eyes gleamed, her mouth 
smiled, and i saw the tip of her tongue swift pass over her lip as 
if licking them. 

“no, that would be a terrible thing to do,” she said. “i shall take it 
home with me ever so carefully, and watch over it. i am afraid it is 
badly hurt. but it may live.” 

suddenly--perhaps it was that swift licking of her lip that suggest 
the thought to me--i felt instinctive that she was not so much 
pitiful as pleased. she stood there with eyes fixed on it, as it feeble 
struggle in her hands. 

and then her face clouded; over its bright there came a look of 
displeasure, of annoyance. 

“i’m afraid it is dying,” she said. “its poor frightened eyes are 
closing.” 

the bird flutter once more, then its leg stretch themselves 
stiff out, and it lay still. she toss it out of her hand on to the 
paved balcony, with a little shrug of her shoulders. 

“what a fuss over a bird,” she said. “it was silly of it to fly 
against the glass. but i have too soft a heart; i cannot bear that the 
poor creature should die. let us go in and have one more romp. oh, 
here is your shilling; i hope it will have brought me good luck. and 
then i must get home. my husband--do you know him?--always sit up till 
i get back, and he will scold me for being so late!” 

there, then, was my first meeting with her, and there, too, were the 
spike of the poisonous plant push up among the magnificence of her 
roses. and yet, so i thought to myself then, and so i think to myself 
now, i perhaps was utterly wrong about it all, in thus attribute to 
her a secret glee of which she was wholly incapable. so, with a certain 
effort i wipe the impression i had received off my mind, determine 
to consider myself quite mistaken. but, involuntarily, my mind as if 
to justify itself in have delineate such a picture, proceed to 
delineate another. 

very shortly after that first meeting i received from her a charming 
note, ask me to dine with her on a date not far distant. i 
telephone a delight acceptance, for, indeed, i want then, even 
as i did this morning, to convince myself that i was wholly in error 
concerning my interpretation of that incident concerning the thrush. 
though i hold that no man has the right to accept the hospitality 
offer by one he do not like, in all points except one i admire 
and like lady rorke immensely and wish to get rid of that one. so 
i grateful accepted, and then hurried out on a dismal and overdue 
visit to the dentist’s. in the waiting-room was a girl of about twelve, 
with a hand nursing a rueful face, and from time to time she stifle 
a sob of pain or apprehension. i was just wonder whether it would 
be a breach of waiting-room etiquette to attempt to administer comfort 
or supply diversion, when the door open and in came lady rorke. she 
laugh delightful when she saw me. 

“hurrah! you’re another occupant of the condemn cell,” she said, “and 
very soon we shall both be sent for to the scaffold. i can’t describe 
to you what a coward i am about it. why haven’t we got beak like 
birds?----” 

her glance fell on the forlorn little figure by the window, with the 
rueful face and the wet eyes. 

“why, here’s another of us,” she said. “and have they sent you to the 
dentist’s all alone, my dear?” 

“y--yes.” 

“how horrid of them!” said lady rorke. “they’ve sent me alone, too, 
and i think it’s most unfeeling. but you shan’t be alone, anyhow, i’ll 
come in with you, and sit by you, if you like that, and box the man’s 
ear for him if he hurt you. or shall you and i set on him, as soon 
as we’ve got him by himself, and take out all his teeth one after the 
other? just to teach him to be a dentist.” 

a faint smile began the break through the clouds. 

“oh, will you come in with me?” she asked. “i shan’t mind nearly so 
much, then. it’s--it’s got to come out, you know, and i mayn’t have 
gas.” 

just the same gleam of a smile as i had seen on lady rorke’s face once 
before quiver there now, a light not of pity, surely. 

“ah, but it won’t ache any more after that,” she said, “and after all, 
it is so soon over. you’ll just open your mouth as if you were go to 
put the largest of all strawberry into it, and you’ll hold tight on 
to my hand, and the dentist take up something which you needn’t look 
at----” 

there was a want of tact in the vivid of this picture, and the 
child began to sob again. 

“oh, don’t, don’t!” she cried. 

again the door opened, and she clung to lady rorke. 

“oh, i know it’s for me!” she wailed. 

lady rorke bent over her, scan her terrify face. 

“come along, my dear,” she said, “and it will be over in no time. 
you’ll be back here again before this gentleman can count a hundred, 
and he’ll have all his trouble in front of him still.” 

again this morning i try to expunge from that picture, so trivial and 
yet so vivid to me, the sinister something which seem to connect it 
with the incident about the thrush, and, leave it, my mind stray 
on over other reminiscences of lady rorke. before the season was over 
i had got to know her well, and the better i knew her the more i 
marvel at that many-petalled vitality, which never cease unfold 
itself. she entertain largely, and had that crown gift of a good 
hostess, namely, that she enjoy her own party quite enormously. she 
was a very fine horsewoman, and after being up till dawn at some dance, 
she would be in the row by half-past eight on a peculiarly vicious mare 
to whom she seem to pay only the most cursory attention. she had a 
good knowledge of music, she dress amazingly, she was charming to her 
meagre little husband, play piquet with him by the hour (which was 
the only thing, apart from herself, that he care about), and if in 
this modern democratic london there could be said to be a queen, there 
is no doubt who that season would have worn the crown. less publicly, 
she was a great student of the psychic and occult, and i remember 
hearing that she was herself possessed of very remarkable mediumistic 
gifts. but to me that was a matter of hearsay, for i never was present 
at any séance of hers. 

yet through the triumphant music of her pageant, there sounded, to 
my ear at least, fragment of a very ugly tune. it was not only in 
these two instance of its emergence that i heard it, it was chiefly 
and most persistent audible in her treatment of archie rorke, her 
husband’s cousin. everyone knew, for none could help knowing, that 
he was desperate in love with her, and it is impossible to imagine 
that she alone was ignorant of it. it is, no doubt, the instinct 
of many women to fan a passion which they do not share, and which 
they have no intention of indulging, just as the male instinct is to 
gratify a passion that he do not really feel, but there are limit 
to mercilessness. she was not “cruel to be kind”; she was kind to be 
demoniacal cruel. she had him always by her; she gave him those 
little touch and comrade-like licence which meant nothing to her, 
but craze him with thirst; she held the glass close to his lip 
and then tilt it up and show it him empty. the more charitable 
explanation was that she, perhaps, knew that her husband could not 
live long, and that she intended to marry archie, and such, so it 
subsequent appeared, her intentions were. but when i saw her feed 
him with husk and putt an empty glass to his lips, nothing, to 
my mind, could account for her treatment of him except a rapture of 
cruelty at the sight of his aching. and somehow, awfully and aptly, 
that seem to fit in with the affair of the thrush, and the meeting 
with the forlorn child in the dentist’s waiting-room. yet ever, through 
that gruesome twilight, there blaze forth her charm and her beauty and 
the beam of her joyous vitality, and i would cudgel myself for my nasty 
interpretations. 

it was early in the spring of next year that i was spend a week-end 
with her and her husband at lincote. she had suggest my coming down 
on saturday morning before the party assemble later in the day, and 
at lunch i was alone with her husband and her. sir ernest was very 
silent; he look ill and haggard, and, in fact, hardly spoke a word 
except when sudden he turn to the butler and said, “has anything 
been heard of the child yet?” he was told that there was no news, and 
subside into silence again. i thought that some queer shadow as of 
suspense or anxiety cross lady rorke’s face at the question; but 
on the answer, it clear off again, and, as if to sweep the subject 
wholly away, she ask me if i could tolerate a saunter with her 
through the wood till her guest arrived. 

out she came like some splendid diana of the forests, and like the 
goddess’s was the swift, swinging pace of her saunter. spring all round 
was riotous in blossom and bird-song; it was just that ecstatic moment 
of the year when the hound of spring have run winter to death, and as 
we gain the high ridge of down above the wood she stop and threw 
her arms wide. 

“oh, the sense of spring!” she cried. “the daffodils, and the west 
wind, and the shadow of the clouds. how i wish i could take the 
whole lot into my arms and hug them. miracle are flowering every 
moment now in the country, while the only miracle in london is the 
mud. what sunshine, what air! drink them in, for they are the one 
divine medicine. one wants that medicine sometimes, for there are sad 
things and terrible things all round us, pain and anguish, and decay. 
yet i suppose that even those call out the splendour of fortitude 
or endurance. even when one looks on a struggle which one know is 
hopeless, it warm the heart to see it.” 

the gleam that shone from her paled, her arms dropped, and she move 
on. then, soft of voice and soft of eye, she spoke again. 

“such a sad thing happen here two days ago,” she said. “a small 
girl--now what was her name? yes--ellen davenport--brought a note from 
the village up to the house. i was out, so she left it, and started, it 
is supposed, to go back home. she has not been seen since. description 
of her were circulate in all the village for mile round; but, as 
you heard at lunch, there has been no news of her, and the copse and 
covert in the park have been searched, but with no result. and yet out 
of that come splendour. i went to see her mother yesterday, bowed down 
with grief, but she won’t give up hope. ‘if it is god’s will,’ she said 
to me, ‘we shall find my ellen alive; and if we find her dead, it will 
be god’s will, too.’” 

she paused. 

“but i didn’t ask you down here to moan over tragedies,” she said. 
“i want you after all your week in town to come and have a 
spring-cleaning. doesn’t the wind take the dust out of you, like one of 
those sucking-machines which you put on to carpets? and the sun! make a 
sponge of yourself and soak it up till you’re dripping with it.” 

for a couple of miles, at the least, we kept along this high ridge of 
down, and the lark were spring from the grass, vocal with song 
uncongealed, as they aspire and sank again, drop at last dumb 
and spent with rapture. then we descended steeply, through the wood 
and glade of the park, past thicket of catkin sallows, and of 
willow with soft moleskin buttons, and in the hollow the daffodil 
were dancing, and the herb of the springtime were push up through 
the brittle wither stuff of the winter. then, passing along the one 
street of the red-tiled village, in which my companion pointed me out 
the house where the poor vanish girl had lived, we turn homewards 
across the grass and join the road again at the bottom of the great 
lake that lie below the terrace garden of the house. 

this lake was artificial, made a hundred years ago by the erection of a 
huge dam across the dip of the valley, so that the stream which flow 
down it was thereby confine and must needs form this sheet of water 
before it found outlet again through the sluices. at the centre the dam 
is some twenty-five feet in height, and by the side of the road which 
cross it clump of rhododendron lean out over the deep water. the 
margin on the side towards the lake is reinforce with concrete, now 
mossy and overgrown with herbage, and the face of it, burrow down 
to the level of the bottom of the dam through four fathom of dusky 
water. the lake was high and the overflow pour sonorous through the 
sluices, and the sun in the west made broken rainbow in the foam of 
its outpouring. 

as we pause there a moment, my companion seem the incarnation of the 
sight and sound that went to the spell of the spring; singing lark 
and dance daffodils, west wind and rain-bowed foam and, no less, the 
dark, deep water, were all distill into her radiant vitality. 

“and now for the house again,” she said, go brisk up the steep 
slope. “is it inhospitable of me to wish that no one was coming except, 
of course, our delightful archie? a houseful bring london into the 
country, and we shall talk scandal and stir up mud instead of watch 
miracles.” 

another faint memory of her linger somewhere in the dusk, and i 
grope for it, as one grope in slime for the roots of a water-plant, 
and pull it out. a notorious murder had been guillotine that 
morning in france, and in some sunday paper next day there was a 
brutal, brilliant, inexcusable little sketch of his being led out 
between guard for the final scene at dawn outside the prison at 
versailles. and, as i wrote my name in lady rorke’s visitors’ book 
on monday morning, i spilt a blot of ink on the page and hasty 
had recourse to the blotting-pad on her writing-table in order to 
minimize the disfigurement. inside it was this unpardonable picture, 
cut out and put away, and i thought of the thrush and the dentist’s 
waiting-room---- 

a month afterwards her husband died, after three week of intolerable 
torment. the doctor insist on his have two train nurses, but 
lady rorke never left him. she was present at the painful dressing 
of the wound from the operation that only prolonged the misery of his 
existence, and even slept on the sofa of the room where he lay. 

* * * * * 

archie rorke arrive that evening. he let me know at once that he had 
seen the announcement of lady rorke’s death, and said no more about 
it till later, when he and i were left alone over the fire in the 
smoking-room. he look round to see that the door was shut behind the 
last bedgoer of my little party, and then turn to me. 

“i’ve got to tell you something,” he said. “it’ll take half an hour, so 
to-morrow will do if you want to be off.” 

“but i don’t,” said i. 

he pull himself together from his sprawl sunken in his chair. 

“very well,” he said. “what i want to tell you is the story of the 
breaking-off of my engagement with sybil. i have often want to do so 
before, but while she was alive, as you will presently see, i could 
tell nobody. i shall ask you, when you know everything, whether you 
think i could have done otherwise. and please do not interrupt me till 
i have finished, unless there is something you don’t understand, for it 
won’t be very easy to get through with it. but i think i can make it 
intelligible.” 

he was silent a moment, and i saw his face working and twitching. 

“i must tell somebody,” he said, “and i choose you, unless you mind it 
awfully. but i simply can’t bear it alone any more.” 

“go on, then, old boy,” i said. “i’m glad you chose me, do you know. 
and i won’t interrupt.” 

archie spoke. 

“a week or two only before our marriage was to have taken place,” he 
said, “i went down to lincote for a couple of days. i had had the house 
done up and re-decorated, and now the work was finished and i want to 
see that all was in order. nothing could be worthy of sybil, but--well, 
you can guess, more or less, what my feelings were. 

“for a week before there had been very heavy rains, and the lake--you 
know it--below the garden was very high, higher than i had ever seen 
it: the water pour over the road across the dam which leads to the 
village. under the weight and press of it a great crack had appear 
in the concrete with which it is faced, and there was danger of the 
dam being carry away. if that happen the whole lake would have 
been sudden release and no end of damage might have been done. it 
was therefore necessary to draw off the water as fast as possible to 
relieve the pressure and repair the crack. this was done by means of 
big siphons. for two days we had them working, but the crack seem 
to extend right to the foundations of the dam, and before it could be 
repair all the water in the lake would have to be drawn off. i was 
just leave for town, when the foreman came up to the house to tell me 
that they had found something there. in the ooze and mud at the base 
of the dam, twenty-five feet below water-level, they had come upon the 
body of a young girl.” 

he grip the arms of his chair tight. little did he know that i was 
horrible aware of what he was go to tell me next. 

“about a month before my cousin ernest’s death,” he said, “a mysterious 
affair happen in the village. a girl name ellen davenport had 
disappeared. she came up one afternoon to the house with a note, 
and was never seen again, dead or alive. her disappearance was now 
explained. a chain of bead round the neck and various fragment of 
clothing established, beyond any doubt, the identity of what they had 
found at the bottom of the lake. i wait for the inquest, telegraph 
to sybil that business had detain me, and then return to town, not 
intend to tell her what that business was, for our marriage was 
close at hand and it was not a topic one would choose. she was very 
superstitious, you know, and i thought that it would shock her. that 
she would feel it to be unlucky and ill-omened. so i said nothing to 
her. 

“sybil had extraordinary mediumistic powers. she did not often exercise 
them and she never would give a séance to any one she did not know 
extremely well, for she believe that people brought with them the 
spiritual influence with which they were surrounded, and that there 
was the possibility of very evil intelligence being set free. but she 
had sat several times with me, and i had witness some very remarkable 
manifestations. her procedure was to put herself, by abstraction of 
her mind, into a state of trance, and spirits of the dead who were 
connected with the sitter could then communicate through her. on 
one occasion my mother, whom she had never seen, and who die many 
years ago, spoke through her and told me certain fact which sybil 
could not have known, and which i did not know. but an old friend of 
my mother’s, still alive, told me that they were correct. they were 
of an exceedingly private nature. sybil also, so she told me, could 
produce materialisations, but up till now i had never seen any. a 
remarkable thing about her mediumship was that she would sometimes 
regain consciousness from her trance while still these communications 
were being made, and she knew what was go on. she could hear herself 
speak and be mental aware of what she was saying. on the occasion, 
for instance, of which i have told you, when my mother spoke to me she 
was in this state. the same thing occur at the sitting of which i 
shall now speak. 

“that night, on my return to london, she and i dine alone. i felt a 
very strong desire, for which i could not account, that she should 
hold a sitting--just herself and me--and she consented. we sat in her 
room, with a shade lamp, but there was sufficient illumination for me 
to see her quite distinctly, for her face was towards the light. there 
was a small table in front of us cover with a dark cloth. she sat 
close to it, in a high chair, compose herself, and almost immediately 
went into trance. her head fell forward and by her slow breathing and 
her absolute immobile i knew she was unconscious. for a long time 
we sat there in silence, and i began to think that we should get no 
manifestation at all, and that the sitting, as sometimes was the case, 
would be a failure; but then i saw that something was happening.” 

his hands, with which he grip the arms of his chair, were trembling. 
twice he try to speak, but it was not till the third attempt that he 
master himself. 

“there was form a mist above the table,” he said. “it was slightly 
luminous and it spread upwards, pillar-shaped, in height between 
two and three feet. then i saw that below the outlying skein of it 
something was materialising. it mould itself into human shape, rising 
waist-high from the table, and presently shoulder and arms and neck 
and head were visible, and features began to outline themselves. for 
some time it remain vague and fluid, sway backwards and forward a 
little; then very quick it solidified, and there, close in front of 
me, was the half-figure of a young girl. the eyes were still closed, 
but now they opened. round her neck was a chain of bead just such as i 
had seen laid by the body that had been found in the lake. and then i 
spoke to her, ask her who she was, though i already knew. 

“her answer was no more than a whisper, but quite distinct. 

“‘ellen davenport,’ she said. 

“a disorder terror seize me. yet perhaps this little white figure, 
with its wide-gazing eyes, was some hallucination, something that had 
no objective existence at all. all day the thought of the poor kiddie 
whose remains i had seen taken out of the ooze at the bottom of the 
lake had been vivid in my mind, and i try to think that what i saw 
was no more than some strange projection of my thought. and yet i 
felt it was not so; it was independent of myself. and why was it made 
manifest, and on what errand had it come? i had pressed sybil to give 
me this séance, and god know what i would have given not to have done 
so! for one thing i was thankful, namely, that she was in unconscious 
trance. perhaps the phantom would fade again before she came out of it. 

“and then i heard a stir of movement from the chair where she sat, and, 
turning, i saw that she had raise her head. her eyes were open and on 
her face such a mask of terror as i have never known human being could 
wear. recognition was there, too; i saw that sybil knew who the phantom 
was. 

“the figure that pale gleam above the table turn its head towards 
her, and once more the white lip opened. 

“‘yes, i am ellen davenport,’ she said. 

“the whisper grew louder. 

“‘you might have save me,’ she said, ‘or you might have try to save 
me; but you watch me struggle till i sank.’ 

“and then the apparition vanished. it did not die away; it was there 
clear and distinct one moment, at the next it was gone. sybil and i 
were sitting alone in her room with the low-burning lamp, and the 
silence sang in my ears. 

“i got up and turn on the switch that kindle the electric lights, 
and knew that something within me had grown cold and that something 
had snapped. she still sat where she was, not look at me at all, 
but blank in front of her. she said no word of denial in answer to 
the terrible accusation that had been uttered. and i think i was glad 
of that, for there are times when it is not only futility to deny, but 
blasphemy. for my part, i could neither look at her nor speak to her. i 
remember holding out my hand to the empty grate, as if there had been 
a fire burning there. and standing there i heard her rise, and dreary 
wonder what she would say and knew how useless it would be. and then 
i heard the whisper of her dress on the carpet and the noise of the 
door opening and shutting, and when i turn i found that i was alone 
in the room. presently i let myself out of the house.” 

there was a long pause, but i did not break it, for i felt he had not 
quite finished. 

“i had love her with my whole heart,” he said, “and she knew it. 
perhaps that was why i never attempt to see her again and why she did 
not attempt to see me. that little white figure would always have been 
with us, for she could not deny the reality of it and the truth of that 
which it had spoken. that’s my story, then. you needn’t even tell me if 
you think i could have done differently, for i knew i couldn’t. and she 
couldn’t.” 

he rose. 

“i see there is to be an inquest,” he said. “i hope they will find 
that she kill herself. it will mean, won’t it, that her remorse was 
unbearable. and that’s atonement.” 

he move towards the door. 

“inscrutable decrees,” he said. 




the garden 




the garden 


two friends of mine, hugh grainger and his wife, had taken for a 
month of christmas holiday the house in which we were to witness such 
strange manifestations, and when i received an invitation from them to 
spend a fortnight there i return them an enthusiast affirmative. 
well already did i know that pleasant heathery country-side, and most 
intimate was my acquaintance with the subtle hazard of its most 
charming golf-links. golf, i was given to understand, was to occupy the 
solid day for hugh and me, so that margaret should never be oblige to 
set her hand to the implement with which the game, so detest to 
her, was conducted.... 

i arrive there while yet the daylight lingered, and as my host were 
out, i took a ramble round the place. the house and garden stood on a 
plateau facing south; below it were a couple of acre of pasture that 
slope down to a vagrant stream cross by a foot-bridge, by the side 
of which stood a thatch cottage with a vegetable patch surrounding 
it. a path ran close past this across the pasture from a wicket-gate in 
the garden, conduct you over the foot-bridge, and, so my remember 
sense of geography told me, must constitute a short cut to the links 
that lay not half a mile beyond. the cottage itself was clearly on 
the land of the little estate, and i at once supposed it to be the 
gardener’s house. what went against so obvious and simple a theory was 
that it appear to be untenanted. no wreath of smoke, though the 
evening was chilly, curl from its chimneys, and, coming closer, i 
fancy it had that air of “waiting” about it which we so often conjure 
into unused habitations. there it stood, with no sign of life whatever 
about it, though ready, as its apparently perfect state of repair 
seem to warrant, for fresh tenant to put the breath of life into it 
again. its little garden, too, though the palings were neat and newly 
painted, told the same tale; the bed were untended and unweeded, and 
in the flower-border by the front door was a row of chrysanthemums, 
which had wither on their stems. but all this was but the impression 
of a moment, and i did not pause as i pass it, but cross the 
foot-bridge and went on up the heathery slope that lay beyond. my 
geography was not at fault, for presently i saw the club-house just 
in front of me. hugh no doubt would be just about coming in from his 
afternoon round, and so we would walk back together. on reach the 
club-house, however, the steward told me that not five minutes before 
mrs. grainger had call in her car for her husband, and i therefore 
retrace my steps by the path along which i had already come. but 
i made a detour, as a golf will, to walk up the fairway of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth hole just for the pleasure of recognition, 
and look respectful at the yawn sandpit which so inexorable 
guard the eighteenth green, wonder in what circumstances i should 
visit it next, whether with a step complacent and superior, knowing 
that my ball repose safe on the green beyond, or with the heavy 
footfall of one who know that laborious delve lie before him. 

the light of the winter evening had fade fast, and when i cross 
the foot-bridge on my return the dusk had gathered. to my right, just 
beside the path, lay the cottage, the whitewash wall of which 
gleam white in the gloaming; and as i turn my glance back from 
it to the rather narrow plank which bridge the stream i thought i 
caught out of the tail of my eye some light from one of its windows, 
which thus disprove my theory that it was untenanted. but when i 
look directly at it again i saw that i was mistaken: some reflection 
in the glass of the red lines of sunset in the west must have deceive 
me, for in the inclement twilight it look more desolate than ever. 
yet i linger by the wicket gate in its low palings, for though all 
exterior evidence bore witness to its emptiness, some inexplicable 
feeling assured me, quite irrationally, that this was not so, and that 
there was somebody there. certainly there was nobody visible, but, so 
this absurd idea informed me, he might be at the back of the cottage 
conceal from me by the intervene structure, and, still oddly, still 
unreasonably, it became a matter of importance to my mind to ascertain 
whether this was so or not, so clearly had my perception told me that 
the place was empty, and so firm had some conviction assured me 
that it was tenanted. to cover my inquisitiveness, in case there was 
someone there, i could inquire whether this path was a short cut to 
the house at which i was staying, and, rather rebel at what i was 
doing, i went through the small garden, and rap at the door. there 
was no answer, and, after wait for a response to a second summons, 
and have try the door and found it locked, i made the circuit of 
the house. of course there was no one there, and i told myself that i 
was just like a man who looks under his bed for a burglar and would be 
beyond measure astonish if he found one. 

my host were at the house when i arrived, and we spent a cheerful two 
hour before dinner in such desultory and eager conversation as is 
proper between friends who have not met for some time. between hugh 
grainger and his wife it is always impossible to light on a subject 
which do not vivid interest one or other of them, and golf, 
politics, the needs of russia, cooking, ghosts, the possible victory 
over mount everest, and the income tax were among the topic which we 
passionately discussed. with all these plate spinning, it was easy 
to whip up any one of them, and the subject of spook generally was 
light upon again and again. 

“margaret is on the high road to madness,” remark hugh on one of 
these occasions, “for she has begun use planchette. if you use 
planchette for six months, i am told, most careful doctor will 
conscientious certify you as insane. she’s got five month more 
before she go to bedlam.” 

“does it work?” i asked. 

“yes, it say most interesting things,” said margaret. “it say things 
that never enter my head. we’ll try it to-night.” 

“oh, not to-night,” said hugh. “let’s have an evening off.” 

margaret disregard this. 

“it’s no use ask planchette questions,” she went on, “because there 
is in your mind some sort of answer to them. if i ask whether it will 
be fine to-morrow, for instance, it is probably i--though indeed i 
don’t mean to push--who make the pencil say ‘yes.’” 

“and then it usually rains,” remark hugh. 

“not always: don’t interrupt. the interesting thing is to let the 
pencil write what it chooses. very often it only make loop and 
curves--though they may mean something--and every now and then a word 
comes, of the significance of which i have no idea whatever, so i 
clearly couldn’t have suggest it. yesterday evening, for instance, 
it wrote ‘gardener’ over and over again. now what did that mean? the 
garden here is a methodist with a chin-beard. could it have meant 
him? oh, it’s time to dress. please don’t be late, my cook is so 
sensitive about soup.” 

we rose, and some connection of idea about “gardener” link itself up 
in my mind. 

“by the way, what’s that cottage in the field by the foot-bridge?” i 
asked. “is that the gardener’s cottage?” 

“it use to be,” said hugh. “but the chin-beard doesn’t live there: in 
fact nobody lives there. it’s empty. if i was owner here, i should put 
the chin-beard into it, and take the rent off his wages. some people 
have no idea of economy. why did you ask?” 

i saw margaret was look at me rather attentively. 

“curiosity,” i said. “idle curiosity.” 

“i don’t believe it was,” said she. 

“but it was,” i said. “it was idle curiosity to know whether the 
house was inhabited. as i pass it, go down to the club-house, i 
felt sure it was empty, but coming back i felt so sure that there was 
someone there that i rap at the door, and indeed walk round it.” 

hugh had precede us upstairs, as she linger a little. 

“and there was no one there?” she asked. “it’s odd: i had just the same 
feeling as you about it.” 

“that explain planchette writing ‘gardener’ over and over again,” said 
i. “you had the gardener’s cottage on your mind.” 

“how ingenious!” said margaret. “hurry up and dress.” 

a gleam of strong moonlight between my drawn curtains when i went up 
to bed that night led me to look out. my room face the garden and 
the field which i had traverse that afternoon, and all was vivid 
illuminate by the full moon. the thatch cottage with its white wall 
close by the stream was very distinct, and once more, i suppose, the 
reflection of the light on the glass of one of its window made it 
appear that the room was lit within. it struck me as odd that twice 
that day this illusion should have been present to me, but now a yet 
odd thing happened. even as i look the light was extinguished. 

the morning did not at all bear out the fine promise of the clear 
night, for when i woke the wind was squealing, and sheet of rain from 
the south-west were dashed against my panes. golf was wholly out of the 
question, and, though the violence of the storm abate a little in the 
afternoon, the rain drip with a steady sullenness. but i weary 
of indoors, and, since the two other entire refuse to set foot 
outside, i went forth mackintosh to get a breath of air. by way of 
an object in my tramp, i took the road to the links in preference to 
the muddy short cut through the fields, with the intention of engaging 
a couple of caddie for hugh and myself next morning, and linger 
awhile over illustrate papers in the smoking-room. i must have read 
for long than i knew, for a sudden beam of sunset light sudden 
illuminate my page, and look up, i saw that the rain had ceased, 
and that evening was fast coming on. so instead of taking the long 
detour by the road again, i set forth homewards by the path across 
the fields. that gleam of sunset was the last of the day, and once 
again, just as twenty-four hour ago, i cross the foot-bridge in the 
gloaming. till that moment, as far as i was aware, i had not thought 
at all about the cottage there, but now in a flash the light i had 
seen there last night, sudden extinguished, recall itself to my 
mind, and at the same moment i felt that invincible conviction that 
the cottage was tenanted. simultaneous in these swift process of 
thought i look towards it, and saw standing by the door the figure of 
a man. in the dusk i could distinguish nothing of his face, if indeed 
it was turn to me, and only got the impression of a tallish fellow, 
thick built. he open the door, from which there came a dim light as 
of a lamp, entered, and shut it after him. 

so then my conviction was right. yet i had been distinct told that 
the cottage was empty: who, then, was he that enter as if return 
home? once more, this time with a certain qualm of fear, i rap on 
the door, intend to put some trivial question; and rap again, 
this time more drastically, so that there could be no question that my 
summons was unheard. but still i got no reply, and finally i try the 
handle of the door. it was locked. then, with difficulty master an 
increase terror, i made the circuit of the cottage, peer into each 
unshuttered window. all was dark within, though but two minutes ago i 
had seen the gleam of light escape from the open door. 

just because some chain of conjecture was beginning to form itself in 
my mind, i made no allusion to this odd adventure, and after dinner 
margaret, amid protest from hugh, got out the planchette which had 
persist in writing “gardener.” my surmise was, of course, utterly 
fantastic, but i want to convey no suggestion of any sort to 
margaret.... for a long time the pencil skate over her paper making 
loop and curve and peak like a temperature chart, and she had begun 
to yawn and weary over her experiment before any coherent word emerged. 
and then, in the oddest way, her head nod forward and she seem to 
have fallen asleep. 

hugh look up from his book and spoke in a whisper to me. 

“she fell asleep the other night over it,” he said. 

margaret’s eyes were closed, and she breathe the long, quiet breath 
of slumber, and then her hand began to move with a curious firmness. 
right across the big sheet of paper went a level line of writing, and 
at the end her hand stop with a jerk, and she woke. 

she look at the paper. 

“hullo,” she said. “ah, one of you has been play a trick on me!” 

we assured her that this was not so, and she read what she had written. 

“gardener, gardener,” it ran. “i am the gardener. i want to come in. i 
can’t find her here.” 

“o lord, that garden again!” said hugh. 

look up from the paper, i saw margaret’s eyes fixed on mine, and 
even before she spoke i knew what her thought was. 

“did you come home by the empty cottage?” she asked. 

“yes: why?” 

“still empty?” she said in a low voice. “or--or anything else?” 

i did not want to tell her just what i had seen--or what, at any rate, 
i thought i had seen. if there was go to be anything odd, anything 
worth observation, it was far better that our respective impression 
should not fortify each other. 

“i tap again, and there was no answer,” i said. 

presently there was a move to bed: margaret initiate it, and after she 
had gone upstairs hugh and i went to the front door to interrogate the 
weather. once more the moon shone in a clear sky, and we stroll out 
along the flag path that front the house. sudden hugh turn 
quick and pointed to the angle of the house. 

“who on earth is that?” he said. “look! there! he has gone round the 
corner.” 

i had but the glimpse of a tallish man of heavy build. 

“didn’t you see him?” ask hugh. “i’ll just go round the house, and 
find him; i don’t want anyone prowl round us at night. wait here, 
will you, and if he come round the other corner ask him what his 
business is.” 

hugh had left me, in our stroll, close by the front door which was 
open, and there i wait until he should have made his circuit. he had 
hardly disappear when i heard, quite distinctly, a rather quick but 
heavy footfall coming along the paved walk towards me from the opposite 
direction. but there was absolutely no one to be seen who made this 
sound of rapid walking. close and close to me came the steps of the 
invisible one, and then with a shudder of horror i felt somebody unseen 
push by me as i stood on the threshold. that shudder was not merely of 
the spirit, for the touch of him was that of ice on my hand. i try to 
seize this impalpable intruder, but he slip from me, and next moment 
i heard his steps on the parquet of the floor inside. some door within 
open and shut, and i heard no more of him. next moment hugh came 
running round the corner of the house from which the sound of steps had 
approached. 

“but where is he?” he asked. “he was not twenty yard in front of me--a 
big, tall fellow.” 

“i saw nobody,” i said. “i heard his step along the walk, but there was 
nothing to be seen.” 

“and then?” ask hugh. 

“whatever it was seem to brush by me, and go into the house,” said i. 

there had certainly been no sound of steps on the bare oak stairs, and 
we search room after room through the ground floor of the house. the 
dining-room door and that of the smoking-room were locked, that into 
the drawing-room was open, and the only other door which could have 
furnish the impression of an opening and a shut was that into the 
kitchen and servants’ quarters. here again our quest was fruitless; 
through pantry and scullery and boot-room and servants’ hall we 
searched, but all was empty and quiet. finally we came to the kitchen, 
which too was empty. but by the fire there was set a rocking-chair, and 
this was oscillate to and fro as if someone, lately sitting there, 
had just quit it. there it stood gently rocking, and this seem to 
convey the sense of a presence, invisible now, more than even the sight 
of him who surely had been sitting there could have done. i remember 
wanting to steady it and stop it, and yet my hand refuse to go forth 
to it. 

what we had seen, and in especial what we had not seen, would have been 
sufficient to furnish most people with a broken night, and assured i 
was not among the strong-minded exceptions. long i lay wide-eyed and 
open-eared, and when at last i doze i was pluck from the borderland 
of sleep by the sound, muffle but unmistakable, of someone moving 
about the house. it occur to me that the steps might be those of 
hugh conduct a lonely exploration, but even while i wonder a tap 
came at the door of communication between our rooms, and, in answer to 
my response, it appear that he had come to see whether it was i thus 
uneasy wandering. even as we spoke the step pass my door, and the 
stairs leading to the floor above creak to its ascent. next moment 
it sound directly above our head in some attic in the roof. 

“those are not the servants’ bedrooms,” said hugh. “no one sleep 
there. let us look once more: it must be somebody.” 

with lit candle we made our stealthy way upstairs, and just when we 
were at the top of the flight, hugh, a step ahead of me, utter a 
sharp exclamation. 

“but something is passing by me!” he said, and he clutch at the empty 
air. even as he spoke, i experienced the same sensation, and the moment 
afterwards the stairs below us creak again, as the unseen pass down. 

all night long that sound of steps move about the passages, as if 
someone was searching the house, and as i lay and listen that message 
which had come through the pencil of the planchette to margaret’s 
finger occur to me. “i want to come in. i cannot find her here.”... 
indeed someone had come in, and was sedulous in his search. he was the 
gardener, it would seem. but what garden was this invisible seeker, 
and for whom did he seek? 

even as when some bodily pain cease it is difficult to recall with 
any vivid what the pain was like, so next morning, as i dressed, i 
found myself vain try to recapture the horror of the spirit which 
had accompany these nocturnal adventures. i remember that something 
within me had sicken as i watch the movements of the rocking-chair 
the night before and as i heard the steps along the paved way outside, 
and by that invisible pressure against me knew that someone had enter 
the house. but now in the sane and tranquil morning, and all day 
under the serene winter sun, i could not realise what it had been. the 
presence, like the bodily pain, had to be there for the realisation of 
it, and all day it was absent. hugh felt the same; he was even disposed 
to be humorous on the subject. 

“well, he’s had a good look,” he said, “whoever he is, and whomever 
he was look for. by the way, not a word to margaret, please. she 
heard nothing of these perambulations, nor of the entry of--of whatever 
it was. not gardener, anyhow: who ever heard of a garden spend 
his time walking about the house? if there were steps all over the 
potato-patch, i might have been with you.” 

margaret had arrange to drive over to have tea with some friends of 
hers that afternoon, and in consequence hugh and i refresh ourselves 
at the club-house after our game, and it was already dusk when for the 
third day in succession i pass homewards by the whitewash cottage. 
but to-night i had no sense of it being subtle occupied; it stood 
mournful desolate, as is the way of untenanted houses, and no light 
nor semblance of such gleam from its windows. hugh, to whom i had 
told the odd impression i had received there, gave them a reception as 
flippant as that which he had accord to the memory of the night, 
and he was still being humorous about them when we came to the door of 
the house. 

“a psychic disturbance, old boy,” he said. “like a cold in the head. 
hullo, the door’s locked.” 

he rang and rapped, and from inside came the noise of a turn key and 
withdrawn bolts. 

“what’s the door lock for?” he ask his servant who open it. 

the man shift from one foot to the other. 

“the bell rang half an hour ago, sir,” he said, “and when i came to 
answer it there was a man standing outside, and----” 

“well?” ask hugh. 

“i didn’t like the looks of him, sir,” he said, “and i ask him his 
business. he didn’t say anything, and then he must have gone pretty 
smart away, for i never saw him go.” 

“where did he seem to go?” ask hugh, glancing at me. 

“i can’t rightly say, sir. he didn’t seem to go at all. something 
seem to brush by me.” 

“that’ll do,” said hugh rather sharply. 

* * * * * 

margaret had not come in from her visit, but when soon after the crunch 
of the motor wheels was heard hugh reiterate his wish that nothing 
should be said to her about the impression which now, apparently, a 
third person share with us. she came in with a flush of excitement on 
her face. 

“never laugh at my planchette again,” she said. “i’ve heard the most 
extraordinary story from maud ashfield--horrible, but so frightfully 
interesting.” 

“out with it,” said hugh. 

“well, there was a garden here,” she said. “he use to live at that 
little cottage by the foot-bridge, and when the family were up in 
london he and his wife use to be caretaker and live here.” 

hugh’s glance and mine met: then he turn away. i knew, as certainly 
as if i was in his mind, that his thought were identical with my own. 

“he married a wife much younger than himself,” continue margaret, “and 
gradual he became frightfully jealous of her. and one day in a fit 
of passion he strangle her with his own hands. a little while after 
someone came to the cottage, and found him sob over her, try to 
restore her. they went for the police, but before they came he had cut 
his own throat. isn’t it all horrible? but surely it’s rather curious 
that the planchette said gardener. ‘i am the gardener. i want to come 
in. i can’t find her here.’ you see i knew nothing about it. i shall do 
planchette again to-night. oh dear me, the post go in half an hour, 
and i have a whole budget to send. but respect my planchette for the 
future, hughie.” 

we talk the situation out when she had gone, but hugh, unwilling 
convinced and yet unwill to admit that something more than 
coincidence lay behind that “planchette nonsense,” still insist that 
margaret should be told nothing of what we had heard and seen in the 
house last night, and of the strange visitor who again this evening, so 
we must conclude, had made his entry. 

“she’ll be frightened,” he said, “and she’ll begin imagine things. as 
for the planchette, as likely as not it will do nothing but scribble 
and make loops. what’s that? yes: come in!” 

there had come from somewhere in the room one sharp, peremptory rap. i 
did not think it came from the door, but hugh, when no response reply 
to his words of admittance, jump up and open it. he took a few 
steps into the hall outside, and returned. 

“didn’t you hear it?” he asked. 

“certainly. no one there?” 

“not a soul.” 

hugh came back to the fireplace and rather irritable threw a cigarette 
which he had just lit into the fender. 

“that was rather a nasty jar,” he observed; “and if you ask me whether 
i feel comfortable, i can tell you i never felt less comfortable in my 
life. i’m frightened, if you want to know, and i believe you are too.” 

i hadn’t the smallest intention of deny this, and he went on. 

“we’ve got to keep a hand on ourselves,” he said. “there’s nothing so 
infectious as fear, and margaret mustn’t catch it from us. but there’s 
something more than our fear, you know. something has got into the 
house and we’re up against it. i never believe in such things before. 
let’s face it for a minute. _what_ is it anyhow?” 

“if you want to know what i think it is,” said i, “i believe it to be 
the spirit of the man who strangle his wife and then cut his throat. 
but i don’t see how it can hurt us. we’re afraid of our own fear 
really.” 

“but we’re up against it,” said hugh. “and what will it do? good 
lord, if i only knew what it would do i shouldn’t mind. it’s the not 
knowing.... well, it’s time to dress.” 

* * * * * 

margaret was in her highest spirits at dinner. knowing nothing of 
the manifestation of that presence which had taken place in the 
last twenty-four hours, she thought it absorbing interesting that 
her planchette should have “guessed” (so ran her phrase) about the 
gardener, and from that topic she flit to an equally interesting 
form of patience for three which her friend had show her, promising 
to initiate us into it after dinner. this she did, and, not knowing 
that we both above all things want to keep planchette at a distance, 
she was delight with the success of her game. but sudden she 
observe that the evening was burning rapid away, and swept the cards 
together at the conclusion of a hand. 

“now just half an hour of planchette,” she said. 

“oh, mayn’t we play one more hand?” ask hugh. “it’s the best game 
i’ve seen for years. planchette will be dismal slow after this.” 

“darling, if the garden will only communicate again, it won’t be 
slow,” said she. 

“but it is such drivel,” said hugh. 

“how rude you are! read your book, then.” 

margaret had already got out her machine and a sheet of paper, when 
hugh rose. 

“please don’t do it to-night, margaret,” he said. 

“but why? you needn’t attend.” 

“well, i ask you not to, anyhow,” said he. 

margaret look at him closely. 

“hughie, you’ve got something on your mind,” she said. “out with it. i 
believe you’re nervous. you think there is something queer about. what 
is it?” 

i could see hugh hesitate as to whether to tell her or not, and i 
gather that he chose the chance of her planchette inane scribbling. 

“go on, then,” he said. 

margaret hesitated: she clearly did not want to vex hugh, but his 
insistence must have seem to her most unreasonable. 

“well, just ten minutes,” she said, “and i promise not to think of 
gardeners.” 

she had hardly laid her hand on the board when her head fell forward, 
and the machine began moving. i was sitting close to her, and as it 
roll steady along the paper the writing became visible. 

“i have come in,” it ran, “but still i can’t find her. are you hiding 
her? i will search the room where you are.” 

what else was written but still conceal underneath the planchette i 
did not know, for at that moment a current of icy air swept round the 
room, and at the door, this time unmistakably, came a loud, peremptory 
knock. hugh sprang to his feet. 

“margaret, wake up,” he said, “something is coming!” 

the door opened, and there move in the figure of a man. he stood just 
within the door, his head bent forward, and he turn it from side to 
side, peering, it would seem, with eyes staring and infinite sad, 
into every corner of the room. 

“margaret, margaret,” cry hugh again. 

but margaret’s eyes were open too; they were fixed on this dreadful 
visitor. 

“be quiet, hughie,” she said below her breath, rising as she spoke. the 
ghost was now look directly at her. once the lip above the thick, 
rust-coloured beard moved, but no sound came forth, the mouth only 
move and slavered. he raise his head, and, horror upon horror, i saw 
that one side of his neck was laid open in a red, glisten gash.... 

for how long that pause continued, when we all three stood stiff and 
frozen in some deadly inhibition to move or speak, i have no idea: i 
suppose that at the utmost it was a dozen seconds. then the spectre 
turned, and went out as it had come. we heard his steps pass along the 
parquet floor; there was the sound of bolt withdrawn from the front 
door, and with a crash that shook the house it slam to. 

“it’s all over,” said margaret. “god have mercy on him!” 

* * * * * 

now the reader may put precisely what construction he please on 
this visitation from the dead. he need not, indeed, consider it to 
have been a visitation from the dead at all, but say that there had 
been impress on the scene, where this murder and suicide happened, 
some sort of emotional record, which in certain circumstances could 
translate itself into image visible and invisible. wave of ether, 
or what not, may conceivable retain the impress of such scenes; they 
may be held, so to speak, in solution, ready to be precipitated. 
or he may hold that the spirit of the dead man indeed made itself 
manifest, revisite in some sort of spiritual penance and remorse 
the place where his crime was committed. naturally, no materialist 
will entertain such an explanation for an instant, but then there is 
no one so obstinate unreasonable as the materialist. beyond doubt 
a dreadful deed was done there, and margaret’s last utterance is not 
inapplicable. 




mr. tilly’s séance 




mr. tilly’s séance 


mr. til had only the briefest moment for reflection, when, as he 
slip and fell on the greasy wood pavement at hyde park corner, which 
he was crossing at a smart trot, he saw the huge traction-engine with 
its groove ponderous wheels towering high above him. 

“oh, dear! oh, dear!” he said petulantly, “it will certainly crush me 
quite flat, and i shan’t be able to be at mrs. cumberbatch’s séance! 
most provoking! a-ow!” 

the words were hardly out of his mouth, when the first half of his 
horrid anticipation was thorough fulfilled. the heavy wheels pass 
over him from head to foot and flatten him completely out. then the 
driver (too late) reverse his engine and pass over him again, and 
finally lost his head, whistle loud and stopped. the policeman on 
duty at the corner turn quite faint at the sight of the catastrophe, 
but presently recover sufficient to hold up the traffic, and ran to 
see what on earth could be done. it was all so much “up” with mr. til 
that the only thing possible was to get the hysterical engine-driver 
to move clear. then the ambulance from the hospital was sent for, and 
mr. tilly’s remains, detached with great difficulty from the road (so 
firm had they been pressed into it), were reverent carry away 
into the mortuary.... 

mr. til during this had experienced one moment’s excruciating pain, 
resemble the severest neuralgia as his head was ground beneath the 
wheel, but almost before he realise it, the pain was past, and he 
found himself, still rather dazed, floating or standing (he did not 
know which) in the middle of the road. there had been no break in 
his consciousness; he perfectly recollect slipping, and wonder 
how he had manage to save himself. he saw the arrest traffic, the 
policeman with white wan face making suggestion to the gibber 
engine-driver, and he received the very puzzle impression that the 
traction engine was all mixed up with him. he had a sensation of 
red-hot coal and boil water and rivet all around him, but yet no 
feeling of scalding or burning or confinement. he was, on the contrary, 
extremely comfortable, and had the most pleasant consciousness of 
buoyancy and freedom. then the engine puffed and the wheels went round, 
and immediately, to his immense surprise, he perceive his own crush 
remains, flat as a biscuit, lie on the roadway. he identify them 
for certain by his clothes, which he had put on for the first time that 
morning, and one patent leather boot which had escape demolition. 

“but what on earth has happened?” he said. “here am i, and yet that 
poor pressed flower of arms and leg is me--or rather i--also. and how 
terribly upset the driver looks. why, i do believe that i’ve been run 
over! it did hurt for a moment, now i come to think of it.... my good 
man, where are you shove to? don’t you see me?” 

he address these two question to the policeman, who appear to walk 
right through him. but the man took no notice, and calm came out 
on the other side: it was quite evident that he did not see him, or 
apprehend him in any way. 

mr. til was still feeling rather at sea amid these unusual 
occurrences, and there began to steal into his mind a glimpse of the 
fact which was so obvious to the crowd which form an interested but 
respectful ring round his body. men stood with bare heads; women 
scream and look away and look back again. 

“i really believe i’m dead,” said he. “that’s the only hypothesis which 
will cover the facts. but i must feel more certain of it before i do 
anything. ah! here they come with the ambulance to look at me. i must 
be terribly hurt, and yet i don’t feel hurt. i should feel hurt surely 
if i was hurt. i must be dead.” 

certainly it seem the only thing for him to be, but he was far from 
realise it yet. a lane had been made through the crowd for the 
stretcher-bearers, and he found himself wince when they began to 
detach him from the road. 

“oh, do take care!” he said. “that’s the sciatic nerve protrude there 
surely, isn’t it? a-ow! no, it didn’t hurt after all. my new clothes, 
too: i put them on to-day for the first time. what bad luck! now you’re 
holding my leg upside down. of course all my money come out of my 
trouser pocket. and there’s my ticket for the séance; i must have that: 
i may use it after all.” 

he tweak it out of the finger of the man who had picked it up, and 
laugh to see the expression of amaze on his face as the card 
sudden vanished. that gave him something fresh to think about, and 
he ponder for a moment over some touch of association set up by it. 

“i have it,” he thought. “it is clear that the moment i came into 
connection with that card, it became invisible. i’m invisible myself 
(of course to the gross sense), and everything i hold become 
invisible. most interesting! that account for the sudden appearances 
of small object at a séance. the spirit has been holding them, and as 
long as he hold them they are invisible. then he let go, and there’s 
the flower or the spirit-photograph on the table. it accounts, too, for 
the sudden disappearance of such objects. the spirit has taken them, 
though the scoff say that the medium has secrete them about his 
person. it is true that when search he sometimes appear to have done 
so; but, after all, that may be a joke on the part of the spirit. now, 
what am i to do with myself.... let me see, there’s the clock. it’s 
just half-past ten. all this has happen in a few minutes, for it was 
a quarter past when i left my house. half-past ten now: what do that 
mean exactly? i use to know what it meant, but now it seem nonsense. 
ten what? hours, is it? what’s an hour?” 

this was very puzzling. he felt that he use to know what an hour and a 
minute meant, but the perception of that, naturally enough, had cease 
with his emergence from time and space into eternity. the conception 
of time was like some memory which, refuse to record itself on the 
consciousness, lie perdu in some dark corner of the brain, laugh at 
the effort of the owner to ferret it out. while he still interrogate 
his mind over this lapsed perception, he found that space as well as 
time, had similarly grown obsolete for him, for he caught sight of his 
friend miss ida soulsby, whom he knew was to be present at the séance 
for which he was bound, hurry with bird-like steps down the pavement 
opposite. forget for the moment that he was a disembodied spirit, 
he made the effort of will which in his past human existence would have 
set his leg in pursuit of her, and found that the effort of will alone 
was enough to place him at her side. 

“my dear miss soulsby,” he said, “i was on my way to mrs. cumberbatch’s 
house when i was knock down and killed. it was far from unpleasant, a 
moment’s headache----” 

so far his natural voluble had carry him before he recollect 
that he was invisible and inaudible to those still closed in by the 
muddy vesture of decay, and stop short. but though it was clear 
that what he said was inaudible to miss soulsby’s rather large 
intelligent-looking ears, it seem that some consciousness of his 
presence was convey to her fine sense, for she look sudden 
startled, a flush rose to her face, and he heard her murmur, “very odd. 
i wonder why i received so vivid an impression of dear teddy.” 

that gave mr. til a pleasant shock. he had long admire the lady, 
and here she was allude to him in her supposed privacy as “dear 
teddy.” that was follow by a momentary regret that he had been 
killed: he would have like to have been possessed of this information 
before, and have pursue the primrose path of dalliance down which it 
seem to lead. (his intentions, of course, would, as always, have 
been strict honourable: the path of dalliance would have conduct 
them both, if she consented, to the altar, where the primrose would 
have been exchange for orange blossom.) but his regret was quite 
short-lived; though the altar seem inaccessible, the primrose path 
might still be open, for many of the spiritualistic circle in which he 
live were on most affectionate terms with their spiritual guide and 
friends who, like himself, had pass over. from a human point of view 
these innocent and even elevate flirtation had always seem to him 
rather bloodless; but now, look on them from the far side, he saw 
how charming they were, for they gave him the sense of still have 
a place and an identity in the world he had just quitted. he pressed 
miss ida’s hand (or rather put himself into the spiritual condition of 
so doing), and could vague feel that it had some hint of warmth and 
solidity about it. this was gratifying, for it show that though he 
had pass out of the material plane, he could still be in touch with 
it. still more gratifying was it to observe that a pleased and secret 
smile overspread miss ida’s fine features as he gave this token of his 
presence: perhaps she only smile at her own thoughts, but in any case 
it was he who had inspired them. encourage by this, he indulge in 
a slightly more intimate token of affection, and permit himself a 
respectful salute, and saw that he had gone too far, for she said to 
herself, “hush, hush!” and quicken her pace, as if to leave these 
amorous thought behind. 

he felt that he was beginning to adjust himself to the new conditions 
in which he would now live, or, at any rate, was get some sort 
of inkling as to what they were. time exist no more for him, nor 
yet did space, since the wish to be at miss ida’s side had instantly 
transport him there, and with a view to test this further he 
wish himself back in his flat. as swift as the change of scene in 
a cinematograph show he found himself there, and perceive that the 
news of his death must have reach his servants, for his cook and 
parlour-maid with excited faces, were talk over the event. 

“poor little gentleman,” said his cook. “it seem a shame it does. he 
never hurt a fly, and to think of one of those great engine lay him 
out flat. i hope they’ll take him to the cemetery from the hospital: i 
never could bear a corpse in the house.” 

the great strapping parlour-maid toss her head. 

“well, i’m not sure that it doesn’t serve him right,” she observed. 
“always mess about with spirits he was, and the knock and 
concertina was awful sometimes when i’ve been lay out supper in 
the dining-room. now perhaps he’ll come himself and visit the rest of 
the loonies. but i’m sorry all the same. a less troublesome little 
gentleman never stepped. always pleasant, too, and wages paid to the 
day.” 

these regretful comment and encomium were something of a shock to mr. 
tilly. he had imagine that his excellent servant regard him with a 
respectful affection, as befit some sort of demigod, and the rôle of 
the poor little gentleman was not at all to his mind. this revelation 
of their true estimate of him, although what they thought of him could 
no long have the smallest significance, irritate him profoundly. 

“i never heard such impertinence,” he said (so he thought) quite out 
loud, and still intense earth-bound, was astonish to see that 
they had no perception whatever of his presence. he raise his voice, 
replete with extreme irony, and address his cook. 

“you may reserve your criticism on my character for your saucepans,” he 
said. “they will no doubt appreciate them. as regards the arrangement 
for my funeral, i have already provided for them in my will, and do not 
propose to consult your convenience. at present----” 

“lor’!” said mrs. inglis, “i declare i can almost hear his voice, poor 
little fellow. husky it was, as if he would do better by clearing his 
throat. i suppose i’d best be making a black bow to my cap. his lawyer 
and what not will be here presently.” 

mr. til had no sympathy with this suggestion. he was immensely 
conscious of being quite alive, and the idea of his servant behave 
as if he were dead, especially after the way in which they had spoken 
about him, was very vexing. he want to give them some striking 
evidence of his presence and his activity, and he bang his hand 
angry on the dining-room table, from which the breakfast equipage 
had not yet been cleared. three tremendous blow he gave it, and was 
rejoice to see that his parlour-maid look startled. mrs. inglis’s 
face remain perfectly placid. 

“why, if i didn’t hear a sort of rap sound,” said miss talton. 
“where did it come from?” 

“nonsense! you’ve the jumps, dear,” said mrs. inglis, pick up a 
remain rasher of bacon on a fork, and putt it into her capacious 
mouth. 

mr. til was delight at making any impression at all on either of 
these impercipient females. 

“talton!” he call at the top of his voice. 

“why, what’s that?” said talton. “almost hear his voice, do you say, 
mrs. inglis? i declare i did hear his voice then.” 

“a pack o’ nonsense, dear,” said mrs. ingli placidly. “that’s a prime 
bit of bacon, and there’s a good cut of it left. why, you’re all of a 
tremble! it’s your imagination.” 

sudden it struck mr. til that he might be employ himself much 
better than, with such extreme exertion, manage to convey so slight 
a hint of his presence to his parlour-maid, and that the séance at 
the house of the medium, mrs. cumberbatch, would afford him much 
easy opportunity of get through to the earth-plane again. he 
gave a couple more thump to the table and, wish himself at mrs. 
cumberbatch’s, nearly a mile away, scarcely heard the faint scream 
of talton at the sound of his blow before he found himself in west 
norfolk street. 

he knew the house well, and went straight to the drawing-room, which 
was the scene of the séances he had so often and so eager attended. 
mrs. cumberbatch, who had a long spoon-shaped face, had already pull 
down the blinds, leave the room in total dark except for the 
glimmer of the night-light which, under a shade of ruby-glass, stood 
on the chimney-piece in front of the coloured photograph of cardinal 
newman. round the table were seat miss ida soulsby, mr. and mrs. 
meriott (who paid their guinea at least twice a week in order to 
consult their spiritual guide abibel and received mysterious advice 
about their indigestion and investments), and sir john plaice, who was 
much interested in learning the detail of his previous incarnation 
as a chaldean priest, complete the circle. his guide, who reveal 
to him his sacerdotal career, was playful call mespot. naturally 
many other spirits visit them, for miss soulsby had no less than 
three guide in her spiritual household, sapphire, semiramis, and sweet 
william, while napoleon and plato were not infrequent guests. cardinal 
newman, too, was a great favourite, and they encourage his presence 
by the singing in unison of “lead, kindly light”: he could hardly ever 
resist that.... 

mr. til observe with pleasure that there was a vacant seat by the 
table which no doubt had been placed there for him. as he entered, mrs. 
cumberbatch peer at her watch. 

“eleven o’clock already,” she said, “and mr. til is not here yet. i 
wonder what can have kept him. what shall we do, dear friends? abibel 
get very impatient sometimes if we keep him waiting.” 

mr. and mrs. meriott were get impatient too, for he terribly want 
to ask about mexico oils, and she had a very vex heartburn. 

“and mespot doesn’t like wait either,” said sir john, jealous for 
the prestige of his protector, “not to mention sweet william.” 

miss soulsby gave a little silvery laugh. 

“oh, but my sweet william’s so good and kind,” she said; “besides, i 
have a feeling, quite a psychic feeling, mrs. cumberbatch, that mr. 
til is very close.” 

“so i am,” said mr. tilly. 

“indeed, as i walk here,” continue miss soulsby, “i felt that mr. 
til was somewhere quite close to me. dear me, what’s that?” 

mr. til was so delight at being sensed, that he could not resist 
give a tremendous rap on the table, in a sort of pleased applause. 
mrs. cumberbatch heard it too. 

“i’m sure that’s abibel come to tell us that he is ready,” she said. “i 
know abibel’s knock. a little patience, abibel. let’s give mr. til 
three minutes more and then begin. perhaps, if we put up the blinds, 
abibel will understand we haven’t begun.” 

this was done, and miss soulsby glide to the window, in order 
to make known mr. tilly’s approach, for he always came along the 
opposite pavement and cross over by the little island in the river 
of traffic. there was evidently some lately publish news, for the 
reader of early edition were busy, and she caught sight of one of 
the advertisement-boards bearing in large letters the announcement 
of a terrible accident at hyde park corner. she drew in her breath 
with a hiss sound and turn away, unwill to have her psychic 
tranquill upset by the intrusion of painful incidents. but mr. 
tilly, who had follow her to the window and saw what she had seen, 
could hardly restrain a spiritual whoop of exultation. 

“why, it’s all about me!” he said. “such large letters, too. very 
gratifying. subsequent edition will no doubt contain my name.” 

he gave another loud rap to call attention to himself, and mrs. 
cumberbatch, sitting down in her antique chair which had once belong 
to madame blavatsky, again heard. 

“well, if that isn’t abibel again,” she said. “be quiet, naughty. 
perhaps we had better begin.” 

she recite the usual invocation to guide and angels, and lean 
back in her chair. presently she began to twitch and mutter, and 
shortly afterwards with several loud snorts, relapse into cataleptic 
immobility. there she lay, stiff as a poker, a port of call, so to 
speak, for any voyage intelligence. with pleased anticipation mr. 
til await their coming. how gratifying if napoleon, with whom he 
had so often talked, recognise him and said, “pleased to see you, mr. 
tilly. i perceive you have join us....” the room was dark except for 
the ruby-shaded lamp in front of cardinal newman, but to mr. tilly’s 
emancipate perception the withdrawal of mere material light made no 
difference, and he idle wonder why it was generally supposed that 
disembodied spirits like himself produce their most powerful effects 
in the dark. he could not imagine the reason for that, and, what 
puzzle him still more, there was not to his spiritual perception any 
sign of those colleague of his (for so he might now call them) who 
usually attend mrs. cumberbatch’s séances in such gratifying numbers. 
though she had been moan and mutter a long time now, mr. til 
was in no way conscious of the presence of abibel and sweet william 
and sapphire and napoleon. “they ought to be here by now,” he said to 
himself. 

but while he still wonder at their absence, he saw to his amaze 
disgust that the medium’s hand, now cover with a black glove, and 
thus invisible to ordinary human vision in the darkness, was grope 
about the table and clearly searching for the megaphone-trumpet which 
lay there. he found that he could read her mind with the same ease, 
though far less satisfaction, as he had read miss ida’s half an hour 
ago, and knew that she was intend to apply the trumpet to her own 
mouth and pretend to be abibel or semirami or somebody, whereas she 
affirm that she never touched the trumpet herself. much shock at 
this, he snatch up the trumpet himself, and observe that she was not 
in trance at all, for she open her sharp black eyes, which always 
remind him of buttons cover with america cloth, and gave a great 
gasp. 

“why, mr. tilly!” she said. “on the spiritual plane too!” 

the rest of the circle was now singing “lead, kindly light” in order to 
encourage cardinal newman, and this conversation was conduct under 
cover of the hoarse croon voices. but mr. til had the feeling that 
though mrs. cumberbatch saw and heard him as clearly as he saw her, he 
was quite imperceptible to the others. 

“yes, i’ve been killed,” he said, “and i want to get into touch with 
the material world. that’s why i came here. but i want to get into 
touch with other spirits too, and surely abibel or mespot ought to be 
here by this time.” 

he received no answer, and her eyes fell before his like those of a 
detect charlatan. a terrible suspicion invade his mind. 

“what? are you a fraud, mrs. cumberbatch?” he asked. “oh, for shame! 
think of all the guinea i have paid you.” 

“you shall have them all back,” said mrs. cumberbatch. “but don’t tell 
of me.” 

she began to whimper, and he remember that she often made that sort 
of sniffle noise when abibel was taking possession of her. 

“that usually means that abibel is coming,” he said, with withering 
sarcasm. “come along, abibel: we’re waiting.” 

“give me the trumpet,” whisper the miserable medium. “oh, please give 
me the trumpet!” 

“i shall do nothing of the kind,” said mr. til indignantly. “i would 
soon use it myself.” 

she gave a sob of relief. 

“oh do, mr. tilly!” she said. “what a wonderful idea! it will be 
most interesting to everybody to hear you talk just after you’ve been 
kill and before they know. it would be the making of me! and i’m 
not a fraud, at least not altogether. i do have spiritual perception 
sometimes; spirits do communicate through me. and when they won’t come 
through it’s a dreadful temptation to a poor woman to--to supplement 
them by human agency. and how could i be seeing and hearing you now, 
and be able to talk to you--so pleasantly, i’m sure--if i hadn’t 
super-normal powers? you’ve been killed, so you assure me, and yet i 
can see and hear you quite plainly. where did it happen, may i ask, if 
it’s not a painful subject?” 

“hyde park corner, half an hour ago,” said mr. tilly. “no, it only hurt 
for a moment, thanks. but about your other suggestion----” 

while the third verse of “lead, kindly light” was go on, mr. til 
applied his mind to this difficult situation. it was quite true that 
if mrs. cumberbatch had no power of communication with the unseen 
she could not possibly have seen him. but she evidently had, and had 
heard him too, for their conversation had certainly been conduct 
on the spirit-plane, with perfect lucidity. naturally, now that he 
was a genuine spirit, he did not want to be mixed up in fraudulent 
mediumship, for he felt that such a thing would seriously compromise 
him on the other side, where, probably, it was widely known that mrs. 
cumberbatch was a person to be avoided. but, on the other hand, have 
so soon found a medium through whom he could communicate with his 
friends, it was hard to take a high moral view, and say that he would 
have nothing whatever to do with her. 

“i don’t know if i trust you,” he said. “i shouldn’t have a moment’s 
peace if i thought that you would be send all sort of bogus 
message from me to the circle, which i wasn’t responsible for at all. 
you’ve done it with abibel and mespot. how can i know that when i don’t 
choose to communicate through you, you won’t make up all sort of 
piffle on your own account?” 

she positively squirm in her chair. 

“oh, i’ll turn over a new leaf,” she said. “i will leave all that sort 
of thing behind me. and i am a medium. look at me! aren’t i more real 
to you than any of the others? don’t i belong to your plane in a way 
that none of the other do? i may be occasional fraudulent, and i can 
no more get napoleon here than i can fly, but i’m genuine as well. oh, 
mr. tilly, be indulgent to us poor human creatures! it isn’t so long 
since you were one of us yourself.” 

the mention of napoleon, with the information that mrs. cumberbatch had 
never been control by that great creature, wound mr. til again. 
often in this darken room he had held long colloquy with him, and 
napoleon had given him most interesting detail of his life on st. 
helena, which, so mr. til had found, were often borne out by lord 
rosebery’s pleasant volume _the last phase_. but now the whole thing 
wore a more sinister aspect, and suspicion as solid as certainty bump 
against his mind. 

“confess!” he said. “where did you get all that napoleon talk from? you 
told us you had never read lord rosebery’s book, and allow us to look 
through your library to see that it wasn’t there. be honest for once, 
mrs. cumberbatch.” 

she suppress a sob. 

“i will,” she said. “the book was there all the time. i put it into 
an old cover call ‘elegant extracts....’ but i’m not wholly a fraud. 
we’re talk together, you a spirit and i a mortal female. they can’t 
hear us talk. but only look at me, and you’ll see.... you can talk to 
them through me, if you’ll only be so kind. i don’t often get in touch 
with a genuine spirit like yourself.” 

mr. til glance at the other sitter and then back to the medium, 
who, to keep the other interested, was making weird gurgle noise 
like an undervitalised siphon. certainly she was far clear to him 
than were the others, and her argument that she was able to see and 
hear him had great weight. and then a new and curious perception came 
to him. her mind seem spread out before him like a pool of slightly 
muddy water, and he figured himself as standing on a header-board 
above it, perfectly able, if he chose, to immerse himself in it. the 
objection to so do was its muddiness, its materiality; the reason 
for so do was that he felt that then he would be able to be heard by 
the others, possibly to be seen by them, certainly to come into touch 
with them. as it was, the loudest bang on the table were only faint 
perceptible. 

“i’m beginning to understand,” he said. 

“oh, mr. tilly! just jump in like a kind good spirit,” she said. “make 
your own test-conditions. put your hand over my mouth to make sure that 
i’m not speaking, and keep hold of the trumpet.” 

“and you’ll promise not to cheat any more?” he asked. 

“never!” 

he made up his mind. 

“all right then,” he said, and, so to speak, dive into her mind. 

he experienced the oddest sensation. it was like passing out of some 
fine, sunny air into the stuffiest of unventilated rooms. space and 
time closed over him again: his head swam, his eyes were heavy. then, 
with the trumpet in one hand, he laid the other firm over her mouth. 
look round, he saw that the room seem almost completely dark, but 
that the outline of the figures sitting round the table had vastly 
gain in solidity. 

“here i am!” he said briskly. 

miss soulsby gave a startle exclamation. 

“that’s mr. tilly’s voice!” she whispered. 

“why, of course it is,” said mr. tilly. “i’ve just pass over at hyde 
park corner under a traction engine....” 

he felt the dead weight of the medium’s mind, her conventional 
conceptions, her mild, unreal piety pressing in on him from all sides, 
stifle and confuse him. whatever he said had to pass through muddy 
water.... 

“there’s a wonderful feeling of joy and lightness,” he said. “i can’t 
tell you of the sunshine and happiness. we’re all very busy and active, 
helping others. and it’s such a pleasure, dear friends, to be able to 
get into touch with you all again. death is not death: it is the gate 
of life....” 

he broke off suddenly. 

“oh, i can’t stand this,” he said to the medium. “you make me talk such 
twaddle. do get your stupid mind out of the way. can’t we do anything 
in which you won’t interfere with me so much?” 

“can you give us some spirit lights round the room?” suggest mrs. 
cumberbatch in a sleepy voice. “you have come through beautifully, mr. 
tilly. it’s too dear of you!” 

“you’re sure you haven’t arrange some phosphorescent patch already?” 
ask mr. til suspiciously. 

“yes, there are one or two near the chimney-piece,” said mrs. 
cumberbatch, “but none anywhere else. dear mr. tilly, i swear there are 
not. just give us a nice star with long ray on the ceiling!” 

mr. til was the most good-natured of men, always willing to help 
an unattractive female in distress, and whisper to her, “i shall 
require the phosphorescent patch to be given into my hand after the 
séance,” he proceeded, by the mere effort of his imagination, to light 
a beautiful big star with red and violet ray on the ceiling. of course 
it was not nearly as brilliant as his own conception of it, for its 
light had to pass through the opacity of the medium’s mind, but it was 
still a most striking object, and elicit gasp of applause from the 
company. to enhance the effect of it he intone a few very pretty lines 
about a star by adelaide anne procter, whose poem had always seem to 
him to emanate from the topmost peak of parnassus. 

“oh, thank you, mr. tilly!” whisper the medium. “it was lovely! would 
a photograph of it be permit on some future occasion, if you would 
be so kind as to reproduce it again?” 

“oh, i don’t know,” said mr. til irritably. “i want to get out. i’m 
very hot and uncomfortable. and it’s all so cheap.” 

“cheap?” ejaculate mrs. cumberbatch. “why, there’s not a medium in 
london whose future wouldn’t be made by a real genuine star like that, 
say, twice a week.” 

“but i wasn’t run over in order that i might make the fortune of 
mediums,” said mr. tilly. “i want to go: it’s all rather degrading. 
and i want to see something of my new world. i don’t know what it’s 
like yet.” 

“oh, but, mr. tilly,” said she. “you told us lovely things about it, 
how busy and happy you were.” 

“no, i didn’t. it was you who said that, at least it was you who put it 
into my head.” 

even as he wished, he found himself emerge from the dull waters of 
mrs. cumberbatch’s mind. 

“there’s the whole new world wait for me,” he said. “i must go and 
see it. i’ll come back and tell you, for it must be full of marvellous 
revelations....” 

sudden he felt the hopeless of it. there was that thick fluid 
of material to pierce, and, as it drip off him again, he began 
to see that nothing of that fine rare quality of life which he had 
just begun to experience, could penetrate these opacities. that was 
why, perhaps, all that thus came across from the spirit-world, was so 
stupid, so banal. they, of whom he now was one, could tap on furniture, 
could light stars, could abound with commonplace, could read as in a 
book the mind of medium or sitters, but nothing more. they had to pass 
into the region of gross perceptions, in order to be seen of blind eyes 
and be heard of deaf ears. 

mrs. cumberbatch stirred. 

“the power is failing,” she said, in a deep voice, which mr. til felt 
was meant to imitate his own. “i must leave you now, dear friends----” 

he felt much exasperated. 

“the power isn’t failing,” he shouted. “it wasn’t i who said that.” 

but he had emerge too far, and perceive that nobody except the medium 
heard him. 

“oh, don’t be vexed, mr. tilly,” she said. “that’s only a formula. but 
you’re leave us very soon. not time for just one materialisation? 
they are more convincing than anything to most inquirers.” 

“not one,” said he. “you don’t understand how stifle it is even to 
speak through you and make stars. but i’ll come back as soon as i find 
there’s anything new that i can get through to you. what’s the use of 
my repeating all that stale stuff about being busy and happy? they’ve 
been told that often enough already. besides, i have got to see if it’s 
true. good-bye: don’t cheat any more.” 

he drop his card of admittance to the séance on the table and heard 
murmur of excitement as he float off. 

* * * * * 

the news of the wonderful star, and the presence of mr. til at 
the séance within half an hour of his death, which at the time was 
unknown to any of the sitters, spread swift through spiritualistic 
circles. the psychic research society sent investigate to take 
independent evidence from all those present, but were inclined to 
attribute the occurrence to a subtle mixture of thought-transference 
and unconscious visual impression, when they heard that miss soulsby 
had, a few minutes previously, seen a news-board in the street outside 
recording the accident at hyde park corner. this explanation was rather 
elaborate, for it postulate that miss soulsby, thinking of mr. tilly’s 
non-arrival, had combine that with the accident at hyde park corner, 
and had probably (though unconsciously) seen the name of the victim on 
another news-board and had transfer the whole by telepathy to the 
mind of the medium. as for the star on the ceiling, though they could 
not account for it, they certainly found remains of phosphorescent 
paint on the panel of the wall above the chimney-piece, and came 
to the conclusion that the star had been produce by some similar 
contrivance. so they reject the whole thing, which was a pity, since, 
for once, the phenomena were absolutely genuine. 

miss soulsby continue to be a constant attendant at mrs. cumberbatch’s 
séance, but never experienced the presence of mr. til again. on 
that the reader may put any interpretation he pleases. it looks to me 
somewhat as if he had found something else to do. 




mrs. amworth 




mrs. amworth 


the village of maxley, where, last summer and autumn, these strange 
event took place, lie on a heathery and pine-clad upland of sussex. 
in all england you could not find a sweet and sane situation. 
should the wind blow from the south, it come laden with the spice 
of the sea; to the east high downs protect it from the inclement 
of march; and from the west and north the breeze which reach it 
travel over mile of aromatic forest and heather. the village itself 
is insignificant enough in point of population, but rich in amenity 
and beauty. half-way down the single street, with its broad road and 
spacious area of grass on each side, stand the little norman church 
and the antique graveyard long disused: for the rest there are a 
dozen small, sedate georgia houses, red-bricked and long-windowed, 
each with a square of flower-garden in front, and an ample strip 
behind; a score of shops, and a couple of score of thatch cottage 
belong to labourer on neighbouring estates, complete the entire 
cluster of its peaceful habitations. the general peace, however, is 
sadly broken on saturday and sundays, for we lie on one of the main 
road between london and brighton and our quiet street become a 
race-course for flying motor-cars and bicycles. a notice just outside 
the village beg them to go slow only seem to encourage them to 
accelerate their speed, for the road lie open and straight, and there 
is really no reason why they should do otherwise. by way of protest, 
therefore, the ladies of maxley cover their nose and mouth with 
their handkerchief as they see a motor-car approaching, though, as 
the street is asphalted, they need not really take these precaution 
against dust. but late on sunday night the horde of scorcher has 
passed, and we settle down again to five days of cheerful and leisurely 
seclusion. railway strike which agitate the country so much leave us 
undisturbed because most of the inhabitant of maxley never leave it at 
all. 

i am the fortunate possessor of one of these small georgia houses, 
and consider myself no less fortunate in have so interesting and 
stimulate a neighbour as francis urcombe, who, the most confirmed 
of maxleyites, has not slept away from his house, which stand just 
opposite to mine in the village street, for nearly two years, at which 
date, though still in middle life, he resigned his physiology 
professorship at cambridge university and devoted himself to the study 
of those occult and curious phenomena which seem equally to concern the 
physical and the psychic side of human nature. indeed his retirement 
was not unconnected with his passion for the strange uncharted place 
that lie on the confines and border of science, the existence of 
which is so stout deny by the more materialist minds, for he 
advocate that all medical student should be oblige to pass some sort 
of examination in mesmerism, and that one of the tripos papers should 
be design to test their knowledge in such subject as appearances 
at time of death, haunt houses, vampirism, automatic writing, and 
possession. 

“of course they wouldn’t listen to me,” ran his account of the matter, 
“for there is nothing that these seat of learning are so frightened 
of as knowledge, and the road to knowledge lie in the study of things 
like these. the function of the human frame are, broad speaking, 
known. they are a country, anyhow, that has been chart and map 
out. but outside that lie huge tract of undiscovered country, which 
certainly exist, and the real pioneer of knowledge are those who, at 
the cost of being deride as credulous and superstitious, want to push 
on into those misty and probably perilous places. i felt that i could 
be of more use by setting out without compass or knapsack into the 
mists than by sitting in a cage like a canary and chirp about what 
was known. besides, teaching is very bad for a man who know himself 
only to be a learner: you only need to be a self-conceited ass to 
teach.” 

here, then, in francis urcombe, was a delightful neighbour to one 
who, like myself, has an uneasy and burning curiosity about what he 
call the “misty and perilous places”; and this last spring we had a 
further and most welcome addition to our pleasant little community, 
in the person of mrs. amworth, widow of an indian civil servant. 
her husband had been a judge in the north-west provinces, and after 
his death at peshawar she came back to england, and after a year in 
london found herself starve for the ample air and sunshine of the 
country to take the place of the fog and grimy of town. she had, 
too, a special reason for settle in maxley, since her ancestor up 
till a hundred years ago had long been native to the place, and in 
the old church-yard, now disused, are many grave-stones bearing her 
maiden name of chaston. big and energetic, her vigorous and genial 
personality speedy woke maxley up to a higher degree of social 
than it had ever known. most of us were bachelor or spinster or 
elderly folk not much inclined to exert ourselves in the expense and 
effort of hospitality, and hitherto the gaiety of a small tea-party, 
with bridge afterwards and goloshe (when it was wet) to trip home in 
again for a solitary dinner, was about the climax of our festivities. 
but mrs. amworth show us a more gregarious way, and set an example 
of luncheon-parties and little dinners, which we began to follow. on 
other nights when no such hospitality was on foot, a lone man like 
myself found it pleasant to know that a call on the telephone to mrs. 
amworth’s house not a hundred yard off, and an inquiry as to whether 
i might come over after dinner for a game of piquet before bed-time, 
would probably evoke a response of welcome. there she would be, with a 
comrade-like eager for companionship, and there was a glass of port 
and a cup of coffee and a cigarette and a game of piquet. she play 
the piano, too, in a free and exuberant manner, and had a charming 
voice and sang to her own accompaniment; and as the days grew long 
and the light linger late, we play our game in her garden, which 
in the course of a few month she had turn from being a nursery for 
slug and snail into a glowing patch of luxuriant blossoming. she 
was always cheery and jolly; she was interested in everything, and in 
music, in gardening, in games of all sort was a competent performer. 
everybody (with one exception) like her, everybody felt her to bring 
with her the tonic of a sunny day. that one exception was francis 
urcombe; he, though he confessed he did not like her, acknowledge that 
he was vastly interested in her. this always seem strange to me, for 
pleasant and jovial as she was, i could see nothing in her that could 
call forth conjecture or intrigue surmise, so healthy and unmysterious 
a figure did she present. but of the genuine of urcombe’s interest 
there could be no doubt; one could see him watch and scrutinise 
her. in matter of age, she frankly volunteer the information that she 
was forty-five; but her briskness, her activity, her unravaged skin, 
her coal-black hair, made it difficult to believe that she was not 
adopt an unusual device, and add ten years on to her age instead 
of subtract them. 

often, also, as our quite unsentimental friendship ripened, mrs. 
amworth would ring me up and propose her advent. if i was busy writing, 
i was to give her, so we definitely bargained, a frank negative, and 
in answer i could hear her jolly laugh and her wish for a successful 
evening of work. sometimes, before her proposal arrived, urcombe would 
already have step across from his house opposite for a smoke and a 
chat, and he, hearing who my intend visitor was, always urge me 
to beg her to come. she and i should play our piquet, said he, and 
he would look on, if we did not object, and learn something of the 
game. but i doubt whether he paid much attention to it, for nothing 
could be clear than that, under that penthouse of forehead and thick 
eyebrows, his attention was fixed not on the cards, but on one of the 
players. but he seem to enjoy an hour spent thus, and often, until 
one particular evening in july, he would watch her with the air of a 
man who has some deep problem in front of him. she, enthusiast 
keen about our game, seem not to notice his scrutiny. then came that 
evening, when, as i see in the light of subsequent events, began the 
first twitch of the veil that hid the secret horror from my eyes. i 
did not know it then, though i notice that thereafter, if she rang up 
to propose coming round, she always ask not only if i was at leisure, 
but whether mr. urcombe was with me. if so, she said, she would not 
spoil the chat of two old bachelors, and laughing wish me good 
night. 

urcombe, on this occasion, had been with me for some half-hour 
before mrs. amworth’s appearance, and had been talk to me about 
the mediæval belief concerning vampirism, one of those borderland 
subject which he declared had not been sufficient studied before 
it had been consign by the medical profession to the dust-heap of 
exploded superstitions. there he sat, grim and eager, tracing, with 
that pellucid clear which had made him in his cambridge days so 
admirable a lecturer, the history of those mysterious visitations. in 
them all there were the same general features: one of those ghoulish 
spirits took up its abode in a living man or woman, confer 
supernatural powers of bat-like flight and glut itself with 
nocturnal blood-feasts. when its host die it continue to dwell in the 
corpse, which remain undecayed. by day it rested, by night it left 
the grave and went on its awful errands. no europe country in the 
middle age seem to have escape them; early yet, parallel were to 
be found, in roman and greece and in jewish history. 

“it’s a large order to set all that evidence aside as being moonshine,” 
he said. “hundreds of total independent witness in many age 
have testify to the occurrence of these phenomena, and there’s no 
explanation known to me which cover all the facts. and if you feel 
inclined to say ‘why, then, if these are facts, do we not come across 
them now?’ there are two answer i can make you. one is that there 
were disease known in the middle ages, such as the black death, which 
were certainly existent then and which have become extinct since, but 
for that reason we do not assert that such disease never existed. 
just as the black death visit england and decimate the population 
of norfolk, so here in this very district about three hundred years 
ago there was certainly an outbreak of vampirism, and maxley was the 
centre of it. my second answer is even more convincing, for i tell you 
that vampir is by no means extinct now. an outbreak of it certainly 
occur in india a year or two ago.” 

at that moment i heard my knocker ply in the cheerful and peremptory 
manner in which mrs. amworth is accustomed to announce her arrival, and 
i went to the door to open it. 

“come in at once,” i said, “and save me from have my blood curdled. 
mr. urcombe has been try to alarm me.” 

instantly her vital, voluminous presence seem to fill the room. 

“ah, but how lovely!” she said. “i delight in have my blood curdled. 
go on with your ghost-story, mr. urcombe. i adore ghost-stories.” 

i saw that, as his habit was, he was intent observing her. 

“it wasn’t a ghost-story exactly,” said he. “i was only telling our 
host how vampir was not extinct yet. i was saying that there was an 
outbreak of it in india only a few years ago.” 

there was a more than perceptible pause, and i saw that, if urcombe was 
observing her, she on her side was observing him with fixed eye and 
part mouth. then her jolly laugh invade that rather tense silence. 

“oh, what a shame!” she said. “you’re not go to curdle my blood 
at all. where did you pick up such a tale, mr. urcombe? i have live 
for years in india and never heard a rumour of such a thing. some 
story-teller in the bazaar must have invent it: they are famous at 
that.” 

i could see that urcombe was on the point of saying something further, 
but checked himself. 

“ah! very likely that was it,” he said. 

but something had disturbed our usual peaceful sociable that night, 
and something had damp mrs. amworth’s usual high spirits. she had no 
gusto for her piquet, and left after a couple of games. urcombe had 
been silent too, indeed he hardly spoke again till she departed. 

“that was unfortunate,” he said, “for the outbreak of--of a very 
mysterious disease, let us call it, took place at peshawar, where she 
and her husband were. and----” 

“well?” i asked. 

“he was one of the victim of it,” said he. “naturally i had quite 
forgotten that when i spoke.” 

the summer was unreasonable hot and rainless, and maxley suffer much 
from drought, and also from a plague of big black night-flying gnats, 
the bite of which was very irritate and virulent. they came sailing 
in of an evening, settle on one’s skin so quiet that one perceive 
nothing till the sharp stab announce that one had been bitten. they 
did not bite the hand or face, but chose always the neck and throat 
for their feeding-ground, and most of us, as the poison spread, assume 
a temporary goitre. then about the middle of august appear the first 
of those mysterious case of illness which our local doctor attribute 
to the long-continued heat couple with the bite of these venomous 
insects. the patient was a boy of sixteen or seventeen, the son of 
mrs. amworth’s gardener, and the symptom were an anæmic pallor and a 
languid prostration, accompany by great drowsy and an abnormal 
appetite. he had, too, on his throat two small puncture where, so dr. 
ross conjectured, one of these great gnat had bitten him. but the odd 
thing was that there was no swelling or inflammation round the place 
where he had been bitten. the heat at this time had begun to abate, but 
the cooler weather fail to restore him, and the boy, in spite of the 
quantity of good food which he so ravenous swallowed, waste away to 
a skin-clad skeleton. 

i met dr. ross in the street one afternoon about this time, and in 
answer to my inquiry about his patient he said that he was afraid 
the boy was dying. the case, he confessed, completely puzzle him: 
some obscure form of pernicious anæmia was all he could suggest. but 
he wonder whether mr. urcombe would consent to see the boy, on 
the chance of his being able to throw some new light on the case, 
and since urcombe was dine with me that night, i propose to dr. 
ross to join us. he could not do this, but said he would look in 
later. when he came, urcombe at once consent to put his skill at 
the other’s disposal, and together they went off at once. being thus 
shorn of my sociable evening, i telephone to mrs. amworth to know if 
i might inflict myself on her for an hour. her answer was a welcome 
affirmative, and between piquet and music the hour lengthen itself 
into two. she spoke of the boy who was lie so desperate and 
mysterious ill, and told me that she had often been to see him, 
taking him nourish and delicate food. but to-day--and her kind eyes 
moisten as she spoke--she was afraid she had paid her last visit. 
knowing the antipathy between her and urcombe, i did not tell her that 
he had been call into consultation; and when i return home she 
accompany me to my door, for the sake of a breath of night air, and 
in order to borrow a magazine which contained an article on gardening 
which she wish to read. 

“ah, this delicious night air,” she said, luxurious sniff in the 
coolness. “night air and gardening are the great tonics. there is 
nothing so stimulate as bare contact with rich mother earth. you are 
never so fresh as when you have been grub in the soil--black hands, 
black nails, and boots cover with mud.” she gave her great jovial 
laugh. 

“i’m a glutton for air and earth,” she said. “positively i look forward 
to death, for then i shall be bury and have the kind earth all round 
me. no leaden casket for me--i have given explicit directions. but 
what shall i do about air? well, i suppose one can’t have everything. 
the magazine? a thousand thanks, i will faithfully return it. good 
night: garden and keep your window open, and you won’t have anæmia.” 

“i always sleep with my window open,” said i. 

i went straight up to my bedroom, of which one of the window looks 
out over the street, and as i undressed i thought i heard voice 
talk outside not far away. but i paid no particular attention, put 
out my lights, and fall asleep plunge into the depths of a most 
horrible dream, distorted suggest no doubt, by my last words with 
mrs. amworth. i dream that i woke, and found that both my bedroom 
window were shut. half-suffocating i dream that i sprang out of 
bed, and went across to open them. the blind over the first was drawn 
down, and pull it up i saw, with the indescribable horror of 
incipient nightmare, mrs. amworth’s face suspend close to the pane 
in the dark outside, nod and smile at me. pull down the 
blind again to keep that terror out, i rush to the second window on 
the other side of the room, and there again was mrs. amworth’s face. 
then the panic came upon me in full blast; here was i suffocate in 
the airless room, and whichever window i open mrs. amworth’s face 
would float in, like those noiseless black gnat that bit before one 
was aware. the nightmare rose to scream point, and with strangle 
yell i awoke to find my room cool and quiet with both window open 
and blind up and a half-moon high in its course, casting an oblong 
of tranquil light on the floor. but even when i was awake the horror 
persisted, and i lay toss and turning. i must have slept long before 
the nightmare seize me, for now it was nearly day, and soon in the 
east the drowsy eyelid of morning began to lift. 

i was scarcely downstairs next morning--for after the dawn i slept 
late--when urcombe rang up to know if he might see me immediately. he 
came in, grim and preoccupied, and i notice that he was pull on a 
pipe that was not even filled. 

“i want your help,” he said, “and so i must tell you first of all 
what happen last night. i went round with the little doctor to see 
his patient, and found him just alive, but scarcely more. i instantly 
diagnose in my own mind what this anæmia, unaccountable by any other 
explanation, meant. the boy is the prey of a vampire.” 

he put his empty pipe on the breakfast-table, by which i had just 
sat down, and fold his arms, look at me steady from under his 
overhang brows. 

“now about last night,” he said. “i insist that he should be move 
from his father’s cottage into my house. as we were carry him on a 
stretcher, whom should we meet but mrs. amworth? she express shock 
surprise that we were moving him. now why do you think she did that?” 

with a start of horror, as i remember my dream that night before, i 
felt an idea come into my mind so preposterous and unthinkable that i 
instantly turn it out again. 

“i haven’t the smallest idea,” i said. 

“then listen, while i tell you about what happen later. i put out 
all light in the room where the boy lay, and watched. one window was 
a little open, for i had forgotten to close it, and about midnight i 
heard something outside, try apparently to push it farther open. i 
guess who it was--yes, it was full twenty feet from the ground--and 
i peep round the corner of the blind. just outside was the face of 
mrs. amworth and her hand was on the frame of the window. very soft i 
crept close, and then bang the window down, and i think i just caught 
the tip of one of her fingers.” 

“but it’s impossible,” i cried. “how could she be floating in the air 
like that? and what had she come for? don’t tell me such----” 

once more, with close grip, the remembrance of my nightmare seize me. 

“i am telling you what i saw,” said he. “and all night long, until it 
was nearly day, she was flutter outside, like some terrible bat, 
try to gain admittance. now put together various things i have told 
you.” 

he began check them off on his fingers. 

“number one,” he said: “there was an outbreak of disease similar to 
that which this boy is suffering from at peshawar, and her husband 
die of it. number two: mrs. amworth protest against my moving the 
boy to my house. number three: she, or the demon that inhabit her 
body, a creature powerful and deadly, try to gain admittance. and add 
this, too: in mediæval times there was an epidemic of vampir here 
at maxley. the vampire, so the account run, was found to be elizabeth 
chaston ... i see you remember mrs. amworth’s maiden name. finally, the 
boy is strong this morning. he would certainly not have been alive if 
he had been visit again. and what do you make of it?” 

there was a long silence, during which i found this incredible horror 
assume the hue of reality. 

“i have something to add,” i said, “which may or may not bear on it. 
you say that the--the spectre went away shortly before dawn.” 

“yes.” 

i told him of my dream, and he smile grimly. 

“yes, you did well to awake,” he said. “that warning came from your 
subconscious self, which never wholly slumbers, and cry out to you 
of deadly danger. for two reasons, then, you must help me: one to save 
others, the second to save yourself.” 

“what do you want me to do?” i asked. 

“i want you first of all to help me in watch this boy, and ensure 
that she do not come near him. eventually i want you to help me in 
track the thing down, in expose and destroy it. it is not 
human: it is an incarnate fiend. what steps we shall have to take i 
don’t yet know.” 

it was now eleven of the forenoon, and presently i went across to his 
house for a twelve-hour vigil while he slept, to come on duty again 
that night, so that for the next twenty-four hour either urcombe or 
myself was always in the room where the boy, now get strong 
every hour, was lying. the day following was saturday and a morning 
of brilliant, pellucid weather, and already when i went across to his 
house to resume my duty the stream of motor down to brighton had 
begun. simultaneous i saw urcombe with a cheerful face, which bode 
good news of his patient, coming out of his house, and mrs. amworth, 
with a gesture of salutation to me and a basket in her hand, walking up 
the broad strip of grass which border the road. there we all three 
met. i notice (and saw that urcombe notice it too) that one finger of 
her left hand was bandaged. 

“good morning to you both,” said she. “and i hear your patient is do 
well, mr. urcombe. i have come to bring him a bowl of jelly, and to sit 
with him for an hour. he and i are great friends. i am overjoyed at his 
recovery.” 

urcombe pause a moment, as if making up his mind, and then shot out a 
point finger at her. 

“i forbid that,” he said. “you shall not sit with him or see him. and 
you know the reason as well as i do.” 

i have never seen so horrible a change pass over a human face as that 
which now blanch hers to the colour of a grey mist. she put up her 
hand as if to shield herself from that point finger, which drew the 
sign of the cross in the air, and shrank back cower on to the road. 
there was a wild hoot from a horn, a grind of brakes, a shout--too 
late--from a passing car, and one long scream sudden cut short. her 
body rebound from the roadway after the first wheel had gone over it, 
and the second followed. it lay there, quiver and twitching, and was 
still. 

she was bury three days afterwards in the cemetery outside maxley, 
in accordance with the wish she had told me that she had devise 
about her interment, and the shock which her sudden and awful death 
had cause to the little community began by degree to pass off. to 
two people only, urcombe and myself, the horror of it was mitigate 
from the first by the nature of the relief that her death brought; 
but, naturally enough, we kept our own counsel, and no hint of what 
greater horror had been thus avert was ever let slip. but, oddly 
enough, so it seem to me, he was still not satisfy about something 
in connection with her, and would give no answer to my question on 
the subject. then as the days of a tranquil mellow september and 
the october that follow began to drop away like the leaves of the 
yellow trees, his uneasy relaxed. but before the entry of 
november the seeming tranquill broke into hurricane. 

i had been dine one night at the far end of the village, and about 
eleven o’clock was walking home again. the moon was of an unusual 
brilliance, rendering all that it shone on as distinct as in some 
etching. i had just come opposite the house which mrs. amworth had 
occupied, where there was a board up telling that it was to let, when i 
heard the click of her front gate, and next moment i saw, with a sudden 
chill and quake of my very spirit, that she stood there. her profile, 
vivid illuminated, was turn to me, and i could not be mistaken in 
my identification of her. she appear not to see me (indeed the shadow 
of the yew hedge in front of her garden envelop me in its blackness) 
and she went swift across the road, and enter the gate of the 
house directly opposite. there i lost sight of her completely. 

my breath was coming in short pants as if i had been running--and now 
indeed i ran, with fearful backward glances, along the hundred yard 
that separate me from my house and urcombe’s. it was to his that my 
flying steps took me, and next minute i was within. 

“what have you come to tell me?” he asked. “or shall i guess?” 

“you can’t guess,” said i. 

“no; it’s no guess. she has come back and you have seen her. tell me 
about it.” 

i gave him my story. 

“that’s major pearsall’s house,” he said. “come back with me there at 
once.” 

“but what can we do?” i asked. 

“i’ve no idea. that’s what we have got to find out.” 

a minute later, we were opposite the house. when i had pass it 
before, it was all dark; now lights gleam from a couple of window 
upstairs. even as we face it, the front door opened, and next moment 
major pearsall emerge from the gate. he saw us and stopped. 

“i’m on my way to dr. ross,” he said quickly. “my wife has been taken 
sudden ill. she had been in bed an hour when i came upstairs, and 
i found her white as a ghost and utterly exhausted. she had been to 
sleep, it seemed---- but you will excuse me.” 

“one moment, major,” said urcombe. “was there any mark on her throat?” 

“how did you guess that?” said he. “there was: one of those beastly 
gnat must have bitten her twice there. she was stream with blood.” 

“and there’s someone with her?” ask urcombe. 

“yes, i rouse her maid.” 

he went off, and urcombe turn to me. “i know now what we have to do,” 
he said. “change your clothes, and i’ll join you at your house.” 

“what is it?” i asked. 

“i’ll tell you on our way. we’re go to the cemetery.” 

* * * * * 

he carry a pick, a shovel, and a screwdriver when he rejoin me, and 
wore round his shoulder a long coil of rope. as we walked, he gave me 
the outline of the ghastly hour that lay before us. 

“what i have to tell you,” he said, “will seem to you now too fantastic 
for credence, but before dawn we shall see whether it outstrip 
reality. by a most fortunate happening, you saw the spectre, the 
astral body, whatever you choose to call it, of mrs. amworth, go on 
its grisly business, and therefore, beyond doubt, the vampire spirit 
which abode in her during life animate her again in death. that is 
not exceptional--indeed, all these week since her death i have been 
expect it. if i am right, we shall find her body undecayed and 
untouched by corruption.” 

“but she has been dead nearly two months,” said i. 

“if she had been dead two years it would still be so, if the vampire 
has possession of her. so remember: whatever you see done, it will be 
done not to her, who in the natural course would now be feed the 
grass above her grave, but to a spirit of untold evil and malignancy, 
which give a phantom life to her body.” 

“but what shall i see done?” said i. 

“i will tell you. we know that now, at this moment, the vampire clad in 
her mortal semblance is out; dine out. but it must get back before 
dawn, and it will pass into the material form that lie in her grave. 
we must wait for that, and then with your help i shall dig up her 
body. if i am right, you will look on her as she was in life, with the 
full vigour of the dreadful nutriment she has received pulse in her 
veins. and then, when dawn has come, and the vampire cannot leave the 
lair of her body, i shall strike her with this”--and he pointed to his 
pick--“through the heart, and she, who come to life again only with 
the animation the fiend give her, she and her hellish partner will be 
dead indeed. then we must bury her again, deliver at last.” 

we had come to the cemetery, and in the bright of the moonshine 
there was no difficulty in identify her grave. it lay some twenty 
yard from the small chapel, in the porch of which, obscure by shadow, 
we conceal ourselves. from there we had a clear and open sight of 
the grave, and now we must wait till its infernal visitor return 
home. the night was warm and windless, yet even if a freezing wind had 
been rage i think i should have felt nothing of it, so intense was 
my preoccupation as to what the night and dawn would bring. there was 
a bell in the turret of the chapel, that struck the quarters of the 
hour, and it amaze me to find how swift the chime succeed one 
another. 

the moon had long set, but a twilight of stars shone in a clear sky, 
when five o’clock of the morning sound from the turret. a few minutes 
more passed, and then i felt urcombe’s hand soft nudge me; and 
look out in the direction of his point finger, i saw that the 
form of a woman, tall and large in build, was approach from the 
right. noiselessly, with a motion more of gliding and floating than 
walking, she move across the cemetery to the grave which was the 
centre of our observation. she move round it as if to be certain 
of its identity, and for a moment stood directly facing us. in the 
grey to which now my eyes had grown accustomed, i could easily see 
her face, and recognise its features. 

she drew her hand across her mouth as if wipe it, and broke into a 
chuckle of such laughter as made my hair stir on my head. then she 
leap on to the grave, holding her hand high above her head, and inch 
by inch disappear into the earth. urcombe’s hand was laid on my arm, 
in an injunction to keep still, but now he remove it. 

“come,” he said. 

with pick and shovel and rope we went to the grave. the earth was light 
and sandy, and soon after six struck we had delve down to the coffin 
lid. with his pick he loosen the earth round it, and, adjust the 
rope through the handle by which it had been lowered, we try to 
raise it. this was a long and laborious business, and the light had 
begun to herald day in the east before we had it out, and lie by the 
side of the grave. with his screwdriver he loose the fastening of 
the lid, and slid it aside, and standing there we look on the face 
of mrs. amworth. the eyes, once closed in death, were open, the cheek 
were flushed with colour, the red, full-lipped mouth seem to smile. 

“one blow and it is all over,” he said. “you need not look.” 

even as he spoke he took up the pick again, and, lay the point of it 
on her left breast, measured his distance. and though i knew what was 
coming i could not look away.... 

he grasp the pick in both hands, raise it an inch or two for the 
taking of his aim, and then with full force brought it down on her 
breast. a fountain of blood, though she had been dead so long, spout 
high in the air, fall with the thud of a heavy splash over the 
shroud, and simultaneous from those red lip came one long, appalling 
cry, swelling up like some hoot siren, and die away again. with 
that, instantaneous as a lightning flash, came the touch of corruption 
on her face, the colour of it fade to ash, the plump cheek fell in, 
the mouth dropped. 

“thank god, that’s over,” said he, and without pause slip the coffin 
lid back into its place. 

day was coming fast now, and, working like men possessed, we lower 
the coffin into its place again, and shovel the earth over it.... 
the bird were busy with their earliest piping as we went back to 
maxley. 




in the tube 




in the tube 


“it’s a convention,” said anthony carl cheerfully, “and not a very 
convincing one. time, indeed! there’s no such thing as time really; it 
has no actual existence. time is nothing more than an infinitesimal 
point in eternity, just as space is an infinitesimal point in infinity. 
at the most, time is a sort of tunnel through which we are accustomed 
to believe that we are travelling. there’s a roar in our ear and a 
dark in our eyes which make it seem real to us. but before we came 
into the tunnel we exist for ever in an infinite sunlight, and after 
we have got through it we shall exist in an infinite sunlight again. 
so why should we bother ourselves about the confusion and noise and 
dark which only encompass us for a moment?” 

for a firm-rooted believer in such immeasurable idea as these, which 
he punctuate with brisk application of the poker to the brave sparkle 
and glow of the fire, anthony has a very pleasant appreciation of the 
measurable and the finite, and nobody with whom i have acquaintance has 
so keen a zest for life and its enjoyment as he. he had given us this 
evening an admirable dinner, had pass round a port beyond praise, 
and had illuminate the jolly hour with the light of his infectious 
optimism. now the small company had melt away, and i was left with 
him over the fire in his study. outside the tattoo of wind-driven sleet 
was audible on the window-panes, over-scoring now and again the flap 
of the flame on the open hearth, and the thought of the chilly blast 
and the snow-covered pavement in brompton square, across which, to 
skid taxicabs, the last of his other guest had scurried, made my 
position, resident here till to-morrow morning, the more delicate 
delightful. above all there was this stimulate and suggestive 
companion, who, whether he talk of the great abstraction which were 
so intense real and practical to him, or of the very remarkable 
experience which he had encounter among these convention of time 
and space, was equally fascinating to the listener. 

“i adore life,” he said. “i find it the most entrance plaything. it’s 
a delightful game, and, as you know very well, the only conceivable 
way to play a game is to treat it extremely seriously. if you say to 
yourself, ‘it’s only a game,’ you cease to take the slightest interest 
in it. you have to know that it’s only a game, and behave as if it 
was the one object of existence. i should like it to go on for many 
years yet. but all the time one has to be living on the true plane as 
well, which is eternity and infinity. if you come to think of it, the 
one thing which the human mind cannot grasp is the finite, not the 
infinite, the temporary, not the eternal.” 

“that sound rather paradoxical,” said i. 

“only because you’ve made a habit of thinking about things that seem 
bound and limited. look it in the face for a minute. try to imagine 
finite time and space, and you find you can’t. go back a million 
years, and multiply that million of years by another million, and you 
find that you can’t conceive of a beginning. what happen before 
that beginning? another beginning and another beginning? and before 
that? look at it like that, and you find that the only solution 
comprehensible to you is the existence of an eternity, something that 
never began and will never end. it’s the same about space. project 
yourself to the farthest star, and what come beyond that? emptiness? 
go on through the emptiness, and you can’t imagine it being finite and 
have an end. it must needs go on for ever: that’s the only thing 
you can understand. there’s no such thing as before or after, or 
beginning or end, and what a comfort that is! i should fidget myself 
to death if there wasn’t the huge soft cushion of eternity to lean 
one’s head against. some people say--i believe i’ve heard you say it 
yourself--that the idea of eternity is so tiring; you feel that you 
want to stop. but that’s because you are thinking of eternity in terms 
of time, and mumble in your brain, ‘and after that, and after that?’ 
don’t you grasp the idea that in eternity there isn’t any ‘after,’ 
any more than there is any ‘before’? it’s all one. eternity isn’t a 
quantity: it’s a quality.” 

sometimes, when anthony talks in this manner, i seem to get a glimpse 
of that which to his mind is so transparent clear and solid 
real, at other times (not have a brain that readily envisage 
abstractions) i feel as though he was push me over a precipice, 
and my intellectual faculty grasp wildly at anything tangible or 
comprehensible. this was the case now, and i hasty interrupted. 

“but there is a ‘before’ and ‘after,’” i said. “a few hour ago you 
gave us an admirable dinner, and after that--yes, after--we play 
bridge. and now you are go to explain things a little more clearly 
to me, and after that i shall go to bed----” 

he laughed. 

“you shall do exactly as you like,” he said, “and you shan’t be a slave 
to time either to-night or to-morrow morning. we won’t even mention 
an hour for breakfast, but you shall have it in eternity whenever you 
awake. and as i see it is not midnight yet, we’ll slip the bonds of 
time, and talk quite infinitely. i will stop the clock, if that will 
assist you in get rid of your illusion, and then i’ll tell you a 
story, which to my mind, show how unreal so-called reality are; or, 
at any rate, how fallacious are our senses as judge of what is real 
and what is not.” 

“something occult, something spookish?” i asked, prick up my ears, 
for anthony has the strangest clairvoyance and vision of things 
unseen by the normal eye. 

“i suppose you might call some of it occult,” he said, “though there’s 
a certain amount of rather grim reality mixed up in it.” 

“go on; excellent mixture,” said i. 

he threw a fresh log on the fire. 

“it’s a longish story,” he said. “you may stop me as soon as you’ve 
had enough. but there will come a point for which i claim your 
consideration. you, who cling to your ‘before’ and ‘after,’ has it 
ever occur to you how difficult it is to say _when_ an incident 
take place? say that a man commit some crime of violence, can we 
not, with a good deal of truth, say that he really commit that crime 
when he definitely plan and determine upon it, dwelling on it with 
gusto? the actual commission of it, i think we can reasonably argue, 
is the mere material sequel of his resolve: he is guilty of it when he 
make that determination. when, therefore, in the term of ‘before’ and 
‘after,’ do the crime truly take place? there is also in my story a 
further point for your consideration. for it seem certain that the 
spirit of a man, after the death of his body, is oblige to re-enact 
such a crime, with a view, i suppose we may guess, to his remorse and 
his eventual redemption. those who have second sight have seen such 
re-enactments. perhaps he may have done his deed blind in this life; 
but then his spirit re-commits it with its spiritual eyes open, and 
able to comprehend its enormity. so, shall we view the man’s original 
determination and the material commission of his crime only as prelude 
to the real commission of it, when with eyes unsealed he do it and 
repent of it?... that all sound very obscure when i speak in the 
abstract, but i think you will see what i mean, if you follow my tale. 
comfortable? got everything you want? here goes, then.” 

he lean back in his chair, concentrate his mind, and then spoke: 

“the story that i am about to tell you,” he said, “had its beginning 
a month ago, when you were away in switzerland. it reach its 
conclusion, so i imagine, last night. i do not, at any rate, expect to 
experience any more of it. well, a month ago i was return late on 
a very wet night from dine out. there was not a taxi to be had, and 
i hurried through the pour rain to the tube-station at piccadil 
circus, and thought myself very lucky to catch the last train in this 
direction. the carriage into which i step was quite empty except 
for one other passenger, who sat next the door immediately opposite 
to me. i had never, to my knowledge, seen him before, but i found my 
attention vivid fixed on him, as if he somehow concerned me. he was 
a man of middle age, in dress-clothes, and his face wore an expression 
of intense thought, as if in his mind he was ponder some very 
significant matter, and his hand which was rest on his knee clench 
and unclenched itself. sudden he look up and stare me in the face, 
and i saw there suspicion and fear, as if i had surprise him in some 
secret deed. 

“at that moment we stop at dove street, and the conductor threw 
open the doors, announce the station and added, ‘change here for hyde 
park corner and gloucester road.’ that was all right for me since 
it meant that the train would stop at brompton road, which was my 
destination. it was all right apparently, too, for my companion, for he 
certainly did not get out, and after a moment’s stop, during which no 
one else got in, we went on. i saw him, i must insist, after the door 
were closed and the train had started. but when i look again, as we 
rattle on, i saw that there was no one there. i was quite alone in the 
carriage. 

“now you may think that i had had one of those swift momentary dream 
which flash in and out of the mind in the space of a second, but i did 
not believe it was so myself, for i felt that i had experienced some 
sort of premonition or clairvoyant vision. a man, the semblance of 
whom, astral body or whatever you may choose to call it, i had just 
seen, would sometime sit in that seat opposite to me, ponder and 
planning.” 

“but why?” i asked. “why should it have been the astral body of a 
living man which you thought you had seen? why not the ghost of a dead 
one?” 

“because of my own sensations. the sight of the spirit of someone dead, 
which has occur to me two or three times in my life, has always been 
accompany by a physical shrink and fear, and by the sensation of 
cold and of loneliness. i believed, at any rate, that i had seen a 
phantom of the living, and that impression was confirmed, i might say 
proved, the next day. for i met the man himself. and the next night, as 
you shall hear, i met the phantom again. we will take them in order. 

“i was lunching, then, the next day with my neighbour mrs. stanley: 
there was a small party, and when i arrive we wait but for the final 
guest. he enter while i was talk to some friend, and presently at 
my elbow i heard mrs. stanley’s voice-- 

“‘let me introduce you to sir henry payle,’ she said. 

“i turn and saw my _vis-à-vis_ of the night before. it was quite 
unmistakable he, and as we shook hand he look at me i thought with 
vague and puzzle recognition. 

“‘haven’t we met before, mr. carling?’ he said. ‘i seem to 
recollect----’ 

“for the moment i forgot the strange manner of his disappearance from 
the carriage, and thought that it had been the man himself whom i had 
seen last night. 

“‘surely, and not so long ago,’ i said. ‘for we sat opposite each other 
in the last tube-train from piccadil circus yesterday night.’ 

“he still look at me, frowning, puzzled, and shook his head. 

“‘that can hardly be,’ he said. ‘i only came up from the country this 
morning.’ 

“now this interested me profoundly, for the astral body, we are told, 
abide in some half-conscious region of the mind or spirit, and has 
recollection of what has happen to it, which it can convey only very 
vague and dim to the conscious mind. all lunch-time i could see his 
eyes again and again direct to me with the same puzzle and perplexed 
air, and as i was taking my departure he came up to me. 

“‘i shall recollect some day,’ he said, ‘where we met before, and i 
hope we may meet again. was it not----?’--and he stopped. ‘no: it has 
gone from me,’ he added.” 

the log that anthony had thrown on the fire was burning brave now, 
and its high-flickering flame lit up his face. 

“now, i don’t know whether you believe in coincidence as chance 
things,” he said, “but if you do, get rid of the notion. or if you 
can’t at once, call it a coincidence that that very night i again 
caught the last train on the tube go westwards. this time, so far 
from my being a solitary passenger, there was a considerable crowd 
wait at dove street, where i entered, and just as the noise of the 
approach train began to reverberate in the tunnel i caught sight of 
sir henry payle standing near the opening from which the train would 
presently emerge, apart from the rest of the crowd. and i thought to 
myself how odd it was that i should have seen the phantom of him at 
this very hour last night and the man himself now, and i began walking 
towards him with the idea of saying, ‘anyhow, it is in the tube that we 
meet to-night.’... and then a terrible and awful thing happened. just 
as the train emerge from the tunnel he jump down on to the line in 
front of it, and the train swept along over him up the platform. 

“for a moment i was stricken with horror at the sight, and i remember 
covering my eyes against the dreadful tragedy. but then i perceive 
that, though it had taken place in full sight of those who were 
waiting, no one seem to have seen it except myself. the driver, 
look out from his window, had not applied his brakes, there was no 
jolt from the advance train, no scream, no cry, and the rest of the 
passenger began boarding the train with perfect nonchalance. i must 
have staggered, for i felt sick and faint with what i had seen, and 
some kindly soul put his arm round me and support me into the train. 
he was a doctor, he told me, and ask if i was in pain, or what ail 
me. i told him what i thought i had seen, and he assured me that no 
such accident had taken place. 

“it was clear then to my own mind that i had seen the second act, so 
to speak, in this psychic drama, and i ponder next morning over 
the problem as to what i should do. already i had glance at the 
morning paper, which, as i knew would be the case, contained no mention 
whatever of what i had seen. the thing had certainly not happened, but 
i knew in myself that it would happen. the flimsy veil of time had been 
withdrawn from my eyes, and i had seen into what you would call the 
future. in terms of time of course it was the future, but from my point 
of view the thing was just as much in the past as it was in the future. 
it existed, and wait only for its material fulfilment. the more i 
thought about it, the more i saw that i could do nothing.” 

i interrupt his narrative. 

“you did nothing?” i exclaimed. “surely you might have taken some step 
in order to try to avert the tragedy.” 

he shook his head. 

“what step precisely?” he said. “was i to go to sir henry and 
tell him that once more i had seen him in the tube in the act of 
commit suicide? look at it like this. either what i had seen was 
pure illusion, pure imagination, in which case it had no existence or 
significance at all, or it was actual and real, and essentially it had 
happened. or take it, though not very logically, somewhere between 
the two. say that the idea of suicide, for some cause of which i knew 
nothing, had occur to him or would occur. should i not, if that was 
the case, be do a very dangerous thing, by making such a suggestion 
to him? might not the fact of my telling him what i had seen put 
the idea into his mind, or, if it was already there, confirm it and 
strengthen it? ‘it’s a ticklish matter to play with souls,’ as brown 
says.” 

“but it seem so inhuman not to interfere in any way,” said i, “not to 
make any attempt.” 

“what interference?” ask he. “what attempt?” 

the human instinct in me still seem to cry aloud at the thought of 
do nothing to avert such a tragedy, but it seem to be beating 
itself against something austere and inexorable. and cudgel my brain 
as i would, i could not combat the sense of what he had said. i had no 
answer for him, and he went on. 

“you must recollect, too,” he said, “that i believe then and believe 
now that the thing had happened. the cause of it, whatever that was, 
had begun to work, and the effect, in this material sphere, was 
inevitable. that is what i allude to when, at the beginning of my 
story, i ask you to consider how difficult it was to say when an 
action took place. you still hold that this particular action, this 
suicide of sir henry, had not yet taken place, because he had not 
yet thrown himself under the advance train. to me that seem a 
materialist view. i hold that in all but the endorse of it, so to 
speak, it had taken place. i fancy that sir henry, for instance, now 
free from the material dusks, know that himself.” 

exactly as he spoke there swept through the warm lit room a current of 
ice-cold air, ruffle my hair as it pass me, and making the wood 
flame on the hearth to dwindle and flare. i look round to see if the 
door at my back had opened, but nothing stir there, and over the 
closed window the curtains were fully drawn. as it reach anthony, he 
sat up quick in his chair and direct his glance this way and that 
about the room. 

“did you feel that?” he asked. 

“yes: a sudden draught,” i said. “ice-cold.” 

“anything else?” he asked. “any other sensation?” 

i pause before i answered, for at the moment there occur to me 
anthony’s differentiate of the effects produce on the behold by 
a phantasm of the living and the apparition of the dead. it was the 
latter which accurate describe my sensation now, a certain physical 
shrinking, a fear, a feeling of desolation. but yet i had seen nothing. 
“i felt rather creepy,” i said. 

as i spoke i drew my chair rather close to the fire, and sent a swift 
and, i confess, a somewhat apprehensive scrutiny round the wall of the 
bright lit room. i notice at the same time that anthony was peer 
across to the chimney-piece, on which, just below a sconce holding two 
electric lights, stood the clock which at the beginning of our talk he 
had offer to stop. the hand i notice pointed to twenty-five minutes 
to one. 

“but you saw nothing?” he asked. 

“nothing whatever,” i said. “why should i? what was there to see? or 
did you----” 

“i don’t think so,” he said. 

somehow this answer got on my nerves, for the queer feeling which had 
accompany that cold current of air had not left me. if anything it 
had become more acute. 

“but surely you know whether you saw anything or not?” i said. 

“one can’t always be certain,” said he. “i say that i don’t think i 
saw anything. but i’m not sure, either, whether the story i am telling 
you was quite conclude last night. i think there may be a further 
incident. if you prefer it, i will leave the rest of it, as far as i 
know it, unfinished till to-morrow morning, and you can go off to bed 
now.” 

his complete calm and tranquill reassure me. 

“but why should i do that?” i asked. 

again he look round on the bright walls. 

“well, i think something enter the room just now,” he said, “and 
it may develop. if you don’t like the notion, you had better go. of 
course there’s nothing to be alarm at; whatever it is, it can’t hurt 
us. but it is close on the hour when on two successive nights i saw 
what i have already told you, and an apparition usually occur at the 
same time. why that is so, i cannot say, but certainly it looks as if 
a spirit that is earth-bound is still subject to certain conventions, 
the convention of time for instance. i think that personally i shall 
see something before long, but most likely you won’t. you’re not such a 
sufferer as i from these--these delusions----” 

i was frightened and knew it, but i was also intense interested, and 
some perverse pride wriggle within me at his last words. why, so i 
ask myself, shouldn’t i see whatever was to be seen?... 

“i don’t want to go in the least,” i said. “i want to hear the rest of 
your story.” 

“where was i, then? ah, yes: you were wonder why i didn’t do 
something after i saw the train move up to the platform, and i said 
that there was nothing to be done. if you think it over, i fancy you 
will agree with me.... a couple of days passed, and on the third 
morning i saw in the paper that there had come fulfilment to my vision. 
sir henry payle, who had been wait on the platform of dove street 
station for the last train to south kensington, had thrown himself in 
front of it as it came into the station. the train had been pull up 
in a couple of yards, but a wheel had pass over his chest, crush 
it in and instantly killing him. 

“an inquest was held, and there emerge at it one of those dark story 
which, on occasion like these, sometimes fall like a midnight shadow 
across a life that the world perhaps had thought prosperous. he had 
long been on bad terms with his wife, from whom he had live apart, 
and it appear that not long before this he had fallen desperate in 
love with another woman. the night before his suicide he had appear 
very late at his wife’s house, and had a long and angry scene with 
her in which he entreat her to divorce him, threaten otherwise 
to make her life a hell to her. she refused, and in an ungovernable 
fit of passion he attempt to strangle her. there was a struggle, and 
the noise of it cause her manservant to come up, who succeed in 
over-mastering him. lady payle threaten to proceed against him for 
assault with the intention to murder her. with this hanging over his 
head, the next night, as i have already told you, he committed suicide.” 

he glance at the clock again, and i saw that the hand now pointed to 
ten minutes to one. the fire was beginning to burn low and the room 
surely was grow strange cold. 

“that’s not quite all,” said anthony, again look round. “are you 
sure you wouldn’t prefer to hear it to-morrow?” 

the mixture of shame and pride and curiosity again prevailed. 

“no: tell me the rest of it at once,” i said. 

before speaking, he peer sudden at some point behind my chair, 
shading his eyes. i follow his glance, and knew what he meant by 
saying that sometimes one could not be sure whether one saw something 
or not. but was that an outline shadow that intervene between me and 
the wall? it was difficult to focus; i did not know whether it was near 
the wall or near my chair. it seem to clear away, anyhow, as i look 
more close at it. 

“you see nothing?” ask anthony. 

“no: i don’t think so,” said i. “and you?” 

“i think i do,” he said, and his eyes follow something which was 
invisible to mine. they came to rest between him and the chimney-piece. 
look steady there, he spoke again. 

“all this happen some week ago,” he said, “when you were out in 
switzerland, and since then, up till last night, i saw nothing further. 
but all the time i was expect something further. i felt that, as 
far as i was concerned, it was not all over yet, and last night, with 
the intention of assist any communication to come through to me 
from--from beyond, i went into the dove street tube-station at a few 
minutes before one o’clock, the hour at which both the assault and 
the suicide had taken place. the platform when i arrive on it was 
absolutely empty, or appear to be so, but presently, just as i began 
to hear the roar of the approach train, i saw there was the figure 
of a man standing some twenty yard from me, look into the tunnel. 
he had not come down with me in the lift, and the moment before he had 
not been there. he began moving towards me, and then i saw who it was, 
and i felt a stir of wind icy-cold coming towards me as he approached. 
it was not the draught that herald the approach of a train, for it 
came from the opposite direction. he came close up to me, and i saw 
there was recognition in his eyes. he raise his face towards me and 
i saw his lip move, but, perhaps in the increase noise from the 
tunnel, i heard nothing come from them. he put out his hand, as if 
entreat me to do something, and with a cowardice from which i cannot 
forgive myself, i shrank from him, for i knew, by the sign that i have 
told you, that this was one from the dead, and my flesh quake before 
him, drown for the moment all pity and all desire to help him, if 
that was possible. certainly he had something which he want of me, 
but i recoil from him. and by now the train was emerge from the 
tunnel, and next moment, with a dreadful gesture of despair, he threw 
himself in front of it.” 

as he finished speak he got up quick from his chair, still look 
fixedly in front of him. i saw his pupil dilate, and his mouth worked. 

“it is coming,” he said. “i am to be given a chance of atone for 
my cowardice. there is nothing to be afraid of: i must remember that 
myself....” 

as he spoke there came from the panelling above the chimney-piece one 
loud shatter crack, and the cold wind again circle about my head. 
i found myself shrink back in my chair with my hand held in front 
of me as instinctive i screen myself against something which i knew 
was there but which i could not see. every sense told me that there was 
a presence in the room other than mine and anthony’s, and the horror of 
it was that i could not see it. any vision, however terrible, would, i 
felt, be more tolerable than this clear certain knowledge that close to 
me was this invisible thing. and yet what horror might not be disclose 
of the face of the dead and the crush chest.... but all i could see, 
as i shudder in this cold wind, was the familiar wall of the room, 
and anthony standing in front of me stiff and firm, making, as i knew, 
a call on his courage. his eyes were focus on something quite close 
to him, and some semblance of a smile quiver on his mouth. and then 
he spoke again. 

“yes, i know you,” he said. “and you want something of me. tell me, 
then, what it is.” 

there was absolute silence, but what was silence to my ear could not 
have been so to his, for once or twice he nodded, and once he said, 
“yes: i see. i will do it.” and with the knowledge that, even as there 
was someone here whom i could not see, so there was speech go on 
which i could not hear, this terror of the dead and of the unknown 
rose in me with the sense of powerless to move that accompany 
nightmare. i could not stir, i could not speak. i could only strain my 
ear for the inaudible and my eyes for the unseen, while the cold wind 
from the very valley of the shadow of death stream over me. it was 
not that the presence of death itself was terrible; it was that from 
its tranquill and serene keeping there had been driven some unquiet 
soul unable to rest in peace for whatever ultimate awakening rouse the 
countless generation of those who have pass away, driven, no less, 
from whatever activity are theirs, back into the material world from 
which it should have been delivered. never, until the gulf between the 
living and the dead was thus bridged, had it seem so immense and so 
unnatural. it is possible that the dead may have communication with 
the living, and it was not that exactly that so terrify me, for such 
communication, as we know it, come voluntary from them. but here was 
something icy-cold and crime-laden, that was chase back from the peace 
that would not pacify it. 

and then, most horrible of all, there came a change in these unseen 
conditions. anthony was silent now, and from look straight and 
fixedly in front of him, he began to glance sideways to where i sat and 
back again, and with that i felt that the unseen presence had turn 
its attention from him to me. and now, too, gradual and by awful 
degree i began to see.... 

there came an outline of shadow across the chimney-piece and the panel 
above it. it took shape: it fashion itself into the outline of a 
man. within the shape of the shadow detail began to form themselves, 
and i saw waver in the air, like something conceal by haze, the 
semblance of a face, stricken and tragic, and burden with such a 
weight of woe as no human face had ever worn. next, the shoulder 
outline themselves, and a stain livid and red spread out below them, 
and sudden the vision leap into clearness. there he stood, the 
chest crush in and drown in the red stain, from which broken ribs, 
like the bone of a wreck ship, protruded. the mournful, terrible 
eyes were fixed on me, and it was from them, so i knew, that the bitter 
wind proceeded.... 

then, quick as the switch off of a lamp, the spectre vanished, and 
the bitter wind was still, and opposite to me stood anthony, in a 
quiet, bright-lit room. there was no sense of an unseen presence any 
more; he and i were then alone, with an interrupt conversation still 
dangle between us in the warm air. i came round to that, as one come 
round after an anæsthetic. it all swam into sight again, unreal at 
first, and gradual assume the texture of actuality. 

“you were talk to somebody, not to me,” i said. “who was it? what 
was it?” 

he pass the back of his hand over his forehead, which glisten in 
the light. 

“a soul in hell,” he said. 

now it is hard ever to recall mere physical sensations, when they 
have passed. if you have been cold and are warmed, it is difficult to 
remember what cold was like: if you have been hot and have got cool, 
it is difficult to realise what the oppression of heat really meant. 
just so, with the passing of that presence, i found myself unable to 
recapture the sense of the terror with which, a few moments ago only, 
it had invade and inspired me. 

“a soul in hell?” i said. “what are you talk about?” 

he move about the room for a minute or so, and then came and sat on 
the arm of my chair. 

“i don’t know what you saw,” he said, “or what you felt, but there has 
never in all my life happen to me anything more real than what these 
last few minutes have brought. i have talk to a soul in the hell of 
remorse, which is the only possible hell. he knew, from what happen 
last night, that he could perhaps establish communication through me 
with the world he had quitted, and he sought me and found me. i am 
charged with a mission to a woman i have never seen, a message from the 
contrite.... you can guess who it is....” 

he got up with a sudden briskness. 

“let’s verify it anyhow,” he said. “he gave me the street and the 
number. ah, there’s the telephone book! would it be a coincidence 
merely if i found that at no. 20 in chasemore street, south kensington, 
there live a lady payle?” 

he turn over the leaves of the bulky volume. 

“yes, that’s right,” he said. 




roderick’s story 




roderick’s story 


my powers of persuasion at first seem quite ineffectual; i could 
not induce my friend roderick cardew to strike his melancholy tent in 
chelsea, and (leaving it struck) steal away like the arab and spend 
this month of spring with me at my newly acquire house at till to 
observe the spell of april’s wand making magic in the country. i seem 
to have brought out all the argument of which i was master; he had 
been very ill, and his doctor recommend a clear air with as mild a 
climate as he could convenient attain; he love the great stretch 
of drain marsh-land which lay spread like a pool of verdure round the 
little town; he had not seen my new home which made a breach in the 
function of hospitality, and he really could not be expect to object 
to his host, who, after all, was one of his oldest friends. besides (to 
leave no stone unturned) as he regain his strength he could begin to 
play golf again, and it entailed, as he well remembered, a very mild 
exertion for him to keep me in my proper position in such a pursuit. 

at last there was some sign of yielding. 

“yes. i should like to see the marsh and the big sky once more,” he 
said. 

a rather sinister interpretation of his words “once more,” made a 
sudden flash signal of alarm in my mind. it was utterly fanciful, no 
doubt, but that had better be extinguish first. 

“once more?” i asked. “what do that mean?” 

“i always say ‘once more,’” he said. “it’s greedy to ask for too much.” 

the very fact that he fence so ingenious deepen my suspicion. 

“that won’t do,” i said. “tell me, roddie.” 

he was silent a moment. 

“i didn’t intend to,” he said, “for there can be no use in it. but 
if you insist, as apparently you mean to do, i may as well give in. 
it’s what you think; ‘once more’ will very likely be the most. but you 
mustn’t fuss about it; i’m not go to. no proper person fuss about 
death; that’s a train which we are all sure to catch. it always waits 
for you.” 

i have notice that when one learn tidings of that sort, one feels, 
almost immediately, that one has known them a long time. i felt so now. 

“go on,” i said. 

“well, that’s about all there is. i’ve had sentence of death pass 
upon me, and it will probably be carry out, i’m delight to say, in 
the france fashion. in france, you know, they don’t tell you when you 
are to be execute till a few minutes before. it is likely that i shall 
have even less than that, so my doctor inform me. a second or two will 
be all i shall get. congratulate me, please.” 

i thought it over for a moment. 

“yes, heartily,” i said. “i want to know a little more though.” 

“well, my heart’s all wrong, quite unmendable so. heart-disease! 
doesn’t it sound romantic? in mid-victorian romance, hero and 
heroin alone die of heart-disease. but that’s by the way. the fact 
is that i may die at any time without a moment’s warning. i shall give 
a couple of gasps, so he told me when i insist on knowing details, 
and that’ll be all. now, perhaps, you understand why i was unwill 
to come and stay with you. i don’t want to die in your house; i think 
it’s dreadfully bad manners to die in other people’s houses. i long 
to see till again, but i think i shall go to an hotel. hotel are 
fair game, for the management over-charges those who live there to 
compensate themselves for those who die there. but it would be rude of 
me to die in your house; it might entail a lot of bother for you, and i 
couldn’t apologize----” 

“but i don’t mind your die in my house,” i said. “at least you see 
what i mean----” 

he laughed. 

“i do, indeed,” he said. “and you couldn’t give a warm assurance of 
friendship. but i couldn’t come and stay with you in my present plight 
without telling you what it was, and yet i didn’t mean to tell you. but 
there we are now. think again; reconsider your decision.” 

“i don’t,” i said. “come and die in my house by all means, if you’ve 
got to. i would much soon you live there: your die will, in any 
case, annoy me immensely. but it would annoy me even more to know that 
you had done it in some beastly hotel among plush and looking-glasses. 
you shall have any bedroom you like. and i want you dreadfully to see 
my house, which is adorable.... o roddie, what a bore it all is!” 

it was impossible to speak or to think differently. i knew well how 
trivial a matter death was to my friend, and i was not sure that at 
heart i did not agree with him. we were quite at one, too, in that 
we had so often gossip about death with cheerful conjecture and 
interested surmise base on the steady assurance that something of new 
and delightful import was to follow, since neither of us happen to be 
of that melancholy cast of mind that can envisage annihilation. i had 
promised, in case i was the first to embark on the great adventure, to 
do my best to “get through,” and give him some irrefutable proof of the 
continuance of my existence, just by way of endorse of our belief, 
and he had given a similar pledge, for it appear to us both, that, 
whatever the conditions of the future might turn out to be, it would 
be impossible when lately translate there, not to be still greatly 
concerned with what the present world still held for us in tie of 
love and affection. i laugh now to remember how he had once imagine 
himself beg to be excuse for a few minutes, directly after death, 
and saying to st. peter: “may i keep your holiness wait for a minute 
before you finally lock me into heaven or hell with those beautiful 
keys? i won’t be a minute, but i do want so much to be a ghost, and 
appear to a friend of mine who is on the look-out for such a visit. if 
i find i can’t make myself visible i will come back at once.... oh, 
_thank_ you, your holiness.” 

so we agree that i should run the risk of his die in my house, and 
promise not to make any reproach posthumous (as far as he was 
concerned) in case he did so. he on his side promise not to die if he 
could possibly help it, and next week or so he would come down to me in 
the heart of the country that he loved, and see april at work. 

“and i haven’t told you anything about my house yet,” i said. “it’s 
right at the top of the hill, square and georgia and red-bricked. a 
panel hall, dining-room and panel sitting-room downstairs, and 
more panel rooms upstairs. and there’s a garden with a lawn, and 
a high brick wall round it, and there is a big garden room, full of 
books, with a bow-window look down the cobble street. which bedroom 
will you have? do you like look on to the garden or on to the 
street? you may even have my room if you like.” 

he look at me a moment with eager attention. “i’ll have the square 
panel bedroom that looks out on to the garden, please,” he said. 
“it’s the second door on the right when you stand at the top of the 
stairs.” 

“but how do you know?” i asked. 

“because i’ve been in the house before, once only, three years ago,” 
he said. “margaret alton took it furnish and live there for a year 
or so. she die there, and i was with her. and if i had known that 
this was your house, i should never have dream of hesitate whether 
i should accept your invitation. i should have thrown my good manners 
about not die in other people’s house to the winds. but the moment 
you began to describe the garden and garden-room i knew what house it 
was. i have always long to go there again. when may i come, please? 
next week is too far ahead. you’re off there this afternoon, aren’t 
you?” 

i rose: the clock warn me that it was time for me to go to the 
station. 

“yes. come this afternoon,” i suggested. “come with me.” 

“i wish i could, but i take that to mean that it will suit you if i 
come to-morrow. for i certainly will. good lord! to think of your 
have got just that house! it ought to be a wonderful happy one, 
for i saw---- but i’ll tell you about that perhaps when i’m there. but 
don’t ask me to: i’ll tell you if and when i can, as the lawyer say. 
are you really off?” 

i was really off, for i had no time to spare, but before i got to the 
door he spoke again. 

“of course, the room i have chosen was _the_ room,” he said, and there 
was no need for me to ask what he meant by _the_ room. 

* * * * * 

i knew no more than the barest and most public outline of that affair, 
distant now by the space of many years, but, so i conceived, ever green 
in roderick’s heart, and, as my train thread its way through the 
gleam of this translucent spring evening, i retrace this outline as 
far as i knew it. it was the one thing of which roderick never spoke 
(even now he was not sure that he could manage to tell me the end of 
it), and i had to rummage in my memory for the reconstruction of the 
half-obliterated lines. 

margaret--her maiden-name would not be conjure back into memory--had 
been an extremely beautiful girl when roderick first met her, and, not 
without encouragement, he had fallen head over ear in love with her. 
all seem to be go well with his wooing, he had the air of a happy 
lover, when there appear on the scene that handsome and outrageous 
fellow, richard alton. he was the heir to his uncle’s barony and his 
really vast estates, and the girl, when he proceed to lay siege, very 
soon capitulated. she may have fallen in love with him, for he was 
an attractive scamp, but the verdict at the time was that it was her 
ambition, not her heart, that she indulged. in any case, there was the 
end of roderick’s wooing, and before the year was out she had married 
the other. 

i remember seeing her once or twice in london about this time, 
splendid and brilliant, of a beauty that dazzled, with the world 
very much at her feet. she bore him two sons; she succeed to a 
great position; and then with the grant of her heart’s desire, the 
lean withal followed. her husband’s infidelity were numerous and 
notorious; he treat her with a subtle cruelty that just kept on the 
right side of the law, and, finally, seek his freedom, he desert 
her, and openly live with another woman. whether it was pride that 
kept her from divorce him, or whether she still love him (if she 
had ever done so) and was ready to take him back, or whether it was 
out of revenge that she refuse to have done with him legally, was an 
affair of which i knew nothing. calamity follow on calamity; first 
one and then the other of her son was kill in the europe war, and 
i remember have heard that she was the victim of some malignant and 
disfigure disease, which cause her to lead a hermit life, seeing 
nobody. it was now three years or so since she had died. 

such, with the addition that she had die in my house, and that 
roderick had been with her, was the sum of my meagre knowledge, which 
might or might not, so he had intimated, be supplement by him. he 
arrive next day, have motor down from london for the avoidance 
of fatigue, and certainly as we sat after dinner that night in the 
garden-room, he had avoid it very successfully, for never had i seen 
him more animated. 

“oh, i have been so right to come here,” he said, “for i feel steep 
in tranquill and content. there’s such a tremendous sense of 
margaret’s presence here, and i never knew how much i want it. 
perhaps that is purely subjective, but what do that matter so long as 
i feel it? how a scene soak into the place where it has been enacted; 
my room, which you know was her room, is alive with her. i want nothing 
better than to be here, prowl and purr over the memory of the 
last time, which was the only one, that i was here. yes, just that; and 
i know how odd you must think it. but it’s true, it was here that i saw 
her die, and instead of shun the place, i bathe myself in it. for 
it was one of the happiest hour of my life.” 

“because----” i began. 

“no; not because it gave her release, if that’s in your mind,” he said. 
“it’s because i saw----” 

he broke off, and remember his stipulation that i should ask him 
nothing, but that he would tell me “if and when” he could, i put no 
question to him. his eyes were dance with the sparkle of fire that 
burn on the hearth, for though april was here, the evenings were 
still chilly, and it was not the fire that gave them their light, but 
a joyous that was as bright as glee, and as deep as happiness. 

“no, i’m not go on with that now,” he said, “though i expect i 
shall before my days are out. at present i shall leave you wonder 
why a place that should hold such mournful memory for me, is such a 
well-spring. and as i am not for telling you about me, let me enquire 
about you. bring yourself up to date; what have you been doing, and 
much more important, what have you been thinking about?” 

“my doings have chiefly been confine to settle into this house,” i 
said. “i’ve been pull and push furniture into place where it 
wouldn’t go, and curse it.” 

he look round the room. 

“it doesn’t seem to bear you any grudge,” he said. “it looks contented. 
and what else?” 

“in the intervals, when i couldn’t push and curse any more,” i said, 
“i’ve been writing a few spook stories. all about the borderland, which 
i love as much as you do.” 

he laugh outright. 

“do you, indeed?” he said. “then it’s no use my saying that it is quite 
impossible. but i should like to know your view on the borderland.” 

i pointed to a sheaf of typewritten stuff that litter my table. 

“them’s my sentiments,” i said, “and quite at your service.” 

“good; then i’ll take them to bed with me when i go, if you’ll allow 
me. i’ve always thought that you had a pretty notion of the creepy, 
but the mistake that you make is to imagine that creepy is 
characteristic of the borderland. no doubt there are creepy things 
there, but so there are everywhere, and a thunder-storm is far more 
terrify than an apparition. and when you get really close to 
the borderland, you see how enchanting it is, and how vastly more 
enchanting the other side must be. i got right on to the borderland 
once, here in this house, as i shall probably tell you, and i never 
saw so happy and kindly a place. and without doubt i shall soon be 
career across it in my own person. that’ll be, as we’ve often 
determined, wildly interesting, and it will have the solemnity of a 
first night at a new play about it. there’ll be the curtain close 
in front of you, and presently it will be raised, and you will see 
something you never saw before. how well, on the whole, the secret has 
been kept, though from time to time little bit of information, little 
scraps of dialogue, little description of scenery have leak out. 
enthralling interesting; one wonders how they will come into the 
great new drama.” 

“you don’t mean the sort of thing that medium tell us?” i asked. 

“of course i don’t. i hate the sloshy--really there’s no other word for 
it, and why should there be, since that word fit so admirably--the 
sloshy utterance of the ordinary high-class, beyond-suspicion medium 
at half a guinea a sitting, who ask if there’s anybody present who 
once knew a charles, or if not charles, thomas or william. naturally 
somebody has known a charles, thomas or william who has pass over, 
and is the son, brother, father or cousin of a lady in black. so 
when she claim thomas, he tell her that he is very busy and happy, 
helping people.... o lord, what rot! i went to one such séance a month 
ago, just before i was taken ill, and the medium said that margaret 
want to get into touch with somebody. two of us claim margaret, 
but margaret chose me and said she was the spirit of my wife. wife, 
you know! you must allow that this was a very unfortunate shot. when i 
said that i was unmarried, margaret said that she was my mother, whose 
name was charlotte. oh dear, oh dear! well, i shall go to bed with joy, 
bring your spook with me....” 

“sheaves,” said i. 

“yes, but aren’t they the sheaves? isn’t one’s glean of sheave in 
this world what they call spooks? that is, the knowledge of what one 
take across?” 

“i don’t understand one word,” said i. 

“but you must understand. all the knowledge--worth anything--which 
you or i have collected here, is the beginning of the other life. we 
toil and moil, and make our gleanings and our harvestings, and all our 
decent effort help us to realize what the real harvest is. surely we 
shall take with us exactly that which we have reaped....” 

after he had gone up to bed i sat try to correct the error of a 
typist, but still between me and the page there dwelt that haunting 
sense of all that we did here being only the grist for what was to 
come. our achievement were rewarded, so he seem to say, by a 
glimpse. and those glimpses--so i try to follow him--were the hint 
that had leak out of the drama for which the curtain was twitching. 
was that it? 

roderick came down to breakfast next morning, superlatively frank and 
happy. 

“i didn’t read a single line of your stories,” he said. “when i got 
into my bedroom i was so immeasurable content that i couldn’t risk 
get interested in anything else. i lay awake a long time, pinch 
myself in order to prolong my sheer happiness, but the flesh was weak, 
and at last, from sheer happiness, i slept and probably snored. did 
you hear me? i hope not. and then sheer happiness dictate my dreams, 
though i don’t know what they were, and the moment i was call i got 
up, because ... because i didn’t want to miss anything. now, to be 
practical again, what are you do this morning?” 

“i was intend to play golf,” i said, “unless----” 

“there isn’t an ‘unless,’ if you mean me. my plan made itself for me, 
and i intend--this is my plan--to drive out with you, and sit in the 
hollow by the fourth tee, and read your story there. there’s a great 
south-westerly wind, like a celestial housemaid, scour the skies, 
and i shall be completely sheltered there, and in the interval of my 
reading, i shall pleasant observe the unsuccessful effort of the 
golf to carry the big bunker. i can’t personally play golf any more, 
but i shall enjoy seeing other people attempt to do it.” 

“and no prowl or purring?” i asked. 

“not this morning. that’s all right: it’s there. it’s so much all right 
that i want to be active in other directions. sitting in a windless 
hollow is about the range of my activities. i say that for fear that 
you should.” 

i found a match when we arrive at the club-house, and roderick 
stroll away to the goal of his observations. half an hour afterwards 
i found him watch with criminal ecstatic joy the soar drive 
that, in the teeth of the great wind, were arrest and blown back into 
the unholiest bunker in all the world or the low clever balls that 
never rose to the height of the shored-up cliff of sand. the couple 
in front of my partner and me were sarcastic dogs, and bade us wait 
only till they had delve themselves over the ridge, and then we might 
follow as soon as we chose. after violent deed in the bunker they 
climb over the big dune, thirty yard beyond which lay the green on 
which they would now be putting. 

as soon as they had disappeared, roderick snatch my driver from my 
hand. 

“i can’t bear it,” he said. “i must hit a ball again. tee it low, 
caddie.... no, no tee at all.” 

he hit a superb shot, just high enough to carry the ridge, and not so 
high that it caught the oppose wind and was stop towards the end 
of its flight. he gave a loud croak of laughter. 

“that’ll teach them not to insult my friend,” he said. “it must have 
been pitch right among their careful puttings. and now i shall read 
his ghost-stories.” 

i have record this athletic incident because better than any analysis 
of his attitude towards life and death it convey just what that 
attitude was. he knew perfectly well that any swift exertion might be 
fatal to him, but he want to hit a golf ball again as sweet and as 
hard as it could be hit. he had done it: he had score off death. and 
as i went on my way i felt perfectly confident that if, with that brisk 
free effort, he had fallen dead on the tee, he would have thought it 
well worth while, provided only that he had made that irreproachable 
shot. while alive, he propose to partake in the pleasure of life, 
amongst which he had always reckon that of hit golf balls, not 
caring, though he like to be alive, whether the immediate consequence 
was death, just because he did not in the least object to being dead. 
the choice was of such little consequence.... the history of that i was 
to know that evening. 

the story which roderick had taken to read were design to be of 
an uncomfortable type: one concerned a vampire, one an elemental, the 
third the reincarnation of a certain execrable personage, and as we sat 
in the garden-room after tea, he with these page on his knees, i had 
the pleasure of seeing him give hasty glance round, as he read, as if 
to assure himself that there was nothing unusual in the dim corner 
of the room.... i like that; he was do as i intended that a reader 
should. 

before long he came to the last page. 

“and are you intend to make a book of them?” he asked. “what are the 
other story like?” 

“worse,” said i, with the complacency of the horror-monger. 

“then--did you ask for criticism? i shall give it in any case--you will 
make a book that not only is inartistic, all shadow and no light, but 
a false book. fiction can be false, you know, inherently false. you 
play godfather to your stories, you see: you tell them in the first 
person, those at least that i have read, and that, though it need not 
be supposed that those experience were actually yours, yet give a 
sort of guarantee that you believe the borderland of which you write to 
be entire terrible. but it isn’t: there are probably terror there--i 
think for instance that i believe in elemental spirits, of some ghastly 
kind--but i am sure that i believe that the borderland, for the most 
part, is almost inconceivable delightful. i’ve got the best of reason 
for believe that.” 

“i’m willing to be convinced,” said i. 

again, as he look at the fire, his eye sparkled, not with the 
reflect flame, but with the bright of some interior vision. 

“well, there’s an hour yet before dinner,” he said, “and my story won’t 
take half of that. it’s about my previous experience of this house; 
what i saw, in fact, in the room which i now occupy. it was because of 
that, naturally, that i want the same room again. here goes, then. 

“for the twenty years of margaret’s married life,” he said, “i never 
saw her except quite accidental and casually. casually, like that, 
i had seen her at theatre and what not with her two boys whom thus i 
knew by sight. but i had never spoken to either of them, nor, after her 
marriage, to their mother. i knew, as all the world knew, that she had 
a terrible life, but circumstances being what they were, i could not 
bring myself to her notice, the more so because she made no sign or 
gesture of wanting me. but i am sure that no day pass on which i did 
not long to be able to show her that my love and sympathy were hers. 
only, so i thought, i had to know that she want them. 

“i heard, of course, of the death of her sons. they were both kill 
in france within a few days of each other; one was eighteen, the other 
nineteen. i wrote to her then formally, so long had we been strangers, 
and she answer formally. after that, she took this house, where she 
live alone. a year later, i was told that she had now for some month 
been suffering from a malignant and disfigure disease. 

“i was in london, strolling down piccadil when my companion mention 
it, and i at once became aware that i must go to see her, not to-morrow 
or soon, but now. it is difficult to describe the quality of that 
conviction, or tell you how instinctive and over-mastering it was. 
there are some things which you can’t help doing, not exactly because 
you desire to do them, but because they must be done. if, for instance, 
you are in the middle of the road, and see a motor coming towards you 
at top-speed, you have to step to the side of the road, unless you 
deliberate choose to commit suicide. it was just like that; unless i 
intended to commit a sort of spiritual suicide there was no choice. 

“a few hour later i was at your door here, ask to see her, and was 
told that she was desperate ill and could see nobody. but i got her 
maid to take the message that i was here, and presently her nurse came 
down to tell me that she would see me. i should find margaret, she 
said, wearing a veil so as to conceal from me the dreadful ravages 
which the disease had inflict on her face, and the scar of the two 
operation which she had undergone. very likely she would not speak to 
me, for she had great difficulty in speak at all, and in any case 
i was not to stay for more than a few minutes. probably she could not 
live many hours: i had only just come in time. and at that moment i 
wish i had done anything rather than come here, for though instinct 
had driven me here, yet instinct now recoil with unspeakable horror. 
the flesh war against the spirit, you know, and under its stress i 
now suggest that it was better perhaps that i should not see her.... 
but the nurse merely said again that margaret wish to see me, and 
guess perhaps the cause of my unwillingness, ‘her face will be quite 
invisible,’ she added. ‘there will be nothing to shock you.’ 

“i went in alone: margaret was prop up in bed with pillows, so that 
she sat nearly upright, and over her head was a dark veil through which 
i could see nothing whatever. her right hand lay on the coverlet, and 
as i seat myself by her bedside, where the nurse had put a chair for 
me, margaret advanced her hand towards me, shyly, hesitatingly, as if 
not sure that i would take it. but it was a sign, a gesture.” 

he paused, his face beam and radiant with the light of that memory. 

“i am speak of things unspeakable,” he said. “i can no more convey 
to you all that meant than by a mere enumerate of colours can i steep 
your soul in the feeling of a sunset.... so there i sat, with her hand 
cover and clasp in mine. i had been told that very likely she would 
not speak, and for myself there was no word in the world which would 
not be dross in the gold of that silence. 

“and then from behind her veil there came a whisper. 

“‘i couldn’t die without seeing you,’ she said. ‘i was sure you would 
come. i’ve one thing to say to you. i love you, and i try to choke 
my love. and for years, my dear, i have been reap the harvest of 
what i did. i try to kill love, but it was so much strong than i. 
and now the harvest is gathered. i have suffer cruelly, you know, but 
i bless every pang of it. i need it all....’ 

“only a few minutes before, i had quake at the thought of seeing her. 
but now i could not suffer that the veil should cover her face. 

“‘put up your veil, darling,’ i said. ‘i must see you.’ 

“‘no, no,’ she whispered. ‘i should horrify you. i am terrible.’ 

“‘you can’t be terrible to me,’ i said. ‘i am go to lift it.’ 

“i raise her veil. and what did i see? i might have known, i think: i 
might have guess that at this moment, supreme and perfect, i should 
see with vision. 

“there was no scar or ravage of disease or disfigure there. she was 
far lovely than she had ever been, and on her face there shone the 
dawn of the everlasting day. she had shed all that was perishable and 
subject to decay, and her immortal spirit was manifest to me, purge 
and punish if you will, but humble and holy. there was grant to my 
frail mortal sight the power of seeing truly; it was permit to me to 
be with her beyond the bounds of mortality.... 

“and then, even as i was lost in an amaze of love and wonder, i 
saw we were not alone in the room. two boys, whom i recognized, were 
standing at the other side of the bed, look at her. it seem 
utterly natural that they should be there. 

“‘we’ve been allow to come for you, mother darling,’ said one. ‘get 
up.’ 

“she turn her face to them. 

“‘ah, my dears,’ she said. ‘how lovely of you. but just one moment.’ 

“she bent over towards me and kiss me. 

“‘thank you for coming, roderick,’ she said. ‘good-bye, just for a 
little while.’ 

“at that my power of sight--my power of true sight--failed. her head 
fell back on the pillow and turn over on one side. for one second, 
before i let the veil drop over it again, i had a glimpse of her face, 
mar and cruel mutilated. i saw that, i say, but never then nor 
afterwards could i remember it. it was like a terrible dream, which 
utterly fade on the awaking. then her hand, which had been clasp 
mine, in that moment of her farewell slacken its hold, and drop on 
to the bed. she had just move away, somewhere out of sight, with her 
two boys to look after her.” 

he paused. 

“that’s all,” he said. “and do you wonder that i chose that room? how 
i hope that she will come for me.” 

my room was next to roderick’s, the head of his bed being just opposite 
the head of mine on the other side of the wall. that night i had 
undressed, lain down, and had just put out my light, when i heard a 
sharp tap just above me. i thought it was some fortuitous noise, as of 
a picture swinging in a draught, but the moment after it was repeated, 
and it struck me that it was perhaps a summons from roderick who want 
something. still quite unalarmed, i got out of bed, and, candle in 
hand, went to his door. i knocked, but receiving no answer, open it 
an inch or two. 

“did you want anything?” i asked, and, again receiving no answer, i 
went in. 

his lights were burning, and he was sitting up in bed. he did not 
appear to see me or be conscious of my presence, and his eyes were 
fixed on some point a few feet away in front of him. his mouth smiled, 
and in his eyes was just such a joy as i had seen there when he told me 
his story. then, leaning on his arm, he move as if to rise. 

“oh, margaret, my dear....” he cried. 

he drew a couple of short breaths, and fell back. 


print in great britain at the pitman press, bath 




* * * * * * 




transcriber’s note: 

obvious typographic error have been corrected. 

inconsistent in hyphenate have been standardized. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook visible and invisible*** 


******* this file should be name 60339-0.txt or 60339-0.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/0/3/3/60339 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

