the project gutenberg ebook of john silence, physician extraordinary, by 
algernon blackwood 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 



title: john silence, physician extraordinary 

author: algernon blackwood 

release date: june 16, 2015 [ebook #49222] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook john silence, physician *** 




produce by the online distribute proofread team at 
http://www.pgdp.net (this file was produce from image 
generous made available by the internet archive/american 
libraries.) 









john silence 
physician extraordinary 

by 
algernon blackwood 

author of 
“the listener” “the empty house” etc. 

boston 
john w. luce & company 
1909 




to 
m. l. w. 
the original of john silence 
and 
my companion in many adventure 




contents 


case i 
page 
a psychic invasion 1 

case ii 
ancient sorcery 75 

case iii 
the nemesis of fire 143 

case iv 
secret worship 245 

case v 
the camp of the dog 295 




john silence 

case i 

a psychic invasion 


“and what is it make you think i could be of use in this particular 
case?” ask dr. john silence, look across somewhat sceptical at 
the sweden lady in the chair facing him. 

“your sympathetic heart and your knowledge of occultism----” 

“oh, please--that dreadful word!” he interrupted, holding up a finger 
with a gesture of impatience. 

“well, then,” she laughed, “your wonderful clairvoyant gift and your 
train psychic knowledge of the process by which a personality may 
be disintegrate and destroyed--these strange study you’ve been 
experiment with all these years----” 

“if it’s only a case of multiple personality i must really cry off,” 
interrupt the doctor again hastily, a bore expression in his eyes. 

“it’s not that; now, please, be serious, for i want your help,” she 
said; “and if i choose my words poorly you must be patient with my 
ignorance. the case i know will interest you, and no one else could 
deal with it so well. in fact, no ordinary professional man could deal 
with it at all, for i know of no treatment or medicine that can restore 
a lost sense of humour!” 

“you begin to interest me with your ‘case,’” he replied, and made 
himself comfortable to listen. 

mrs. sivendson drew a sigh of contentment as she watch him go to the 
tube and heard him tell the servant he was not to be disturbed. 

“i believe you have read my thought already,” she said; “your 
intuitive knowledge of what go on in other people’s mind is 
positively uncanny.” 

her friend shook his head and smile as he drew his chair up to a 
convenient position and prepared to listen attentive to what she had 
to say. he closed his eyes, as he always did when he wish to absorb 
the real meaning of a recital that might be inadequate expressed, 
for by this method he found it easy to set himself in tune with the 
living thought that lay behind the broken words. 

by his friends john silence was regard as an eccentric, because 
he was rich by accident, and by choice--a doctor. that a man of 
independent means should devote his time to doctoring, chiefly 
doctor folk who could not pay, pass their comprehension entirely. 
the native nobility of a soul whose first desire was to help those who 
could not help themselves, puzzle them. after that, it irritate them, 
and, greatly to his own satisfaction, they left him to his own devices. 

dr. silence was a free-lance, though, among doctors, have neither 
consulting-room, bookkeeper, nor professional manner. he took no 
fees, being at heart a genuine philanthropist, yet at the same time 
did no harm to his fellow-practitioners, because he only accept 
unremunerative cases, and case that interested him for some very 
special reason. he argue that the rich could pay, and the very poor 
could avail themselves of organised charity, but that a very large 
class of ill-paid, self-respecting workers, often follower of the 
arts, could not afford the price of a week’s comfort merely to be told 
to travel. and it was these he desire to help: case often require 
special and patient study--things no doctor can give for a guinea, and 
that no one would dream of expect him to give. 

but there was another side to his personality and practice, and one 
with which we are now more directly concerned; for the case that 
especially appeal to him were of no ordinary kind, but rather of that 
intangible, elusive, and difficult nature best describe as psychic 
afflictions; and, though he would have been the last person himself to 
approve of the title, it was beyond question that he was known more or 
less generally as the “psychic doctor.” 

in order to grapple with case of this peculiar kind, he had submit 
himself to a long and severe training, at once physical, mental, and 
spiritual. what precisely this training had been, or where undergone, 
no one seem to know,--for he never spoke of it, as, indeed, he 
betray no single other characteristic of the charlatan,--but the fact 
that it had involved a total disappearance from the world for five 
years, and that after he return and began his singular practice no 
one ever dream of apply to him the so easily acquire epithet of 
quack, spoke much for the serious of his strange quest and also for 
the genuine of his attainments. 

for the modern psychic research he felt the calm tolerance of the 
“man who knows.” there was a trace of pity in his voice--contempt he 
never showed--when he spoke of their methods. 

“this classification of result is uninspired work at best,” he said 
once to me, when i had been his confidential assistant for some years. 
“it leads nowhere, and after a hundred years will lead nowhere. it is 
play with the wrong end of a rather dangerous toy. far better, it 
would be, to examine the causes, and then the result would so easily 
slip into place and explain themselves. for the source are accessible, 
and open to all who have the courage to lead the life that alone make 
practical investigate safe and possible.” 

and towards the question of clairvoyance, too, his attitude was 
significant sane, for he knew how extremely rare the genuine power 
was, and that what is commonly call clairvoyance is nothing more than 
a keen power of visualising. 

“it connote a slightly increase sensibility, nothing more,” he would 
say. “the true clairvoyant deplore his power, recognise that it add 
a new horror to life, and is in the nature of an affliction. and you 
will find this always to be the real test.” 

thus it was that john silence, this singularly develop doctor, was 
able to select his case with a clear knowledge of the difference 
between mere hysterical delusion and the kind of psychic affliction 
that claim his special powers. it was never necessary for him to 
resort to the cheap mystery of divination; for, as i have heard him 
observe, after the solution of some peculiarly intricate problem-- 

“systems of divination, from geomance down to reading by tea-leaves, 
are merely so many method of obscure the outer vision, in order 
that the inner vision may become open. once the method is mastered, no 
system is necessary at all.” 

and the words were significant of the method of this remarkable man, 
the keynote of whose power lay, perhaps, more than anything else, 
in the knowledge, first, that thought can act at a distance, and, 
secondly, that thought is dynamic and can accomplish material results. 

“learn how to _think_,” he would have express it, “and you have 
learned to tap power at its source.” 

to look at--he was now past forty--he was spare built, with speak 
brown eyes in which shone the light of knowledge and self-confidence, 
while at the same time they made one think of that wondrous gentle 
seen most often in the eyes of animals. a close beard conceal the 
mouth without disguise the grim determination of lip and jaw, 
and the face somehow convey an impression of transparency, almost 
of light, so delicate were the features refined away. on the 
fine forehead was that indefinable touch of peace that come from 
identify the mind with what is permanent in the soul, and letting 
the impermanent slip by without power to wound or distress; while, from 
his manner,--so gentle, quiet, sympathetic,--few could have guess the 
strength of purpose that burn within like a great flame. 

“i think i should describe it as a psychic case,” continue the 
sweden lady, obviously try to explain herself very intelligently, 
“and just the kind you like. i mean a case where the cause is hidden 
deep down in some spiritual distress, and----” 

“but the symptom first, please, my dear svenska,” he interrupted, with 
a strange compel serious of manner, “and your deduction 
afterwards.” 

she turn round sharp on the edge of her chair and look him in the 
face, lower her voice to prevent her emotion betray itself too 
obviously. 

“in my opinion there’s only one symptom,” she half whispered, as though 
telling something disagreeable--“fear--simply fear.” 

“physical fear?” 

“i think not; though how can i say? i think it’s a horror in the 
psychic region. it’s no ordinary delusion; the man is quite sane; but 
he lives in mortal terror of something----” 

“i don’t know what you mean by his ‘psychical region,’” said the 
doctor, with a smile; “though i suppose you wish me to understand that 
his spiritual, and not his mental, process are affected. anyhow, try 
and tell me brief and pointed what you know about the man, his 
symptoms, his need for help, _my_ peculiar help, that is, and all that 
seem vital in the case. i promise to listen devotedly.” 

“i am trying,” she continue earnestly, “but must do so in my own words 
and trust to your intelligence to disentangle as i go along. he is a 
young author, and lives in a tiny house off putney heath somewhere. he 
write humorous stories--quite a genre of his own: pender--you must 
have heard the name--felix pender? oh, the man had a great gift, and 
married on the strength of it; his future seem assured. i say ‘had,’ 
for quite sudden his talent utterly fail him. worse, it became 
transform into its opposite. he can no long write a line in the 
old way that was bring him success----” 

dr. silence open his eyes for a second and look at her. 

“he still writes, then? the force has not gone?” he ask briefly, and 
then closed his eyes again to listen. 

“he works like a fury,” she went on, “but produce nothing”--she 
hesitate a moment--“nothing that he can use or sell. his earnings have 
practically ceased, and he make a precarious living by book-reviewing 
and odd jobs--very odd, some of them. yet, i am certain his talent has 
not really desert him finally, but is merely----” 

again mrs. sivendson hesitate for the appropriate word. 

“in abeyance,” he suggested, without opening his eyes. 

“obliterated,” she went on, after a moment to weigh the word, “merely 
obliterate by something else----” 

“by some _one_ else?” 

“i wish i knew. all i can say is that he is haunted, and temporary 
his sense of humour is shrouded--gone--replaced by something dreadful 
that write other things. unless something competent is done, he will 
simply starve to death. yet he is afraid to go to a doctor for fear of 
being pronounced insane; and, anyhow, a man can hardly ask a doctor to 
take a guinea to restore a vanish sense of humour, can he?” 

“has he try any one at all----?” 

“not doctor yet. he try some clergymen and religious people; but 
they _know_ so little and have so little intelligent sympathy. and 
most of them are so busy balance on their own little pedestals----” 

john silence stop her tirade with a gesture. 

“and how is it that you know so much about him?” he ask gently. 

“i know mrs. pender well--i knew her before she married him----” 

“and is she a cause, perhaps?” 

“not in the least. she is devoted; a woman very well educated, though 
without being really intelligent, and with so little sense of humour 
herself that she always laugh at the wrong places. but she has 
nothing to do with the cause of his distress; and, indeed, has chiefly 
guess it from observing him, rather than from what little he has 
told her. and he, you know, is a really lovable fellow, hard-working, 
patient--altogether worth saving.” 

dr. silence open his eyes and went over to ring for tea. he did 
not know very much more about the case of the humorist than when he 
first sat down to listen; but he realise that no amount of words from 
his sweden friend would help to reveal the real facts. a personal 
interview with the author himself could alone do that. 

“all humorist are worth saving,” he said with a smile, as she pour 
out tea. “we can’t afford to lose a single one in these strenuous days. 
i will go and see your friend at the first opportunity.” 

she thank him elaborately, effusively, with many words, and he, with 
much difficulty, kept the conversation thenceforward strict to the 
teapot. 

and, as a result of this conversation, and a little more he had 
gather by means best known to himself and his secretary, he was 
whizz in his motor-car one afternoon a few days later up the putney 
hill to have his first interview with felix pender, the humorous writer 
who was the victim of some mysterious malady in his “psychical region” 
that had obliterate his sense of the comic and threaten to wreck his 
life and destroy his talent. and his desire to help was probably of 
equal strength with his desire to know and to investigate. 

the motor stop with a deep purr sound, as though a great black 
panther lay conceal within its hood, and the doctor--the “psychic 
doctor,” as he was sometimes called--stepped out through the gathering 
fog, and walk across the tiny garden that held a blacken fir tree 
and a stunt laurel shrubbery. the house was very small, and it was 
some time before any one answer the bell. then, suddenly, a light 
appear in the hall, and he saw a pretty little woman standing on 
the top step beg him to come in. she was dress in grey, and the 
gaslight fell on a mass of deliberate brush light hair. stuffed, 
dusty birds, and a shabby array of africa spears, hung on the wall 
behind her. a hat-rack, with a bronze plate full of very large cards, 
led his eye swift to a dark staircase beyond. mrs. pender had round 
eyes like a child’s, and she greet him with an effusive that 
barely conceal her emotion, yet strove to appear naturally cordial. 
evidently she had been look out for his arrival, and had outrun the 
servant girl. she was a little breathless. 

“i hope you’ve not been kept waiting--i think it’s _most_ good of you 
to come----” she began, and then stop sharp when she saw his face in 
the gaslight. there was something in dr. silence’s look that did not 
encourage mere talk. he was in earnest now, if ever man was. 

“good evening, mrs. pender,” he said, with a quiet smile that won 
confidence, yet deprecate unnecessary words, “the fog delay me a 
little. i am glad to see you.” 

they went into a dingy sitting-room at the back of the house, neat 
furnish but depressing. books stood in a row upon the mantelpiece. 
the fire had evidently just been lit. it smoke in great puff into the 
room. 

“mrs. sivendson said she thought you might be able to come,” venture 
the little woman again, look up engaging into his face and 
betray anxiety and eager in every gesture. “but i hardly dare 
to believe it. i think it is really too good of you. my husband’s case 
is so peculiar that--well, you know, i am quite sure any _ordinary_ 
doctor would say at once the asylum----” 

“isn’t he in, then?” ask dr. silence gently. 

“in the asylum?” she gasped. “oh dear, no--not yet!” 

“in the house, i meant,” he laughed. 

she gave a great sigh. 

“he’ll be back any minute now,” she replied, obviously relieved to see 
him laugh; “but the fact is, we didn’t expect you so early--i mean, my 
husband hardly thought you would come at all.” 

“i am always delight to come--when i am really wanted, and can be of 
help,” he said quickly; “and, perhaps, it’s all for the best that your 
husband is out, for now that we are alone you can tell me something 
about his difficulties. so far, you know, i have heard very little.” 

her voice tremble as she thank him, and when he came and took a 
chair close beside her she actually had difficulty in finding words 
with which to begin. 

“in the first place,” she began timidly, and then continue with a 
nervous incoherent rush of words, “he will be simply delight that 
you’ve really come, because he said you were the only person he would 
consent to see at all--the only doctor, i mean. but, of course, he 
doesn’t know how frightened i am, or how much i have noticed. he 
pretend with me that it’s just a nervous breakdown, and i’m sure he 
doesn’t realise all the odd things i’ve notice him doing. but the main 
thing, i suppose----” 

“yes, the main thing, mrs. pender,” he said encouragingly, notice her 
hesitation. 

“----is that he think we are not alone in the house. that’s the chief 
thing.” 

“tell me more facts--just facts.” 

“it began last summer when i came back from ireland; he had been here 
alone for six weeks, and i thought him look tired and queer--ragged 
and scattered about the face, if you know what i mean, and his manner 
worn out. he said he had been writing hard, but his inspiration had 
somehow fail him, and he was dissatisfy with his work. his sense of 
humour was leave him, or change into something else, he said. there 
was something in the house, he declared, that”--she emphasise the 
words--“prevented his feeling funny.” 

“something in the house that prevent his feeling funny,” repeated the 
doctor. “ah, now we’re get to the heart of it!” 

“yes,” she resume vaguely; “that’s what he kept saying.” 

“and what was it he _did_ that you thought strange?” he ask 
sympathetically. “be brief, or he may be here before you finish.” 

“very small things, but significant it seem to me. he change his 
workroom from the library, as we call it, to the sitting-room. he 
said all his character became wrong and terrible in the library; 
they altered, so that he felt like writing tragedies--vile, debase 
tragedies, the tragedy of broken souls. but now he say the same of 
the smoking-room, and he’s gone back to the library.” 

“ah!” 

“you see, there’s so little i can tell you,” she went on, with 
increase speed and countless gestures. “i mean it’s only very small 
things he do and say that are queer. what frighten me is that he 
assume there is some one else in the house all the time--some one i 
never see. he do not actually say so, but on the stairs i’ve seen him 
standing aside to let some one pass; i’ve seen him open a door to let 
some one in or out; and often in our bedroom he put chair about as 
though for some one else to sit in. oh--oh yes, and once or twice,” she 
cried--“once or twice----” 

she paused, and look about her with a startle air. 

“yes?” 

“once or twice,” she resume hurriedly, as though she heard a sound 
that alarm her, “i’ve heard him running--coming in and out of the 
rooms breathless as if something were after him----” 

the door open while she was still speaking, cutting her words off in 
the middle, and a man came into the room. he was dark and clean-shaven 
sallow rather, with the eyes of imagination, and dark hair grow 
scanty about the temples. he was dress in a shabby tweed suit, and 
wore an untidy flannel collar at the neck. the dominant expression of 
his face was startled--hunted; an expression that might any moment 
leap into the dreadful stare of terror and announce a total loss of 
self-control. 

the moment he saw his visitor a smile spread over his worn features, 
and he advanced to shake hands. 

“i hope you would come; mrs. sivendson said you might be able to find 
time,” he said simply. his voice was thin and reedy. “i am very glad to 
see you, dr. silence. it is ‘doctor,’ is it not?” 

“well, i am entitle to the description,” laugh the other, “but i 
rarely get it. you know, i do not practise as a regular thing; that is, 
i only take case that specially interest me, or----” 

he did not finish the sentence, for the men exchange a glance of 
sympathy that render it unnecessary. 

“i have heard of your great kindness.” 

“it’s my hobby,” said the other quickly, “and my privilege.” 

“i trust you will still think so when you have heard what i have to 
tell you,” continue the author, a little wearily. he led the way 
across the hall into the little smoking-room where they could talk 
freely and undisturbed. 

in the smoking-room, the door shut and privacy about them, pender’s 
attitude change somewhat, and his manner became very grave. the doctor 
sat opposite, where he could watch his face. already, he saw, it 
look more haggard. evidently it cost him much to refer to his trouble 
at all. 

“what i have is, in my belief, a profound spiritual affliction,” he 
began quite bluntly, look straight into the other’s eyes. 

“i saw that at once,” dr. silence said. 

“yes, you saw that, of course; my atmosphere must convey that much to 
any one with psychic perceptions. besides which, i feel sure from all 
i’ve heard, that you are really a soul-doctor, are you not, more than a 
heal merely of the body?” 

“you think of me too highly,” return the other; “though i prefer 
cases, as you know, in which the spirit is disturbed first, the body 
afterwards.” 

“i understand, yes. well, i have experienced a curious disturbance 
in--_not_ in my physical region primarily. i mean my nerves are all 
right, and my body is all right i have no delusion exactly, but my 
spirit is torture by a calamitous fear which first came upon me in a 
strange manner.” 

john silence lean forward a moment and took the speaker’s hand and 
held it in his own for a few brief seconds, close his eyes as he 
did so. he was not feeling his pulse, or do any of the things that 
doctor ordinarily do; he was merely absorbing into himself the main 
note of the man’s mental condition, so as to get completely his own 
point of view, and thus be able to treat his case with true sympathy. a 
very close observer might perhaps have notice that a slight tremor ran 
through his frame after he had held the hand for a few seconds. 

“tell me quite frankly, mr. pender,” he said soothingly, release the 
hand, and with deep attention in his manner, “tell me all the steps 
that led to the beginning of this invasion. i mean tell me what the 
particular drug was, and why you took it, and how it affected you----” 

“then you know it began with a drug!” cry the author, with 
undisguised astonishment. 

“i only know from what i observe in you, and in its effect upon myself. 
you are in a surprising psychic condition. certain portion of your 
atmosphere are vibrate at a far greater rate than others. this is the 
effect of a drug, but of no ordinary drug. allow me to finish, please. 
if the higher rate of vibration spread all over, you will become, of 
course, permanent cognisant of a much large world than the one you 
know normally. if, on the other hand, the rapid portion sink back to 
the usual rate, you will lose these occasional increase perception 
you now have.” 

“you amaze me!” exclaim the author; “for your words exactly describe 
what i have been feeling----” 

“i mention this only in passing, and to give you confidence before 
you approach the account of your real affliction,” continue the 
doctor. “all perception, as you know, is the result of vibrations; and 
clairvoyance simply means becoming sensitive to an increase scale of 
vibrations. the awakening of the inner senses we hear so much about 
means no more than that. your partial clairvoyance is easily explained. 
the only thing that puzzle me is how you manage to procure the drug, 
for it is not easy to get in pure form, and no adulterate tincture 
could have given you the terrific impetus i see you have acquired. but, 
please proceed now and tell me your story in your own way.” 

“this _cannabis indica_,” the author went on, “came into my possession 
last autumn while my wife was away. i need not explain how i got it, 
for that has no importance; but it was the genuine fluid extract, and 
i could not resist the temptation to make an experiment. one of its 
effects, as you know, is to induce torrential laughter----” 

“yes; sometimes.” 

“----i am a writer of humorous tales, and i wish to increase my own 
sense of laughter--to see the ludicrous from an abnormal point of view. 
i wish to study it a bit, if possible, and----” 

“tell me!” 

“i took an experimental dose. i starve for six hour to hasten the 
effect, lock myself into this room, and gave orders not to be 
disturbed. then i swallow the stuff and waited.” 

“and the effect?” 

“i wait one hour, two, three, four, five hours. nothing happened. no 
laughter came, but only a great weary instead. nothing in the room 
or in my thought came within a hundred mile of a humorous aspect.” 

“always a most uncertain drug,” interrupt the doctor. “we make very 
small use of it on that account.” 

“at two o’clock in the morning i felt so hungry and tired that i 
decided to give up the experiment and wait no longer. i drank some 
milk and went upstairs to bed. i felt flat and disappointed. i fell 
asleep at once and must have slept for about an hour, when i awoke 
sudden with a great noise in my ears. it was the noise of my 
own laughter! i was simply shake with merriment. at first i was 
bewilder and thought i had been laugh in dreams, but a moment 
later i remember the drug, and was delight to think that after 
all i had got an effect. it had been working all along, only i had 
miscalculate the time. the only unpleasant thing _then_ was an odd 
feeling that i had not wake naturally, but had been waken by some 
one else--deliberately. this came to me as a certainty in the middle of 
my noisy laughter and distress me.” 

“any impression who it could have been?” ask the doctor, now 
listen with close attention to every word, very much on the alert. 

pender hesitate and try to smile. he brush his hair from his 
forehead with a nervous gesture. 

“you must tell me all your impressions, even your fancies; they are 
quite as important as your certainties.” 

“i had a vague idea that it was some one connected with my forgotten 
dream, some one who had been at me in my sleep, some one of great 
strength and great ability--of great force--quite an unusual 
personality--and, i was certain, too--a woman.” 

“a good woman?” ask john silence quietly. 

pender start a little at the question and his sallow face flushed; 
it seem to surprise him. but he shook his head quick with an 
indefinable look of horror. 

“evil,” he answer briefly, “appallingly evil, and yet mingle with 
the sheer wicked of it was also a certain perverseness--the 
perversity of the unbalance mind.” 

he hesitate a moment and look up sharp at his interlocutor. a 
shade of suspicion show itself in his eyes. 

“no,” laugh the doctor, “you need not fear that i’m merely humour 
you, or think you mad. far from it. your story interests me exceedingly 
and you furnish me unconscious with a number of clue as you tell it. 
you see, i possess some knowledge of my own as to these psychic byways.” 

“i was shake with such violent laughter,” continue the narrator, 
reassure in a moment, “though with no clear idea what was amuse me, 
that i had the greatest difficulty in get up for the matches, and 
was afraid i should frighten the servant overhead with my explosions. 
when the gas was lit i found the room empty, of course, and the door 
lock as usual. then i half dress and went out on to the landing, 
my hilarity better under control, and proceed to go downstairs. i 
wish to record my sensations. i stuff a handkerchief into my mouth 
so as not to scream aloud and communicate my hysterics to the entire 
household.” 

“and the presence of this--this----?” 

“it was hanging about me all the time,” said pender, “but for the 
moment it seem to have withdrawn. probably, too, my laughter kill 
all other emotions.” 

“and how long did you take get downstairs?” 

“i was just coming to that i see you know all my ‘symptoms’ in advance, 
as it were; for, of course, i thought i should never get to the bottom. 
each step seem to take five minutes, and crossing the narrow hall at 
the foot of the stairs--well, i could have sworn it was half an hour’s 
journey had not my watch certify that it was a few seconds. yet i 
walk fast and try to push on. it was no good. i walk apparently 
without advancing, and at that rate it would have taken me a week to 
get down putney hill.” 

“an experimental dose radical alter the scale of time and space 
sometimes----” 

“but, when at last i got into my study and lit the gas, the change came 
horridly, and sudden as a flash of lightning. it was like a douche of 
icy water, and in the middle of this storm of laughter----” 

“yes; what?” ask the doctor, leaning forward and peer into his 
eyes. 

“----i was overwhelm with terror,” said pender, lower his reedy 
voice at the mere recollection of it. 

he pause a moment and mop his forehead. the scared, hunt look in 
his eyes now dominate the whole face. yet, all the time, the corner 
of his mouth hint of possible laughter as though the recollection of 
that merriment still amuse him. the combination of fear and laughter 
in his face was very curious, and lent great conviction to his story; 
it also lent a bizarre expression of horror to his gestures. 

“terror, was it?” repeated the doctor soothingly. 

“yes, terror; for, though the thing that woke me seem to have gone, 
the memory of it still frightened me, and i collapse into a chair. 
then i lock the door and try to reason with myself, but the 
drug made my movements so prolonged that it took me five minutes to 
reach the door, and another five to get back to the chair again. the 
laughter, too, kept bubble up inside me--great wholesome laughter 
that shook me like gust of wind--so that even my terror almost made 
me laugh. oh, but i may tell you, dr. silence, it was altogether vile, 
that mixture of fear and laughter, altogether vile! 

“then, all at once, the things in the room again present their 
funny side to me and set me off laugh more furiously than ever. 
the bookcase was ludicrous, the arm-chair a perfect clown, the way 
the clock look at me on the mantelpiece too comic for words; the 
arrangement of papers and inkstand on the desk tickle me till i roar 
and shook and held my side and the tear stream down my cheeks. and 
that footstool! oh, that absurd footstool!” 

he lay back in his chair, laugh to himself and holding up his hand 
at the thought of it, and at the sight of him dr. silence laugh too. 

“go on, please,” he said, “i quite understand. i know something myself 
of the hashish laughter.” 

the author pull himself together and resumed, his face grow 
quick grave again. 

“so, you see, side by side with this extravagant, apparently causeless 
merriment, there was also an extravagant, apparently causeless terror. 
the drug produce the laughter, i knew; but what brought in the terror 
i could not imagine. everywhere behind the fun lay the fear. it was 
terror masked by cap and bells; and i became the playground for two 
oppose emotions, armed and fight to the death. gradually, then, 
the impression grew in me that this fear was cause by the invasion--so 
you call it just now--of the ‘person’ who had waken me: she was 
utterly evil; inimical to my soul, or at least to all in me that wish 
for good. there i stood, sweat and trembling, laugh at everything 
in the room, yet all the while with this white terror master my 
heart. and this creature was putting--putting her----” 

he hesitate again, use his handkerchief freely. 

“putting what?” 

“----putting idea into my mind,” he went on, glancing nervous about 
the room. “actually tap my thought-stream so as to switch off the 
usual current and inject her own. how mad that sounds! i know it, 
but it’s true. it’s the only way i can express it. moreover, while 
the operation terrify me, the skill with which it was accomplished 
fill me afresh with laughter at the clumsy of men by comparison. 
our ignorant, bungle method of teaching the mind of others, of 
inculcate ideas, and so on, overwhelm me with laughter when i 
understood this superior and diabolical method. yet my laughter seem 
hollow and ghastly, and idea of evil and tragedy trod close upon the 
heel of the comic. oh, doctor, i tell you again, it was unnerving!” 

john silence sat with his head thrust forward to catch every word of 
the story which the other continue to pour out in nervous, jerky 
sentence and lower voice. 

“you _saw_ nothing--no one--all this time?” he asked. 

“not with my eyes. there was no visual hallucination. but in my mind 
there began to grow the vivid picture of a woman--large, dark-skinned, 
with white teeth and masculine features, and one eye--the left--so 
droop as to appear almost closed. oh, such a face----!” 

“a face you would recognise again?” 

pender laugh dreadfully. 

“i wish i could forget it,” he whispered, “i only wish i could forget 
it!” then he sat forward in his chair suddenly, and grasp the 
doctor’s hand with an emotional gesture. 

“i _must_ tell you how grateful i am for your patience and sympathy,” 
he cried, with a tremor in his voice, “and--that you do not think 
me mad. i have told no one else a quarter of all this, and the 
mere freedom of speech--the relief of share my affliction with 
another--has help me already more than i can possibly say.” 

dr. silence pressed his hand and look steady into the frightened 
eyes. his voice was very gentle when he replied. 

“your case, you know, is very singular, but of absorbing interest to 
me,” he said, “for it threatens, not your physical existence, but 
the temple of your psychic existence--the inner life. your mind 
would not be permanent affected here and now, in this world; but in 
the existence after the body is left behind, you might wake up with 
your spirit so twisted, so distorted, so befouled, that you would be 
_spiritually insane_--a far more radical condition than merely being 
insane here.” 

there came a strange hush over the room, and between the two men 
sitting there facing one another. 

“do you really mean--good lord!” stammer the author as soon as he 
could find his tongue. 

“what i mean in detail will keep till a little later, and i need only 
say now that i should not have spoken in this way unless i were quite 
positive of being able to help you. oh, there’s no doubt as to that, 
believe me. in the first place, i am very familiar with the workings 
of this extraordinary drug, this drug which has had the chance effect 
of opening you up to the forces of another region; and, in the second, 
i have a firm belief in the reality of super-sensuous occurrence as 
well as considerable knowledge of psychic process acquire by long 
and painful experiment. the rest is, or should be, merely sympathetic 
treatment and practical application. the hashish has partially open 
another world to you by increase your rate of psychic vibration, 
and thus rendering you abnormal sensitive. ancient forces attach to 
this house have attack you. for the moment i am only puzzle as to 
their precise nature; for were they of an ordinary character, i should 
myself be psychic enough to feel them. yet i am conscious of feeling 
nothing as yet. but now, please continue, mr. pender, and tell me the 
rest of your wonderful story; and when you have finished, i will talk 
about the means of cure.” 

pender shift his chair a little close to the friendly doctor and 
then went on in the same nervous voice with his narrative. 

“after making some note of my impression i finally got upstairs again 
to bed. it was four o’clock in the morning. i laugh all the way 
up--at the grotesque banisters, the droll physiognomy of the staircase 
window, the burlesque grouping of the furniture, and the memory of that 
outrageous footstool in the room below; but nothing more happen to 
alarm or disturb me, and i woke late in the morning after a dreamless 
sleep, none the worse for my experiment except for a slight headache 
and a cold of the extremities due to lower circulation.” 

“fear gone, too?” ask the doctor. 

“i seem to have forgotten it, or at least ascribe it to mere 
nervousness. it’s reality had gone, anyhow for the time, and all 
that day i wrote and wrote and wrote. my sense of laughter seem 
wonderful quicken and my character act without effort out of 
the heart of true humour. i was exceedingly pleased with this result 
of my experiment but when the stenographer had taken her departure and 
i came to read over the page she had type out, i recall her sudden 
glance of surprise and the odd way she had look up at me while i was 
dictating. i was amaze at what i read and could hardly believe i had 
utter it.” 

“and why?” 

“it was so distorted. the words, indeed, were mine so far as i could 
remember, but the meaning seem strange. it frightened me. the sense 
was so altered. at the very place where my character were intended to 
tickle the ribs, only curious emotion of sinister amusement resulted. 
dreadful innuendo had manage to creep into the phrases. there was 
laughter of a kind, but it was bizarre, horrible, distressing; and 
my attempt at analysis only increase my dismay. the story, as it 
read then, made me shudder, for by virtue of these slight change it 
had come somehow to hold the soul of horror, of horror disguise as 
merriment. the framework of humour was there, if you understand me, but 
the character had turn sinister, and their laughter was evil.” 

“can you show me this writing?” 

the author shook his head. 

“i destroy it,” he whispered. “but, in the end, though of course 
much perturb about it, i persuade myself that it was due to some 
after-effect of the drug, a sort of reaction that gave a twist to my 
mind and made me read macabre interpretation into words and situation 
that did not properly hold them.” 

“and, meanwhile, did the presence of this person leave you?” 

“no; that stay more or less. when my mind was active employ i 
forgot it, but when idle, dreaming, or do nothing in particular, 
there she was beside me, influence my mind horribly----” 

“in what way, precisely?” interrupt the doctor. 

“evil, scheme thought came to me, vision of crime, hateful pictures 
of wickedness, and the kind of bad imagination that so far has been 
foreign, indeed impossible, to my normal nature----” 

“the pressure of the dark powers upon the personality,” murmur the 
doctor, making a quick note. 

“eh? i didn’t quite catch----” 

“pray, go on. i am merely making notes; you shall know their purport 
fully later.” 

“even when my wife return i was still aware of this presence in the 
house; it associate itself with my inner personality in most intimate 
fashion; and outwardly i always felt oddly constrained to be polite and 
respectful towards it--to open doors, provide chair and hold myself 
careful deferential when it was about. it became very compel at 
last, and, if i fail in any little particular, i seem to know that 
it pursue me about the house, from one room to another, haunting my 
very soul in its inmost abode. it certainly came before my wife so far 
as my attention were concerned. 

“but, let me first finish the story of my experimental dose, for i took 
it again the third night, and underwent a very similar experience, 
delay like the first in coming, and then carry me off my feet 
when it did come with a rush of this false demon-laughter. this time, 
however, there was a reversal of the change scale of space and 
time; it shortened, instead of lengthened, so that i dress and got 
downstairs in about twenty seconds, and the couple of hour i stay 
and work in the study pass literally like a period of ten minutes.” 

“that is often true of an overdose,” interject the doctor, “and you 
may go a mile in a few minutes, or a few yard in a quarter of an hour. 
it is quite incomprehensible to those who have never experienced it, 
and is a curious proof that time and space are merely form of thought.” 

“this time,” pender went on, talk more and more rapid in his 
excitement, “another extraordinary effect came to me, and i experienced 
a curious change of the senses, so that i perceive external things 
through one large main sense-channel instead of through the five 
division known as sight, smell, touch, and so forth. you will, i 
know, understand me when i tell you that i _heard_ sight and _saw_ 
sounds. no language can make this comprehensible, of course, and i 
can only say, for instance, that the striking of the clock i saw as a 
visible picture in the air before me. i saw the sound of the tinkle 
bell. and in precisely the same way i heard the colours in the room, 
especially the colours of those books in the shelf behind you. those 
red binding i heard in deep sounds, and the yellow cover of the 
france binding next to them made a shrill, piercing note not unlike 
the chatter of starlings. that brown bookcase muttered, and those 
green curtains opposite kept up a constant sort of ripple sound like 
the lower note of a wood-horn. but i only was conscious of these 
sound when i look steady at the different objects, and thought 
about them. the room, you understand, was not full of a chorus of 
notes; but when i concentrated my mind upon a colour, i heard, as well 
as saw, it.” 

“that is a known, though rarely-obtained, effect of _cannabis indica_,” 
observe the doctor. “and it provoke laughter again, did it?” 

“only the mutter of the cupboard-bookcase made me laugh. it was so 
like a great animal try to get itself noticed, and made me think 
of a perform bear--which is full of a kind of pathetic humour, you 
know. but this mingle of the senses produce no confusion in my 
brain. on the contrary, i was unusually clear-headed and experienced 
an intensify of consciousness, and felt marvellous alive and 
keen-minded. 

“moreover, when i took up a pencil in obedience to an impulse to 
sketch--a talent not normally mine--i found that i could draw nothing 
but heads, nothing, in fact, but one head--always the same--the head 
of a dark-skinned woman, with huge and terrible features and a very 
droop left eye; and so well drawn, too, that i was amazed, as you 
may imagine----” 

“and the expression of the face----?” 

pender hesitate a moment for words, casting about with his hand in 
the air and hunch his shoulders. a perceptible shudder ran over him. 

“what i can only describe as--_blackness_,” he reply in a low tone; 
“the face of a dark and evil soul.” 

“you destroy that, too?” query the doctor sharply. 

“no; i have kept the drawings,” he said, with a laugh, and rose to get 
them from a drawer in the writing-desk behind him. 

“here is all that remains of the pictures, you see,” he added, push 
a number of loose sheet under the doctor’s eyes; “nothing but a few 
scraw lines. that’s all i found the next morning. i had really drawn 
no head at all--nothing but those lines and blot and wriggles. the 
pictures were entire subjective, and exist only in my mind which 
construct them out of a few wild stroke of the pen. like the alter 
scale of space and time it was a complete delusion. these all passed, 
of course, with the passing of the drug’s effects. but the other thing 
did not pass. i mean, the presence of that dark soul remain with me. 
it is here still. it is real. i don’t know how i can escape from it.” 

“it is attach to the house, not to you personally. you must leave the 
house.” 

“yes. only i cannot afford to leave the house, for my work is my sole 
means of support, and--well, you see, since this change i cannot even 
write. they are horrible, these mirthless tale i now write, with their 
mockery of laughter, their diabolical suggestion. horrible! i shall go 
mad if this continues.” 

he screw his face up and look about the room as though he expect 
to see some haunting shape. 

“the influence in this house, induce by my experiment, has kill in 
a flash, in a sudden stroke, the source of my humour, and, though i 
still go on writing funny tales--i have a certain name, you know--my 
inspiration has dry up, and much of what i write i have to burn--yes, 
doctor, to burn, before any one see it.” 

“as utterly alien to your own mind and personality?” 

“utterly! as though some one else had written it----” 

“ah!” 

“and shocking!” he pass his hand over his eyes a moment and let the 
breath escape soft through his teeth. “yet most damnable clever in 
the consummate way the vile suggestion are insinuate under cover of 
a kind of high drollery. my stenographer left me, of course--and i’ve 
been afraid to take another----” 

john silence got up and began to walk about the room leisurely without 
speaking; he appear to be examine the pictures on the wall and 
reading the name of the books lie about. presently he pause on the 
hearthrug, with his back to the fire, and turn to look his patient 
quiet in the eyes. pender’s face was grey and drawn; the hunt 
expression dominate it; the long recital had told upon him. 

“thank you, mr. pender,” he said, a curious glow showing about his 
fine, quiet face, “thank you for the sincerity and frank of your 
account. but i think now there is nothing further i need ask you.” he 
indulge in a long scrutiny of the author’s haggard features, drawing 
purposely the man’s eyes to his own and then meeting them with a look 
of power and confidence calculate to inspire even the feeblest soul 
with courage. “and, to begin with,” he added, smile pleasantly, “let 
me assure you without delay that you need have no alarm, for you are no 
more insane or delude than i myself am----” 

pender heave a deep sigh and try to return the smile. 

“----and this is simply a case, so far as i can judge at present, of a 
very singular psychic invasion, and a very sinister one, too, if you 
perhaps understand what i mean----” 

“it’s an odd expression; you use it before, you know,” said the 
author wearily, yet eager listen to every word of the diagnosis, 
and deep touched by the intelligent sympathy which did not at once 
indicate the lunatic asylum. 

“possibly,” return the other, “and an odd affliction too, you’ll 
allow, yet one not unknown to the nation of antiquity, nor to those 
moderns, perhaps, who recognise the freedom of action under certain 
pathogenic conditions between this world and another.” 

“and you think,” ask pender hastily, “that it is all primarily due to 
the _cannabis_? there is nothing radical amiss with myself--nothing 
incurable, or----?” 

“due entire to the overdose,” dr. silence reply emphatically, “to 
the drug’s direct action upon your psychic being. it render you 
ultra-sensitive and made you respond to an increase rate of vibration. 
and, let me tell you, mr. pender, that your experiment might have had 
result far more dire. it has brought you into touch with a somewhat 
singular class of invisible, but of one, i think, chiefly human in 
character. you might, however, just as easily have been drawn out of 
human range altogether, and the result of such a contingency would 
have been exceedingly terrible. indeed, you would not now be here to 
tell the tale. i need not alarm you on that score, but mention it as 
a warning you will not misunderstand or underrate after what you have 
been through. 

“you look puzzled. you do not quite gather what i am driving at; and 
it is not to be expect that you should, for you, i suppose, are 
the nominal christian with the nominal christian’s lofty standard of 
ethics, and his utter ignorance of spiritual possibilities. beyond 
a somewhat childish understanding of ‘spiritual wicked in high 
places,’ you probably have no conception of what is possible once you 
break down the slender gulf that is merciful fixed between you and 
that outer world. but my study and training have taken me far outside 
these orthodox trips, and i have made experiment that i could scarcely 
speak to you about in language that would be intelligible to you.” 

he pause a moment to note the breathless interest of pender’s face and 
manner. every word he utter was calculated; he knew exactly the value 
and effect of the emotion he desire to waken in the heart of the 
afflict being before him. 

“and from certain knowledge i have gain through various experiences,” 
he continue calmly, “i can diagnose your case as i said before to be 
one of psychic invasion.” 

“and the nature of this--er--invasion?” stammer the bewilder writer 
of humorous tales. 

“there is no reason why i should not say at once that i do not yet 
quite know,” reply dr. silence. “i may first have to make one or two 
experiments----” 

“on me?” gasp pender, catching his breath. 

“not exactly,” the doctor said, with a grave smile, “but with your 
assistance, perhaps. i shall want to test the conditions of the 
house--to ascertain, if possible, the character of the forces, of this 
strange personality that has been haunting you----” 

“at present you have no idea exactly who--what--why----” ask the 
other in a wild flurry of interest, dread and amazement. 

“i have a very good idea, but no proof rather,” return the doctor. 
“the effects of the drug in alter the scale of time and space, and 
merge the senses have nothing primarily to do with the invasion. they 
come to any one who is fool enough to take an experimental dose. it is 
the other features of your case that are unusual. you see, you are now 
in touch with certain violent emotions, desires, purposes, still active 
in this house, that were produce in the past by some powerful and evil 
personality that live here. how long ago, or why they still persist 
so forcibly, i cannot positively say. but i should judge that they are 
merely forces acting automatic with the momentum of their terrific 
original impetus.” 

“not direct by a living being, a conscious will, you mean?” 

“possibly not--but none the less dangerous on that account, and more 
difficult to deal with. i cannot explain to you in a few minutes the 
nature of such things, for you have not made the study that would 
enable you to follow me; but i have reason to believe that on the 
dissolution at death of a human being, its forces may still persist 
and continue to act in a blind, unconscious fashion. as a rule they 
speedy dissipate themselves, but in the case of a very powerful 
personality they may last a long time. and, in some cases--of which i 
incline to think this is one--these forces may coalesce with certain 
non-human entity who thus continue their life indefinitely and 
increase their strength to an unbelievable degree. if the original 
personality was evil, the being attract to the left-over forces 
will also be evil. in this case, i think there has been an unusual and 
dreadful aggrandisement of the thought and purpose left behind long 
ago by a woman of consummate wicked and great personal power of 
character and intellect. now, do you begin to see what i am driving at 
a little?” 

pender stare fixedly at his companion, plain horror showing in his 
eyes. but he found nothing to say, and the doctor continued-- 

“in your case, predispose by the action of the drug, you have 
experienced the rush of these forces in undiluted strength. they 
wholly obliterate in you the sense of humour, fancy, imagination,--all 
that make for cheerful and hope. they seek, though perhaps 
automatic only, to oust your own thought and establish themselves 
in their place. you are the victim of a psychic invasion. at the same 
time, you have become clairvoyant in the true sense. you are also a 
clairvoyant victim.” 

pender mop his face and sighed. he left his chair and went over to 
the fireplace to warm himself. 

“you must think me a quack to talk like this, or a madman,” laugh 
dr. silence. “but never mind that. i have come to help you, and i can 
help you if you will do what i tell you. it is very simple: you must 
leave this house at once. oh, never mind the difficulties; we will deal 
with those together. i can place another house at your disposal, or 
i would take the lease here off your hands, and later have it pull 
down. your case interests me greatly, and i mean to see you through, so 
that you have no anxiety, and can drop back into your old groove of 
work to-morrow! the drug has provided you, and therefore me, with a 
short-cut to a very interesting experience. i am grateful to you.” 

the author poke the fire vigorously, emotion rising in him like a 
tide. he glance towards the door nervously. 

“there is no need to alarm your wife or to tell her the detail of 
our conversation,” pursue the other quietly. “let her know that you 
will soon be in possession again of your sense of humour and your 
health, and explain that i am lend you another house for six months. 
meanwhile i may have the right to use this house for a night or two for 
my experiment. is that understood between us?” 

“i can only thank you from the bottom of my heart,” stammer pender, 
unable to find words to express his gratitude. 

then he hesitate for a moment, searching the doctor’s face anxiously. 

“and your experiment with the house?” he said at length. 

“of the simplest character, my dear mr. pender. although i am myself an 
artificial train psychic, and consequently aware of the presence 
of discarnate entity as a rule, i have so far felt nothing here at 
all. this make me sure that the forces acting here are of an unusual 
description. what i propose to do is to make an experiment with a view 
of drawing out this evil, coax it from its lair, so to speak, in 
order that it may _exhaust itself through me_ and become dissipated for 
ever. i have already been inoculated,” he added; “i consider myself to 
be immune.” 

“heavens above!” gasp the author, collapse on to a chair. 

“hell beneath! might be a more appropriate exclamation,” the doctor 
laughed. “but, seriously, mr. pender, this is what i propose to 
do--with your permission.” 

“of course, of course,” cry the other, “you have my permission and my 
best wish for success. i can see no possible objection, but----” 

“but what?” 

“i pray to heaven you will not undertake this experiment alone, will 
you?” 

“oh dear, no; not alone.” 

“you will take a companion with good nerves, and reliable in case of 
disaster, won’t you?” 

“i shall bring two companions,” the doctor said. 

“ah, that’s better. i feel easier. i am sure you must have among your 
acquaintance men who----” 

“i shall not think of bring men, mr. pender.” 

the other look up sharply. 

“no, or women either; or children.” 

“i don’t understand. who will you bring, then?” 

“animals,” explain the doctor, unable to prevent a smile at his 
companion’s expression of surprise--“two animals, a cat and a dog.” 

pender stare as if his eyes would drop out upon the floor, and then 
led the way without another word into the adjoin room where his wife 
was await them for tea. 


ii 

a few days later the humorist and his wife, with mind greatly 
relieved, move into a small furnish house placed at their free 
disposal in another part of london; and john silence, intent upon his 
approach experiment, made ready to spend a night in the empty house 
on the top of putney hill. only two rooms were prepared for occupation: 
the study on the ground floor and the bedroom immediately above it; 
all other door were to be locked, and no servant was to be left in 
the house. the motor had orders to call for him at nine o’clock the 
following morning. 

and, meanwhile, his secretary had instruction to look up the past 
history and association of the place, and learn everything he could 
concerning the character of former occupants, recent or remote. 

the animals, by whose sensitive he intended to test any unusual 
conditions in the atmosphere of the building, dr. silence select 
with care and judgment. he believe (and had already made curious 
experiment to prove it) that animal were more often, and more truly, 
clairvoyant than human beings. many of them, he felt convinced, 
possessed powers of perception far superior to that mere keen of 
the senses common to all dwell in the wild where the senses grow 
specially alert; they had what he term “animal clairvoyance,” and 
from his experiment with horses, dogs, cats, and even birds, he had 
drawn certain deductions, which, however, need not be refer to in 
detail here. 

cats, in particular, he believed, were almost continuous conscious of 
a large field of vision, too detailed even for a photographic camera, 
and quite beyond the reach of normal human organs. he had, further, 
observe that while dogs were usually terrify in the presence of such 
phenomena, cat on the other hand were soothe and satisfied. they 
welcome manifestation as something belong peculiarly to their own 
region. 

he select his animals, therefore, with wisdom so that they might 
afford a differ test, each in its own way, and that one should not 
merely communicate its own excitement to the other. he took a dog and a 
cat. 

the cat he chose, now full grown, had live with him since kittenhood, 
a kittenhood of perplex sweet and audacious mischief. wayward 
it was and fanciful, ever play its own mysterious games in the 
corner of the room, jump at invisible nothings, leap sideways 
into the air and fall with tiny mocassine feet on to another part 
of the carpet, yet with an air of dignified earnest which show 
that the performance was necessary to its own well-being, and not done 
merely to impress a stupid human audience. in the middle of elaborate 
washing it would look up, startled, as though to stare at the approach 
of some invisible, cock its little head sideways and putt out a 
velvet pad to inspect cautiously. then it would get absent-minded, and 
stare with equal intent in another direction (just to confuse the 
onlookers), and sudden go on furiously washing its body again, but in 
quite a new place. except for a white patch on its breast it was coal 
black. and its name was--smoke. 

“smoke” describe its temperament as well as its appearance. its 
movements, its individuality, its pose as a little furry mass of 
conceal mysteries, its elfin-like elusiveness, all combine to 
justify its name; and a subtle painter might have picture it as a 
wisp of floating smoke, the fire below betray itself at two points 
only--the glowing eyes. 

all its forces ran to intelligence--secret intelligence, the wordless, 
incalculable intuition of the cat. it was, indeed, _the_ cat for the 
business in hand. 

the selection of the dog was not so simple, for the doctor own many; 
but after much deliberation he chose a collie, call flame from his 
yellow coat. true, it was a trifle old, and stiff in the joints, and 
even beginning to grow deaf, but, on the other hand, it was a very 
particular friend of smoke’s, and had father it from kittenhood 
upwards so that a subtle understanding exist between them. it was 
this that turn the balance in its favour, this and its courage. 
moreover, though good-tempered, it was a terrible fighter, and its 
anger when provoke by a righteous cause was a fury of fire, and 
irresistible. 

it had come to him quite young, straight from the shepherd, with the 
air of the hill yet in its nostrils, and was then little more than 
skin and bone and teeth. for a collie it was sturdy built, its nose 
blunt than most, its yellow hair stiff rather than silky, and it had 
full eyes, unlike the slit eyes of its breed. only its master could 
touch it, for it ignore strangers, and despise their pattings--when 
any dare to pat it. there was something patriarchal about the old 
beast. he was in earnest, and went through life with tremendous 
energy and big things in view, as though he had the reputation of his 
whole race to uphold. and to watch him fight against odds was to 
understand why he was terrible. 

in his relations with smoke he was always absurd gentle; also he 
was fatherly; and at the same time betray a certain diffidence or 
shyness. he recognise that smoke call for strong yet respectful 
management. the cat’s circuitous method puzzle him, and his elaborate 
pretence perhaps shock the dog’s liking for direct, undisguised 
action. yet, while he fail to comprehend these tortuous feline 
mysteries, he was never contemptuous or condescending; and he preside 
over the safety of his furry black friend somewhat as a father, 
loving but intuitive, might superintend the vagary of a wayward and 
talented child. and, in return, smoke reward him with exhibition of 
fascinating and audacious mischief. 

and these brief description of their character are necessary for the 
proper understanding of what subsequent took place. 

with smoke sleep in the fold of his fur coat, and the collie lie 
watchful on the seat opposite, john silence went down in his motor 
after dinner on the night of november 15th. 

and the fog was so dense that they were oblige to travel at quarter 
speed the entire way. 

* * * * * 

it was after ten o’clock when he dismiss the motor and enter the 
dingy little house with the latchkey provided by pender. he found the 
hall gas turn low, and a fire in the study. books and food had also 
been placed ready by the servant according to instructions. coil of 
fog rush in after him through the open door and fill the hall and 
passage with its cold discomfort. 

the first thing dr. silence did was to lock up smoke in the study with 
a saucer of milk before the fire, and then make a search of the house 
with flame. the dog ran cheerful behind him all the way while he 
try the door of the other rooms to make sure they were locked. he 
nose about into corner and made little excursion on his own account. 
his manner was expectant. he knew there must be something unusual about 
the proceeding, because it was contrary to the habit of his whole 
life not to be asleep at this hour on the mat in front of the fire. he 
kept look up into his master’s face, as door after door was tried, 
with an expression of intelligent sympathy, but at the same time a 
certain air of disapproval. yet everything his master did was good in 
his eyes, and he betray as little impatience as possible with all 
this unnecessary journey to and fro. if the doctor was pleased to 
play this sort of game at such an hour of the night, it was surely not 
for him to object. so he play it too; and was very busy and earnest 
about it into the bargain. 

after an uneventful search they came down again to the study, and here 
dr. silence discover smoke washing his face calm in front of the 
fire. the saucer of milk was lick dry and clean; the preliminary 
examination that cat always make in new surroundings had evidently 
been satisfactory concluded. he drew an arm-chair up to the fire, 
stir the coal into a blaze, arrange the table and lamp to his 
satisfaction for reading, and then prepared surreptitious to watch 
the animals. he wish to observe them careful without their being 
aware of it. 

now, in spite of their respective ages, it was the regular custom of 
these two to play together every night before sleep. smoke always made 
the advances, beginning with grave impudence to pat the dog’s tail, and 
flame play cumbrously, with condescension. it was his duty, rather 
than pleasure; he was glad when it was over, and sometimes he was very 
determined and refuse to play at all. 

and this night was one of the occasion on which he was firm. 

the doctor, look cautious over the top of his book, watch 
the cat begin the performance. it start by gaze with an innocent 
expression at the dog where he lay with nose on paw and eyes wide open 
in the middle of the floor. then it got up and made as though it meant 
to walk to the door, go deliberate and very softly. flame’s eyes 
follow it until it was beyond the range of sight, and then the cat 
turn sharp and began pat his tail tentative with one paw. 
the tail move slightly in reply, and smoke change paw and tap 
it again. the dog, however, did not rise to play as was his wont, and 
the cat fell to pat it brisk with both paws. flame still lay 
motionless. 

this puzzle and bore the cat, and it went round and stare hard into 
its friend’s face to see what was the matter. perhaps some inarticulate 
message flash from the dog’s eyes into its own little brain, making 
it understand that the programme for the night had better not begin 
with play. perhaps it only realise that its friend was immovable. but, 
whatever the reason, its usual persistence thenceforward desert it, 
and it made no further attempt at persuasion. smoke yield at once to 
the dog’s mood; it sat down where it was and began to wash. 

but the washing, the doctor noted, was by no means its real purpose; 
it only use it to mask something else; it stop at the most busy 
and furious moments and began to stare about the room. its thought 
wander absurdly. it peer intent at the curtains; at the shadowy 
corners; at empty space above; leave its body in curious awkward 
position for whole minutes together. then it turn sharp and stare 
with a sudden signal of intelligence at the dog, and flame at once 
rose somewhat stiff to his feet and began to wander aimless and 
restless to and fro about the floor. smoke follow him, padding 
quiet at his heels. between them they made what seem to be a 
deliberate search of the room. 

and, here, as he watch them, note careful every detail of 
the performance over the top of his book, yet making no effort to 
interfere, it seem to the doctor that the first beginning of a 
faint distress betray themselves in the collie, and in the cat the 
stirring of a vague excitement. 

he observe them closely. the fog was thick in the air, and the 
tobacco smoke from his pipe add to its density; the furniture at the 
far end stood mistily, and where the shadow congregate in hanging 
cloud under the ceiling, it was difficult to see clearly at all; the 
lamplight only reach to a level of five feet from the floor, above 
which came layer of comparative darkness, so that the room appear 
twice as lofty as it actually was. by means of the lamp and the fire, 
however, the carpet was everywhere clearly visible. 

the animal made their silent tour of the floor, sometimes the dog 
leading, sometimes the cat; occasional they look at one another 
as though exchange signals; and once or twice, in spite of the 
limited space, he lost sight of one or other among the fog and the 
shadows. their curiosity, it appear to him, was something more than 
the excitement lurk in the unknown territory of a strange room; 
yet, so far, it was impossible to test this, and he purposely kept his 
mind quiet receptive lest the smallest mental excitement on his part 
should communicate itself to the animal and thus destroy the value of 
their independent behaviour. 

they made a very thorough journey, leave no piece of furniture 
unexamined, or unsmelt. flame led the way, walking slow with lower 
head, and smoke follow demure at his heels, making a transparent 
pretence of not being interested, yet missing nothing. and, at length, 
they returned, the old collie first, and came to rest on the mat 
before the fire. flame rest his muzzle on his master’s knee, smile 
beatific while he pat the yellow head and spoke his name; and 
smoke, coming a little later, pretend he came by chance, look from 
the empty saucer to his face, lap up the milk when it was given him 
to the last drop, and then sprang upon his knee and curl round for 
the sleep it had fully earn and intended to enjoy. 

silence descended upon the room. only the breathing of the dog upon the 
mat came through the deep stillness, like the pulse of time marking 
the minutes; and the steady drip, drip of the fog outside upon the 
window-ledges dismal testify to the inclement of the night beyond. 
and the soft crashing of the coal as the fire settled down into the 
grate became less and less audible as the fire sank and the flame 
resigned their fierceness. 

it was now well after eleven o’clock, and dr. silence devoted himself 
again to his book. he read the words on the print page and took 
in their meaning superficially, yet without start into life 
the correlation of thought and suggestion that should accompany 
interesting reading. underneath, all the while, his mental energy 
were absorb in watching, listening, wait for what might come. 
he was not over sanguine himself, yet he did not wish to be taken 
by surprise. moreover, the animals, his sensitive barometers, had 
incontinent gone to sleep. 

after reading a dozen pages, however, he realise that his mind was 
really occupy in review the features of pender’s extraordinary 
story, and that it was no long necessary to steady his imagination 
by study the dull paragraph detailed in the page before him. he 
laid down his book accordingly, and allow his thought to dwell upon 
the features of the case. speculation as to the meaning, however, he 
rigorous suppressed, knowing that such thought would act upon his 
imagination like wind upon the glowing ember of a fire. 

as the night wore on the silence grew deep and deeper, and only 
at rare interval he heard the sound of wheels on the main road a 
hundred yard away, where the horse went at a walking pace owe to 
the density of the fog. the echo of pedestrian footstep no long 
reach him, the clamour of occasional voice no long came down the 
side street the night, muffle by fog, shroud by veil of ultimate 
mystery, hung about the haunt villa like a doom. nothing in the house 
stirred. stillness, in a thick blanket, lay over the upper storeys. 
only the mist in the room grew more dense, he thought, and the damp 
cold more penetrating. certainly, from time to time, he shivered. 

the collie, now deep in slumber, move occasionally,--grunted, sighed, 
or twitch his leg in dreams. smoke lay on his knees, a pool of warm, 
black fur, only the closest observation detect the movement of his 
sleek sides. it was difficult to distinguish exactly where his head and 
body join in that circle of glisten hair; only a black satin nose 
and a tiny tip of pink tongue betray the secret. 

dr. silence watch him, and felt comfortable. the collie’s breathing 
was soothing. the fire was well built, and would burn for another two 
hour without attention. he was not conscious of the least nervousness. 
he particularly wish to remain in his ordinary and normal state of 
mind, and to force nothing. if sleep came naturally, he would let it 
come--and even welcome it. the cold of the room, when the fire 
die down later, would be sure to wake him again; and it would then be 
time enough to carry these sleep barometer up to bed. from various 
psychic premonition he knew quite well that the night would not pass 
without adventure; but he did not wish to force its arrival; and he 
wish to remain normal, and let the animal remain normal, so that, 
when it came, it would be unattended by excitement or by any strain 
of the attention. many experiment had made him wise. and, for the 
rest, he had no fear. 

accordingly, after a time, he did fall asleep as he had expected, and 
the last thing he remembered, before oblivion slip up over his eyes 
like soft wool, was the picture of flame stretch all four leg at 
once, and sigh noisy as he sought a more comfortable position for 
his paw and muzzle upon the mat. 

* * * * * 

it was a good deal later when he became aware that a weight lay upon 
his chest, and that something was pencil over his face and mouth. a 
soft touch on the cheek woke him. something was pat him. 

he sat up with a jerk, and found himself staring straight into a pair 
of brilliant eyes, half green, half black. smoke’s face lay level with 
his own; and the cat had climb up with its front paw upon his chest. 

the lamp had burn low and the fire was nearly out, yet dr. silence 
saw in a moment that the cat was in an excited state. it knead with 
its front paw into his chest, shift from one to the other. he felt 
them prod against him. it lift a leg very careful and pat 
his cheek gingerly. its fur, he saw, was standing ridgewise upon its 
back; the ear were flatten back somewhat; the tail was switch 
sharply. the cat, of course, had waken him with a purpose, and the 
instant he realise this, he set it upon the arm of the chair and 
sprang up with a quick turn to face the empty room behind him. by some 
curious instinct, his arms of their own accord assume an attitude 
of defence in front of him, as though to ward off something that 
threaten his safety. yet nothing was visible. only shape of fog hung 
about rather heavy in the air, moving slightly to and fro. 

his mind was now fully alert, and the last vestige of sleep gone. he 
turn the lamp higher and peer about him. two things he became aware 
of at once: one, that smoke, while excited, was _pleasurably_ excited; 
the other, that the collie was no long visible upon the mat at his 
feet. he had crept away to the corner of the wall farthest from the 
window, and lay watch the room with wide-open eyes, in which lurk 
plainly something of alarm. 

something in the dog’s behaviour instantly struck dr. silence as 
unusual, and, calling him by name, he move across to pat him. flame 
got up, wag his tail, and came over slow to the rug, utter a 
low sound that was half growl, half whine. he was evidently perturb 
about something, and his master was proceeding to administer comfort 
when his attention was sudden drawn to the antics of his other 
four-footed companion, the cat. 

and what he saw fill him with something like amazement. 

smoke had jump down from the back of the arm-chair and now occupy 
the middle of the carpet, where, with tail erect and leg stiff as 
ramrods, it was steady pace backwards and forward in a narrow 
space, uttering, as it did so, those curious little guttural sound of 
pleasure that only an animal of the feline species know how to make 
expressive of supreme happiness. its stiffen leg and arch back 
made it appear large than usual, and the black visage wore a smile of 
beatific joy. its eyes blaze magnificently; it was in an ecstasy. 

at the end of every few pace it turn sharp and stalk back again 
along the same line, padding softly, and purr like a roll of little 
muffle drums. it behave precisely as though it were rubbing against 
the ankle of some one who remain invisible. a thrill ran down the 
doctor’s spine as he stood and stared. his experiment was grow 
interesting at last. 

he call the collie’s attention to his friend’s performance to see 
whether he too was aware of anything standing there upon the carpet; 
and the dog’s behaviour was significant and corroborative. he came 
as far as his master’s knee and then stop dead, refuse to 
investigate closely. in vain dr. silence urge him; he wag his 
tail, whine a little, and stood in a half-crouching attitude, staring 
alternate at the cat and at his master’s face. he was, apparently, 
both puzzle and alarmed, and the whine went deep and deep down 
into his throat till it change into an ugly snarl of awakening anger. 

then the doctor call to him in a tone of command he had never known 
to be disregarded; but still the dog, though spring up in response, 
decline to move nearer. he made tentative motions, prance a little 
like a dog about to take to water, pretended to bark, and ran to and 
fro on the carpet. so far there was no actual fear in his manner, but 
he was uneasy and anxious, and nothing would induce him to go within 
touching distance of the walking cat. once he made a complete circuit, 
but always careful out of reach; and in the end he return to his 
master’s leg and rub vigorous against him. flame did not like the 
performance at all: that much was quite clear. 

for several minutes john silence watch the performance of the cat 
with profound attention and without interfering. then he call to the 
animal by name. 

“smoke, you mysterious beastie, what in the world are you about?” he 
said, in a coax tone. 

the cat look up at him for a moment, smile in its ecstasy, blinking 
its eyes, but too happy to pause. he spoke to it again. he call to it 
several times, and each time it turn upon him its blazing eyes, drunk 
with inner delight, opening and shut its lips, its body large and 
rigid with excitement. yet it never for one instant pause in its short 
journey to and fro. 

he noted exactly what it did: it walked, he saw, the same number of 
pace each time, some six or seven steps, and then it turn sharp 
and retrace them. by the pattern of the great rose in the carpet 
he measured it. it kept to the same direction and the same line. it 
behave precisely as though it were rubbing against something solid. 
undoubtedly, there was something standing there on that strip of 
carpet, something invisible to the doctor, something that alarm the 
dog, yet cause the cat unspeakable pleasure. 

“smokie!” he call again, “smokie, you black mystery, what is it 
excite you so?” 

again the cat look up at him for a brief second, and then continue 
its sentry-walk, blissful happy, intense preoccupied. and, for an 
instant, as he watch it, the doctor was aware that a faint uneasy 
stir in the depths of his own being, focus itself for the moment 
upon this curious behaviour of the uncanny creature before him. 

there rose in him quite a new realisation of the mystery connected 
with the whole feline tribe, but especially with that common member 
of it, the domestic cat--their hidden lives, their strange aloofness, 
their incalculable subtlety. how utterly remote from anything that 
human being understood lay the source of their elusive activities. 
as he watch the indescribable bearing of the little creature mince 
along the strip of carpet under his eyes, coquette with the powers 
of darkness, welcoming, maybe, some fearsome visitor, there stir in 
his heart a feeling strange akin to awe. its indifference to human 
kind, its serene superior to the obvious, struck him forcibly with 
fresh meaning; so remote, so inaccessible seem the secret purpose of 
its real life, so alien to the blunder honesty of other animals. 
its absolute poise of bearing brought into his mind the opium-eater’s 
words that “no dignity is perfect which do not at some point ally 
itself with the mysterious”; and he became sudden aware that the 
presence of the dog in this foggy, haunt room on the top of putney 
hill was uncommonly welcome to him. he was glad to feel that flame’s 
dependable personality was with him. the savage growl at his heel 
was a pleasant sound. he was glad to hear it. that march cat made 
him uneasy. 

finding that smoke paid no further attention to his words, the doctor 
decided upon action. would it rub against his leg, too? he would take 
it by surprise and see. 

he step quick forward and placed himself upon the exact strip of 
carpet where it walked. 

but no cat is ever taken by surprise! the moment he occupy the space 
of the intruder, setting his feet on the woven rose midway in the line 
of travel, smoke sudden stop purr and sat down. it lift up 
its face with the most innocent stare imaginable of its green eyes. he 
could have sworn it laughed. it was a perfect child again. in a single 
second it had resume its simple, domestic manner; and it gaze at him 
in such a way that he almost felt smoke was the normal being, and _his_ 
was the eccentric behaviour that was being watched. it was consummate, 
the manner in which it brought about this change so easily and so 
quickly. 

“superb little actor!” he laugh in spite of himself, and stoop to 
stroke the shining black back. but, in a flash, as he touched its fur, 
the cat turn and spat at him viciously, striking at his hand with 
one paw. then, with a hurried scut of feet, it shot like a shadow 
across the floor and a moment later was calm sitting over by the 
window-curtains washing its face as though nothing interested it in the 
whole world but the clean of its cheek and whiskers. 

john silence straighten himself up and drew a long breath. he 
realise that the performance was temporary at an end. the 
collie, meanwhile, who had watch the whole proceeding with marked 
disapproval, had now lain down again upon the mat by the fire, no 
long growling. it seem to the doctor just as though something that 
had enter the room while he slept, alarm the dog, yet bring 
happiness to the cat, had now gone out again, leave all as it was 
before. whatever it was that excited its blissful attention had 
retreat for the moment. 

he realise this intuitively. smoke evidently realise it, too, for 
presently he deign to march back to the fireplace and jump upon his 
master’s knees. dr. silence, patient and determined, settled down once 
more to his book. the animal soon slept; the fire blaze cheerfully; 
and the cold fog from outside pour into the room through every 
available chink and cranny. 

for a long time silence and peace reign in the room and dr. silence 
avail himself of the quiet to make careful note of what had 
happened. he enter for future use in other case an exhaustive 
analysis of what he had observed, especially with regard to the 
effect upon the two animals. it is impossible here, nor would it be 
intelligible to the reader unversed in the knowledge of the region 
known to a scientific train psychic like dr. silence, to 
detail these observations. but to him it was clear, up to a certain 
point--and for the rest he must still wait and watch. so far, at least, 
he realise that while he slept in the chair--that is, while his will 
was dormant--the room had suffer intrusion from what he recognise 
as an intense active force, and might later be forced to acknowledge 
as something more than merely a blind force, namely, a distinct 
personality. 

so far it had affected himself scarcely at all, but had act directly 
upon the simple organism of the animals. it stimulate keen the 
centre of the cat’s psychic being, induce a state of instant 
happiness (intensifying its consciousness probably in the same way 
a drug or stimulant intensify that of a human being); whereas it 
alarm the less sensitive dog, cause it to feel a vague apprehension 
and distress. 

his own sudden action and exhibition of energy had serve to disperse 
it temporarily, yet he felt convinced--the indication were not lacking 
even while he sat there making notes--that it still remain near to 
him, conditional if not spatially, and was, as it were, gathering 
force for a second attack. 

and, further, he intuitive understood that the relations between the 
two animal had undergone a subtle change: that the cat had become 
immeasurable superior, confident, sure of itself in its own peculiar 
region, whereas flame had been weaken by an attack he could not 
comprehend and knew not how to reply to. though not yet afraid, he was 
defiant--ready to act against a fear that he felt to be approaching. he 
was no long fatherly and protective towards the cat. smoke held the 
key to the situation; and both he and the cat knew it. 

thus, as the minutes passed, john silence sat and waited, keen on 
the alert, wonder how soon the attack would be renewed, and at what 
point it would be divert from the animal and direct upon himself. 

the book lay on the floor beside him, his note were complete. with one 
hand on the cat’s fur, and the dog’s front paw rest against his 
feet, the three of them doze comfortable before the hot fire while the 
night wore on and the silence deepen towards midnight. 

it was well after one o’clock in the morning when dr. silence turn 
the lamp out and light the candle preparatory to go up to bed. 
then smoke sudden woke with a loud sharp purr and sat up. it neither 
stretched, wash nor turned: it listened. and the doctor, watch it, 
realise that a certain indefinable change had come about that very 
moment in the room. a swift readjust of the forces within the four 
wall had taken place--a new disposition of their personal equations. 
the balance was destroyed, the former harmony gone. smoke, most 
sensitive of barometers, had been the first to feel it, but the dog was 
not slow to follow suit, for on look down he noted that flame was no 
long asleep. he was lie with eyes wide open, and that same instant 
he sat up on his great haunch and began to growl. 

dr. silence was in the act of taking the match to re-light the lamp 
when an audible movement in the room behind made him pause. smoke 
leap down from his knee and move forward a few pace across the 
carpet. then it stop and stare fixedly; and the doctor stood up on 
the rug to watch. 

as he rose the sound was repeated, and he discover that it was not 
in the room as he first thought, but outside, and that it came from 
more directions than one. there was a rushing, sweeping noise against 
the window-panes, and simultaneous a sound of something brush 
against the door--out in the hall. smoke advanced sedate across the 
carpet, twitch his tail, and sat down within a foot of the door. the 
influence that had destroy the harmonious conditions of the room had 
apparently move in advance of its cause. clearly, something was about 
to happen. 

for the first time that night john silence hesitated; the thought of 
that dark narrow hall-way, choke with fog, and destitute of human 
comfort, was unpleasant. he became aware of a faint creep of his 
flesh. he knew, of course, that the actual opening of the door was not 
necessary to the invasion of the room that was about to take place, 
since neither door nor windows, nor any other solid barrier could 
interpose an obstacle to what was seek entrance. yet the opening of 
the door would be significant and symbolic, and he distinct shrank 
from it. 

but for a moment only. smoke, turning with a show of impatience, 
recall him to his purpose, and he move past the sitting, watch 
creature, and deliberate open the door to its full width. 

what subsequent happened, happen in the feeble and flicker light 
of the solitary candle on the mantelpiece. 

through the open door he saw the hall, dim lit and thick with fog. 
nothing, of course, was visible--nothing but the hat-stand, the africa 
spear in dark lines upon the wall and the high-backed wooden chair 
standing grotesque underneath on the oilcloth floor. for one instant 
the fog seem to move and thicken oddly; but he set that down to the 
score of the imagination. the door had open upon nothing. 

yet smoke apparently thought otherwise, and the deep growl of the 
collie from the mat at the back of the room seem to confirm his 
judgment. 

for, proud and self-possessed, the cat had again risen to his feet, 
and have advanced to the door, was now usher some one slow into 
the room. nothing could have been more evident. he pace from side to 
side, bowing his little head with great _empressement_ and holding his 
stiffen tail aloft like a flagstaff. he turn this way and that, 
mince to and fro, and showing sign of supreme satisfaction. he was 
in his element. he welcome the intrusion, and apparently reckon that 
his companions, the doctor and the dog, would welcome it likewise. 

the intruder had return for a second attack. 

dr. silence move slow backwards and took up his position on the 
hearthrug, key himself up to a condition of concentrated attention. 

he noted that flame stood beside him, facing the room, with body 
motionless, and head moving swift from side to side with a curious 
sway movement. his eyes were wide open, his back rigid, his neck and 
jaws thrust forward, his leg tense and ready to leap. savage, ready 
for attack or defence, yet dreadfully puzzle and perhaps already a 
little cowed, he stood and stared, the hair on his spine and side 
positively bristle outwards as though a wind play through them. in 
the dim firelight he look like a great yellow-haired wolf, silent, 
eyes shoot dark fire, exceedingly formidable. it was flame, the 
terrible. 

smoke, meanwhile, advanced from the door towards the middle of the 
room, adopt the very slow pace of an invisible companion. a few 
feet away it stop and began to smile and blink its eyes. there 
was something deliberate coax in its attitude as it stood there 
undecided on the carpet, clearly wish to effect some sort of 
introduction between the intruder and its canine friend and ally. 
it assume its most winning manners, purring, smiling, look 
persuasive from one to the other, and making quick tentative steps 
first in one direction and then in the other. there had always exist 
such perfect understanding between them in everything. surely flame 
would appreciate smoke’s intentions now, and acquiesce. 

but the old collie made no advances. he bare his teeth, lift 
his lip till the gum showed, and stood stockstill with fixed eyes 
and heave sides. the doctor move a little farther back, watch 
intent the smallest movement, and it was just then he divine 
sudden from the cat’s behaviour and attitude that it was not only a 
single companion it had usher into the room, but _several_. it kept 
crossing over from one to the other, look up at each in turn. it 
sought to win over the dog to friendly with them all. the original 
intruder had come back with reinforcements. and at the same time he 
further realise that the intruder was something more than a blind 
acting force, impersonal though destructive. it was a personality, and 
moreover a great personality. and it was accompany for the purpose 
of assistance by a host of other personalities, minor in degree, but 
similar in kind. 

he brace himself in the corner against the mantelpiece and waited, 
his whole being rouse to defence, for he was now fully aware that 
the attack had spread to include himself as well as the animals, 
and he must be on the alert. he strained his eyes through the foggy 
atmosphere, try in vain to see what the cat and dog saw; but the 
candlelight threw an uncertain and flicker light across the room and 
his eyes discern nothing. on the floor smoke move soft in front of 
him like a black shadow, his eyes gleam as he turn his head, still 
try with many insinuate gesture and much purr to bring about 
the introduction he desired. 

but it was all in vain. flame stood rivet to one spot, motionless as 
a figure carve in stone. 

some minutes passed, during which only the cat moved, and then there 
came a sharp change. flame began to back towards the wall. he move 
his head from side to side as he went, sometimes turning to snap at 
something almost behind him. _they_ were advance upon him, try to 
surround him. his distress became very marked from now onwards, and 
it seem to the doctor that his anger merge into genuine terror and 
became overwhelm by it. the savage growl sound perilous like a 
whine, and more than once he try to dive past his master’s legs, as 
though hunting for a way of escape. he was try to avoid something 
that everywhere block the way. 

this terror of the indomitable fighter impress the doctor enormously; 
yet also painfully; stirring his impatience; for he had never before 
seen the dog show sign of give in, and it distress him to witness 
it. he knew, however, that he was not give in easily, and understood 
that it was really impossible for him to gauge the animal’s sensation 
properly at all. what flame felt, and saw, must be terrible indeed to 
turn him all at once into a coward. he face something that made him 
afraid of more than his life merely. the doctor spoke a few quick words 
of encouragement to him, and stroke the bristle hair. but without 
much success. the collie seem already beyond the reach of comfort 
such as that, and the collapse of the old dog follow indeed very 
speedy after this. 

and smoke, meanwhile, remain behind, watch the advance, but not 
join in it; sitting, pleased and expectant, considering that all 
was go well and as it wished. it was knead on the carpet with 
its front paws--slowly, laboriously, as though its feet were dip in 
treacle. the sound its claw made as they caught in the thread was 
distinct audible. it was still smiling, blinking, purring. 

sudden the collie utter a poignant short bark and leap heavy to 
one side. his bare teeth trace a line of white through the gloom. 
the next instant he dashed past his master’s legs, almost upset his 
balance, and shot out into the room, where he went blunder wildly 
against wall and furniture. but that bark was significant; the doctor 
had heard it before and knew what it meant: for it was the cry of the 
fighter against odds and it meant that the old beast had found his 
courage again. possibly it was only the courage of despair, but at any 
rate the fight would be terrific. and dr. silence understood, too, 
that he dare not interfere. flame must fight his own enemy in his 
own way. 

but the cat, too, had heard that dreadful bark; and it, too, had 
understood. this was more than it had bargain for. across the dim 
shadow of that haunt room there must have pass some secret signal 
of distress between the animals. smoke stood up and look swift 
about him. he utter a piteous meow and trot smart away into the 
greater dark by the windows. what his object was only those endow 
with the spirit-like intelligence of cat might know. but, at any rate, 
he had at last range himself on the side of his friend. and the little 
beast meant business. 

at the same moment the collie manage to gain the door. the doctor saw 
him rush through into the hall like a flash of yellow light. he shot 
across the oilcloth, and tore up the stairs, but in another second he 
appear again, flying down the steps and landing at the bottom in a 
tumble heap, whining, cringing, terrified. the doctor saw him slink 
back into the room again and crawl round by the wall towards the cat. 
was, then, even the staircase occupied? did _they_ stand also in the 
hall? was the whole house crowded from floor to ceiling? 

the thought came to add to the keen distress he felt at the sight of 
the collie’s discomfiture. and, indeed, his own personal distress had 
increase in a marked degree during the past minutes, and continue 
to increase steady to the climax. he recognise that the drain on 
his own vitality grew steadily, and that the attack was now direct 
against himself even more than against the defeat dog, and the too 
much deceive cat. 

it all seem so rapid and uncalculated after that--the event that 
took place in this little modern room at the top of putney hill between 
midnight and sunrise--that dr. silence was hardly able to follow and 
remember it all. it came about with such uncanny swift and terror; 
the light was so uncertain; the movements of the black cat so difficult 
to follow on the dark carpet, and the doctor himself so weary and taken 
by surprise--that he found it almost impossible to observe accurately, 
or to recall afterwards precisely what it was he had seen or in what 
order the incident had taken place. he never could understand what 
defect of vision on his part made it seem as though the cat had 
duplicate itself at first, and then increase indefinitely, so that 
there were at least a dozen of them dart silent about the floor, 
leap soft on to chair and tables, passing like shadow from the 
open door to the end of the room, all black as sin, with brilliant 
green eyes flash fire in all directions. it was like the reflection 
from a score of mirror placed round the wall at different angles. 
nor could he make out at the time why the size of the room seem to 
have altered, grown much larger, and why it extend away behind him 
where ordinarily the wall should have been. the snarl of the enrage 
and terrify collie sound sometimes so far away; the ceiling seem 
to have raise itself so much higher than before, and much of the 
furniture had change in appearance and shift marvellously. 

it was all so confuse and confusing, as though the little room he knew 
had become merge and transform into the dimensions of quite another 
chamber, that came to him, with its host of cat and its strange 
distances, in a sort of vision. 

but these change came about a little later, and at a time when his 
attention was so concentrated upon the proceedings of smoke and the 
collie, that he only observe them, as it were, subconsciously. and the 
excitement, the flicker candlelight, the distress he felt for the 
collie, and the distort atmosphere of fog were the poorest possible 
ally to careful observation. 

at first he was only aware that the dog was repeating his short 
dangerous bark from time to time, snap vicious at the empty 
air, a foot or so from the ground. once, indeed, he sprang upwards 
and forwards, working furiously with teeth and paws, and with a noise 
like wolf fighting, but only to dash back the next minute against 
the wall behind him. then, after lie still for a bit, he rose to a 
crouch position as though to spring again, snarl horrible and 
making short half-circles with lower head. and smoke all the while 
meow piteous by the window as though try to draw the attack upon 
himself. 

then it was that the rush of the whole dreadful business seem to turn 
aside from the dog and direct itself upon his own person. the collie 
had made another spring and fallen back with a crash into the corner, 
where he made noise enough in his savage rage to waken the dead before 
he fell to whine and then finally lay still. and directly afterwards 
the doctor’s own distress became intolerable acute. he had made a half 
movement forward to come to the rescue when a veil that was dense 
than mere fog seem to drop down over the scene, drape room, walls, 
animal and fire in a mist of dark and fold also about his own 
mind. other form move silent across the field of vision, form 
that he recognise from previous experiments, and welcome not. unholy 
thought began to crowd into his brain, sinister suggestion of evil 
present themselves seductively. ice seem to settle about his heart, 
and his mind trembled. he began to lose memory--memory of his identity, 
of where he was, of what he ought to do. the very foundations of his 
strength were shaken. his will seem paralysed. 

and it was then that the room fill with this horde of cats, all dark 
as the night, all silent, all with lamp eyes of green fire. the 
dimensions of the place alter and shifted. he was in a much large 
space. the whine of the dog sound far away, and all about him the 
cat flew busy to and fro, silent play their tearing, rush 
game of evil, weave the pattern of their dark purpose upon the floor. 
he strove hard to collect himself and remember the words of power he 
had made use of before in similar dread position where his dangerous 
practice had sometimes led; but he could recall nothing consecutively; 
a mist lay over his mind and memory; he felt daze and his forces 
scattered. the deep within were too trouble for heal power to come 
out of them. 

it was glamour, of course, he realise afterwards, the strong glamour 
thrown upon his imagination by some powerful personality behind the 
veil; but at the time he was not sufficient aware of this and, as 
with all true glamour, was unable to grasp where the true end and 
the false began. he was caught momentarily in the same vortex that 
had sought to lure the cat to destruction through its delight, and 
threaten utterly to overwhelm the dog through its terror. 

there came a sound in the chimney behind him like wind boom and 
tear its way down. the window rattled. the candle flicker and 
went out. the glacial atmosphere closed round him with the cold of 
death, and a great rush sound swept by overhead as though the 
ceiling had lift to a great height. he heard the door shut. far 
away it sounded. he felt lost, shelterless in the depths of his soul. 
yet still he held out and resist while the climax of the fight came 
near and nearer.... he had step into the stream of forces awaken 
by pender and he knew that he must withstand them to the end or come to 
a conclusion that it was not good for a man to come to. something from 
the region of utter cold was upon him. 

and then quite suddenly, through the confuse mists about him, there 
slow rose up the personality that had been all the time direct 
the battle. some force enter his being that shook him as the 
tempest shakes a leaf, and close against his eyes--clean level with 
his face--he found himself staring into the wreck of a vast dark 
countenance, a countenance that was terrible even in its ruin. 

for ruin it was, and terrible it was, and the mark of spiritual 
evil was brand everywhere upon its broken features. eyes, face and 
hair rose level with his own, and for a space of time he never could 
properly measure, or determine, these two, a man and a woman, look 
straight into each other’s visage and down into each other’s hearts. 

and john silence, the soul with the good, unselfish motive, held his 
own against the dark discarnate woman whose motive was pure evil, and 
whose soul was on the side of the dark powers. 

it was the climax that touched the depth of power within him and began 
to restore him slow to his own. he was conscious, of course, of 
effort, and yet it seem no superhuman one, for he had recognise the 
character of his opponent’s power, and he call upon the good within 
him to meet and overcome it. the inner forces stir and tremble 
in response to his call. they did not at first come readily as was 
their habit, for under the spell of glamour they had already been 
diabolical lull into inactivity, but come they eventually did, 
rising out of the inner spiritual nature he had learned with so much 
time and pain to awaken to life. and power and confidence came with 
them. he began to breathe deep and regularly, and at the same time 
to absorb into himself the forces oppose to him, and to _turn them to 
his own account_. by cease to resist, and allow the deadly stream 
to pour into him unopposed, he use the very power supply by his 
adversary and thus enormously increase his own. 

for this spiritual alchemy he had learned. he understood that force 
ultimately is everywhere one and the same; it is the motive behind 
that make it good or evil; and his motive was entire unselfish. he 
knew--provided he was not first rob of self-control--how vicarious 
to absorb these evil radiation into himself and change them magical 
into his own good purposes. and, since his motive was pure and his soul 
fearless, they could not work him harm. 

thus he stood in the main stream of evil unwitting attract by 
pender, deflect its course upon himself; and after passing through 
the purify filter of his own unselfish these energy could only 
add to his store of experience, of knowledge, and therefore of power. 
and, as his self-control return to him, he gradual accomplished 
this purpose, even though tremble while he did so. 

yet the struggle was severe, and in spite of the freezing chill of the 
air, the perspiration pour down his face. then, by slow degrees, the 
dark and dreadful countenance faded, the glamour pass from his soul, 
the normal proportions return to wall and ceiling, the form melt 
back into the fog, and the whirl of rush shadow-cats disappear 
whence they came. 

and with the return of the consciousness of his own identity john 
silence was restore to the full control of his own will-power. in a 
deep, modulate voice he began to utter certain rhythmic sound that 
slow roll through the air like a rising sea, filling the room with 
powerful vibratory activity that whelme all irregularity of lesser 
vibration in its own swelling tone. he made certain sigils, gesture 
and movements at the same time. for several minutes he continue to 
utter these words, until at length the grow volume dominate the 
whole room and master the manifestation of all that oppose it. for 
just as he understood the spiritual alchemy that can transmute evil 
forces by raise them into higher channels, so he knew from long study 
the occult use of sound, and its direct effect upon the plastic region 
wherein the powers of spiritual evil work their fell purposes. harmony 
was restore first of all to his own soul, and thence to the room and 
all its occupants. 

and, after himself, the first to recognise it was the old dog lie 
in his corner. flame began sudden utter sound of pleasure, that 
“something” between a growl and a grunt that dogs make upon being 
restore to their master’s confidence. dr. silence heard the thumping 
of the collie’s tail against the ground. and the grunt and the thumping 
touched the depth of affection in the man’s heart, and gave him some 
inkling of what agony the dumb creature had suffered. 

next, from the shadow by the window, a somewhat shrill purr 
announce the restoration of the cat to its normal state. smoke was 
advance across the carpet. he seem very pleased with himself, and 
smile with an expression of supreme innocence. he was no shadow-cat, 
but real and full of his usual and perfect self-possession. he march 
along, pick his way delicately, but with a stately dignity that 
suggest his ancestry with the majesty of egypt. his eyes no long 
glared; they shone steady before him; they radiated, not excitement, 
but knowledge. clearly he was anxious to make amends for the mischief 
to which he had unwitting lent himself owe to his subtle and 
electric constitution. 

still utter his sharp high purr he march up to his master and 
rub vigorous against his legs. then he stood on his hind feet and 
paw his knee and stare beseeching up into his face. he turn his 
head towards the corner where the collie still lay, thumping his tail 
feeble and pathetically. 

john silence understood. he bent down and stroke the creature’s living 
fur, note the line of bright blue sparks that follow the motion of 
his hand down its back. and then they advanced together towards the 
corner where the dog was. 

smoke went first and put his nose gently against his friend’s muzzle, 
purr while he rubbed, and utter little soft sound of affection 
in his throat. the doctor lit the candle and brought it over. he 
saw the collie lie on its side against the wall; it was utterly 
exhausted, and foam still hung about its jaws. its tail and eyes 
respond to the sound of its name, but it was evidently very weak and 
overcome. smoke continue to rub against its cheek and nose and eyes, 
sometimes even standing on its body and knead into the thick yellow 
hair. flame reply from time to time by little lick of the tongue, 
most of them curious misdirected. 

but dr. silence felt intuitive that something disastrous had 
happened, and his heart was wrung. he stroke the dear body, feeling 
it over for bruise or broken bones, but finding none. he fed it with 
what remain of the sandwich and milk, but the creature clumsy 
upset the saucer and lost the sandwich between its paws, so that the 
doctor had to feed it with his own hand. and all the while smoke meow 
piteously. 

then john silence began to understand. he went across to the farther 
side of the room and call aloud to it. 

“flame, old man! come!” 

at any other time the dog would have been upon him in an instant, 
bark and leap to the shoulder. and even now he got up, though 
heavy and awkwardly, to his feet. he start to run, wag his 
tail more briskly. he collide first with a chair, and then ran 
straight into a table. smoke trot close at his side, try his very 
best to guide him. but it was useless. dr. silence had to lift him up 
into his own arms and carry him like a baby. for he was blind. 


iii 

it was a week later when john silence call to see the author in his 
new house, and found him well on the way to recovery and already busy 
again with his writing. the haunt look had left his eyes, and he 
seem cheerful and confident. 

“humour restored?” laugh the doctor, as soon as they were comfortable 
settled in the room overlook the park. 

“i’ve had no trouble since i left that dreadful place,” return pender 
gratefully; “and thanks to you----” 

the doctor stop him with a gesture. 

“never mind that,” he said, “we’ll discuss your new plan afterwards, 
and my scheme for relieve you of the house and helping you settle 
elsewhere. of course it must be pull down, for it’s not fit for any 
sensitive person to live in, and any other tenant might be afflict 
in the same way you were. although, personally, i think the evil has 
exhaust itself by now.” 

he told the astonish author something of his experience in it with 
the animals. 

“i don’t pretend to understand,” pender said, when the account was 
finished, “but i and my wife are intense relieved to be free of it 
all. only i must say i should like to know something of the former 
history of the house. when we took it six month ago i heard no word 
against it.” 

dr. silence drew a typewritten paper from his pocket. 

“i can satisfy your curiosity to some extent,” he said, running 
his eye over the sheets, and then replace them in his coat; “for 
by my secretary’s investigate i have been able to check certain 
information obtain in the hypnotic trance by a ‘sensitive’ who help 
me in such cases. the former occupant who haunt you appear to have 
been a woman of singularly atrocious life and character who finally 
suffer death by hanging, after a series of crime that appall the 
whole of england and only came to light by the merest chance. she came 
to her end in the year 1798, for it was not this particular house she 
live in, but a much large one that then stood upon the site it now 
occupies, and was then, of course, not in london, but in the country. 
she was a person of intellect, possessed of a powerful, train will, 
and of consummate audacity, and i am convinced avail herself of the 
resources of the lower magic to attain her ends. this go far to 
explain the virulence of the attack upon yourself, and why she is still 
able to carry on after death the evil practice that form her main 
purpose during life.” 

“you think that after death a soul can still conscious direct----” 
gasp the author. 

“i think, as i told you before, that the forces of a powerful 
personality may still persist after death in the line of their original 
momentum,” reply the doctor; “and that strong thought and purpose 
can still react upon suitable prepared brains long after their 
originate have pass away. 

“if you knew anything of magic,” he pursued, “you would know that 
thought is dynamic, and that it may call into existence form and 
pictures that may well exist for hundred of years. for, not far 
remove from the region of our human life, is another region where 
float the waste and drift of all the centuries, the limbo of the 
shell of the dead; a dense populate region cram with horror and 
abomination of all descriptions, and sometimes galvanise into active 
life again by the will of a train manipulator, a mind versed in the 
practice of lower magic. that this woman understood its vile commerce, 
i am persuaded, and the forces she set go during her life have 
simply been accumulate ever since, and would have continue to do so 
had they not been drawn down upon yourself, and afterwards discharge 
and satisfy through me. 

“anything might have brought down the attack, for, besides drugs, 
there are certain violent emotions, certain mood of the soul, certain 
spiritual fevers, if i may so call them, which directly open the inner 
being to a cognisance of this astral region i have mentioned. in your 
case it happen to be a peculiarly potent drug that did it. 

“but now, tell me,” he added, after a pause, hand to the perplexed 
author a pencil-drawing he had made of the dark countenance that had 
appear to him during the night on putney hill--“tell me if you 
recognise this face?” 

pender look at the drawing closely, greatly astonished. he shudder 
a little as he looked. 

“undoubtedly,” he said, “it is the face i kept try to draw--dark, 
with the great mouth and jaw, and the droop eye. that is the woman.” 

dr. silence then produce from his pocket-book an old-fashioned woodcut 
of the same person which his secretary had unearth from the record 
of the newgate calendar. the woodcut and the pencil drawing were two 
different aspect of the same dreadful visage. the men compare them 
for some moments in silence. 

“it make me thank god for the limitation of our senses,” said 
pender quietly, with a sigh; “continuous clairvoyance must be a sore 
affliction.” 

“it is indeed,” return john silence significantly, “and if all 
the people nowadays who claim to be clairvoyant were really so, the 
statistics of suicide and lunacy would be considerably higher than they 
are. it is little wonder,” he added, “that your sense of humour was 
clouded, with the mind-forces of that dead monster try to use your 
brain for their dissemination. you have had an interesting adventure, 
mr. felix pender, and, let me add, a fortunate escape.” 

the author was about to renew his thanks when there came a sound of 
scratch at the door, and the doctor sprang up quickly. 

“it’s time for me to go. i left my dog on the step, but i suppose----” 

before he had time to open the door, it had yield to the pressure 
behind it and flew wide open to admit a great yellow-haired collie. 
the dog, wag his tail and contort his whole body with delight, 
tore across the floor and try to leap up upon his owner’s breast. and 
there was laughter and happiness in the old eyes; for they were clear 
again as the day. 




case ii 

ancient sorcery 


i 

there are, it would appear, certain wholly unremarkable persons, with 
none of the characteristic that invite adventure, who yet once or 
twice in the course of their smooth lives undergo an experience so 
strange that the world catch its breath--and looks the other way! and 
it was case of this kind, perhaps, more than any other, that fell into 
the widespread net of john silence, the psychic doctor, and, appealing 
to his deep humanity, to his patience, and to his great quality of 
spiritual sympathy, led often to the revelation of problem of the 
strangest complexity, and of the profoundest possible human interest. 

matter that seem almost too curious and fantastic for belief he 
love to trace to their hidden sources. to unravel a tangle in the 
very soul of things--and to release a suffering human soul in the 
process--was with him a veritable passion. and the knot he untie 
were, indeed, often passing strange. 

the world, of course, ask for some plausible basis to which it can 
attach credence--something it can, at least, pretend to explain. 
the adventurous type it can understand: such people carry about 
with them an adequate explanation of their exciting lives, and their 
character obviously drive them into the circumstances which produce 
the adventures. it expect nothing else from them, and is satisfied. 
but dull, ordinary folk have no right to out-of-the-way experiences, 
and the world have been led to expect otherwise, is disappointed 
with them, not to say shocked. its complacent judgment has been rudely 
disturbed. 

“such a thing happen to _that_ man!” it cries--“a commonplace person 
like that! it is too absurd! there must be something wrong!” 

yet there could be no question that something did actually happen to 
little arthur vezin, something of the curious nature he describe to 
dr. silence. outwardly, or inwardly, it happen beyond a doubt, and in 
spite of the jeer of his few friends who heard the tale, and observe 
wise that “such a thing might perhaps have come to iszard, that 
crack-brained iszard, or to that odd fish minski, but it could never 
have happen to commonplace little vezin, who was fore-ordained to 
live and die according to scale.” 

but, whatever his method of death was, vezin certainly did not “live 
according to scale” so far as this particular event in his otherwise 
uneventful life was concerned; and to hear him recount it, and watch 
his pale delicate features change, and hear his voice grow soft 
and more hush as he proceeded, was to know the conviction that his 
halting words perhaps fail sometimes to convey. he live the thing 
over again each time he told it. his whole personality became muffle 
in the recital. it subdued him more than ever, so that the tale became 
a lengthy apology for an experience that he deprecated. he appear to 
excuse himself and ask your pardon for have dare to take part in so 
fantastic an episode. for little vezin was a timid, gentle, sensitive 
soul, rarely able to assert himself, tender to man and beast, and 
almost constitutionally unable to say no, or to claim many things that 
should rightly have been his. his whole scheme of life seem utterly 
remote from anything more exciting than missing a train or lose an 
umbrella on an omnibus. and when this curious event came upon him he 
was already more years beyond forty than his friends suspect or he 
care to admit. 

john silence, who heard him speak of his experience more than once, 
said that he sometimes left out certain detail and put in others; 
yet they were all obviously true. the whole scene was unforgettable 
cinematograph on to his mind. none of the detail were imagine 
or invented. and when he told the story with them all complete, the 
effect was undeniable. his appealing brown eyes shone, and much of the 
charming personality, usually so careful repressed, came forward and 
reveal itself. his modesty was always there, of course, but in the 
telling he forgot the present and allow himself to appear almost 
vivid as he live again in the past of his adventure. 

he was on the way home when it happened, crossing northern france from 
some mountain trip or other where he bury himself solitary-wise 
every summer. he had nothing but an unregistered bag in the rack, and 
the train was jam to suffocation, most of the passenger being 
unredeemed holiday english. he dislike them, not because they were 
his fellow-countrymen, but because they were noisy and obtrusive, 
obliterate with their big limb and tweed clothing all the quiet 
tint of the day that brought him satisfaction and enable him to melt 
into insignificance and forget that he was anybody. these english 
clash about him like a brass band, making him feel vague that he 
ought to be more self-assertive and obstreperous, and that he did not 
claim insistent enough all kind of things that he didn’t want and 
that were really valueless, such as corner seats, window up or down, 
and so forth. 

so that he felt uncomfortable in the train, and wish the journey were 
over and he was back again living with his unmarried sister in surbiton. 

and when the train stop for ten pant minutes at the little 
station in northern france, and he got out to stretch his leg on the 
platform, and saw to his dismay a further batch of the britain isle 
debouch from another train, it sudden seem impossible to him to 
continue the journey. even _his_ flabby soul revolted, and the idea of 
stay a night in the little town and go on next day by a slower, 
empty train, flash into his mind. the guard was already shouting 
“_en voiture_” and the corridor of his compartment was already packed 
when the thought came to him. and, for once, he act with decision and 
rush to snatch his bag. 

finding the corridor and steps impassable, he tap at the window 
(for he had a corner seat) and beg the frenchman who sat opposite 
to hand his luggage out to him, explain in his wretched france that 
he intended to break the journey there. and this elderly frenchman, he 
declared, gave him a look, half of warning, half of reproach, that to 
his die day he could never forget; hand the bag through the window 
of the moving train; and at the same time pour into his ear a long 
sentence, spoken rapid and low, of which he was able to comprehend 
only the last few words: “_à cause du sommeil et à cause des chats_.” 

in reply to dr. silence, whose singular psychic acute at once 
seize upon this frenchman as a vital point in the adventure, 
vezin admitted that the man had impress him favourable from the 
beginning, though without being able to explain why. they had sat 
facing one another during the four hour of the journey, and though 
no conversation had pass between them--vezin was timid about his 
stutter french--he confessed that his eyes were being continual 
drawn to his face, almost, he felt, to rudeness, and that each, by a 
dozen nameless little politenesse and attentions, had evince the 
desire to be kind. the men like each other and their personalities 
did not clash, or would not have clash had they chance to come to 
terms of acquaintance. the frenchman, indeed, seem to have exercise 
a silent protective influence over the insignificant little englishman, 
and without words or gesture betray that he wish him well and 
would gladly have been of service to him. 

“and this sentence that he hurl at you after the bag?” ask john 
silence, smile that peculiarly sympathetic smile that always melt 
the prejudice of his patient, “were you unable to follow it exactly?” 

“it was so quick and low and vehement,” explain vezin, in his small 
voice, “that i miss practically the whole of it. i only caught the 
few words at the very end, because he spoke them so clearly, and his 
face was bent down out of the carriage window so near to mine.” 

“_‘a cause du sommeil et à cause des chats’?_” repeated dr. silence, as 
though half speak to himself. 

“that’s it exactly,” said vezin; “which, i take it, means something 
like ‘because of sleep and because of the cats,’ doesn’t it?” 

“certainly, that’s how i should translate it,” the doctor observe 
shortly, evidently not wish to interrupt more than necessary. 

“and the rest of the sentence--all the first part i couldn’t 
understand, i mean--was a warning not to do something--not to stop in 
the town, or at some particular place in the town, perhaps. that was 
the impression it made on me.” 

then, of course, the train rush off, and left vezin standing on the 
platform alone and rather forlorn. 

the little town climb in straggle fashion up a sharp hill rising 
out of the plain at the back of the station, and was crown by the 
twin tower of the ruin cathedral peep over the summit. from the 
station itself it look uninterest and modern, but the fact was 
that the mediæval position lay out of sight just beyond the crest. and 
once he reach the top and enter the old streets, he step clean 
out of modern life into a bygone century. the noise and bustle of the 
crowded train seem days away. the spirit of this silent hill-town, 
remote from tourist and motor-cars, dream its own quiet life under 
the autumn sun, rose up and cast its spell upon him. long before he 
recognise this spell he act under it. he walk softly, almost on 
tiptoe, down the winding narrow street where the gable all but met 
over his head, and he enter the doorway of the solitary inn with a 
deprecate and modest demeanour that was in itself an apology for 
intrude upon the place and disturb its dream. 

at first, however, vezin said, he notice very little of all this. the 
attempt at analysis came much later. what struck him then was only the 
delightful contrast of the silence and peace after the dust and noisy 
rattle of the train. he felt soothe and stroke like a cat. 

“like a cat, you said?” interrupt john silence, quick catching him 
up. 

“yes. at the very start i felt that.” he laugh apologetically. “i 
felt as though the warmth and the still and the comfort made me 
purr. it seem to be the general mood of the whole place--then.” 

the inn, a rambling ancient house, the atmosphere of the old coach 
days still about it, apparently did not welcome him too warmly. he felt 
he was only tolerated, he said. but it was cheap and comfortable, and 
the delicious cup of afternoon tea he ordered at once made him feel 
really very pleased with himself for leave the train in this bold, 
original way. for to him it had seem bold and original. he felt 
something of a dog. his room, too, soothe him with its dark panelling 
and low irregular ceiling, and the long slope passage that led to it 
seem the natural pathway to a real chamber of sleep--a little dim 
cubby hole out of the world where noise could not enter. it look 
upon the courtyard at the back. it was all very charming, and made 
him think of himself as dress in very soft velvet somehow, and the 
floor seem padded, the wall provided with cushions. the sound of 
the street could not penetrate there. it was an atmosphere of absolute 
rest that surround him. 

on engaging the two-franc room he had interview the only person 
who seem to be about that sleepy afternoon, an elderly waiter with 
dundreary whiskers and a drowsy courtesy, who had amble lazy towards 
him across the stone yard; but on coming downstairs again for a little 
promenade in the town before dinner he encounter the proprietress 
herself. she was a large woman whose hands, feet, and features seem 
to swim towards him out of a sea of person. they emerged, so to speak. 
but she had great dark, vivacious eyes that counteract the bulk of 
her body, and betray the fact that in reality she was both vigorous 
and alert. when he first caught sight of her she was knitting in a low 
chair against the sunlight of the wall, and something at once made him 
see her as a great tabby cat, dozing, yet awake, heavy sleepy, and 
yet at the same time prepared for instantaneous action. a great mouser 
on the watch occur to him. 

she took him in with a single comprehensive glance that was polite 
without being cordial. her neck, he noticed, was extraordinarily supple 
in spite of its proportions, for it turn so easily to follow him, and 
the head it carry bowed so very flexibly. 

“but when she look at me, you know,” said vezin, with that little 
apologetic smile in his brown eyes, and that faint deprecate 
gesture of the shoulder that was characteristic of him, “the odd 
notion came to me that really she had intended to make quite a 
different movement, and that with a single bound she could have leap 
at me across the width of that stone yard and pounce upon me like some 
huge cat upon a mouse.” 

he laugh a little soft laugh, and dr. silence made a note in his book 
without interrupting, while vezin proceed in a tone as though he 
fear he had already told too much and more than we could believe. 

“very soft, yet very active she was, for all her size and mass, and i 
felt she knew what i was do even after i had pass and was behind 
her back. she spoke to me, and her voice was smooth and running. she 
ask if i had my luggage, and was comfortable in my room, and then 
add that dinner was at seven o’clock, and that they were very early 
people in this little country town. clearly, she intended to convey 
that late hour were not encouraged.” 

evidently, she contrived by voice and manner to give him the impression 
that here he would be “managed,” that everything would be arrange and 
plan for him, and that he had nothing to do but fall into the groove 
and obey. no decided action or sharp personal effort would be look 
for from him. it was the very reverse of the train. he walk quiet 
out into the street feeling soothe and peaceful. he realise that he 
was in a _milieu_ that suit him and stroke him the right way. it was 
so much easy to be obedient. he began to purr again, and to feel that 
all the town purr with him. 

about the street of that little town he meander gently, fall 
deep and deep into the spirit of repose that characterise it. with 
no special aim he wander up and down, and to and fro. the september 
sunshine fell slanting over the roofs. down winding alleyways, 
fringe with tumble gable and open casements, he caught fairylike 
glimpse of the great plain below, and of the meadow and yellow copse 
lie like a dream-map in the haze. the spell of the past held very 
potent here, he felt. 

the street were full of picturesque garb men and women, all busy 
enough, go their respective ways; but no one took any notice of him 
or turn to stare at his obviously english appearance. he was even 
able to forget that with his tourist appearance he was a false note in 
a charming picture, and he melt more and more into the scene, feeling 
delightful insignificant and unimportant and unselfconscious. it was 
like becoming part of a softly-coloured dream which he did not even 
realise to be a dream. 

on the eastern side the hill fell away more sharply, and the plain 
below ran off rather sudden into a sea of gathering shadow in which 
the little patch of woodland look like island and the stubble 
field like deep water. here he stroll along the old rampart of 
ancient fortification that once had been formidable, but now were 
only vision-like with their charming mingle of broken grey wall 
and wayward vine and ivy. from the broad coping on which he sat for a 
moment, level with the round tops of clip plane trees, he saw the 
esplanade far below lie in shadow. here and there a yellow sunbeam 
crept in and lay upon the fallen yellow leaves, and from the height 
he look down and saw that the townsfolk were walking to and fro in 
the cool of the evening. he could just hear the sound of their slow 
footfalls, and the murmur of their voice float up to him through the 
gap between the trees. the figures look like shadow as he caught 
glimpse of their quiet movements far below. 

he sat there for some time pondering, bath in the wave of murmur 
and half-lost echo that rose to his ears, muffle by the leaves of 
the plane trees. the whole town, and the little hill out of which it 
grew as naturally as an ancient wood, seem to him like a being lie 
there half asleep on the plain and croon to itself as it dozed. 

and, presently, as he sat lazy melting into its dream, a sound of 
horn and strings and wood instrument rose to his ears, and the town 
band began to play at the far end of the crowded terrace below to 
the accompaniment of a very soft, deep-throated drum. vezin was very 
sensitive to music, knew about it intelligently, and had even ventured, 
unknown to his friends, upon the composition of quiet melody with 
low-running chord which he play to himself with the soft pedal when 
no one was about. and this music floating up through the tree from an 
invisible and doubtless very picturesque band of the townspeople wholly 
charm him. he recognise nothing that they played, and it sound as 
though they were simply improvise without a conductor. no definitely 
marked time ran through the pieces, which end and began oddly after 
the fashion of wind through an Æolian harp. it was part of the place 
and scene, just as the die sunlight and faintly-breathing wind were 
part of the scene and hour, and the mellow note of old-fashioned 
plaintive horns, pierce here and there by the sharper strings, all 
half smother by the continuous boom of the deep drum, touched his 
soul with a curious potent spell that was almost too engrossing to be 
quite pleasant. 

there was a certain queer sense of bewitch in it all. the music 
seem to him oddly unartificial. it made him think of tree swept by 
the wind, of night breeze singing among wire and chimney-stacks, or 
in the rigging of invisible ships; or--and the simile leap up in his 
thought with a sudden sharp of suggestion--a chorus of animals, 
of wild creatures, somewhere in desolate place of the world, crying 
and singing as animal will, to the moon. he could fancy he heard the 
wailing, half-human cries of cat upon the tile at night, rising and 
fall with weird interval of sound, and this music, muffle by 
distance and the trees, made him think of a queer company of these 
creature on some roof far away in the sky, utter their solemn music 
to one another and the moon in chorus. 

it was, he felt at the time, a singular image to occur to him, yet it 
express his sensation pictorial better than anything else. the 
instrument play such impossible odd intervals, and the crescendo 
and diminuendo were so very suggestive of cat-land on the tile at 
night, rising swiftly, drop without warning to deep note again, 
and all in such strange confusion of discord and accords. but, at the 
same time a plaintive sweet result on the whole, and the discord 
of these half-broken instrument were so singular that they did not 
distress his musical soul like fiddle out of tune. 

he listen a long time, wholly surrender himself as his character 
was, and then stroll homewards in the dusk as the air grew chilly. 

“there was nothing to alarm?” put in dr. silence briefly. 

“absolutely nothing,” said vezin; “but you know it was all so 
fantastic and charming that my imagination was profound impressed. 
perhaps, too,” he continued, gently explanatory, “it was this stirring 
of my imagination that cause other impressions; for, as i walk back, 
the spell of the place began to steal over me in a dozen ways, though 
all intelligible ways. but there were other things i could not account 
for in the least, even then.” 

“incidents, you mean?” 

“hardly incidents, i think. a lot of vivid sensation crowded 
themselves upon my mind and i could trace them to no causes. it was 
just after sunset and the tumble old building trace magical outline 
against an opalescent sky of gold and red. the dusk was running down 
the twist streets. all round the hill the plain pressed in like a 
dim sea, its level rising with the darkness. the spell of this kind of 
scene, you know, can be very moving, and it was so that night. yet i 
felt that what came to me had nothing directly to do with the mystery 
and wonder of the scene.” 

“not merely the subtle transformation of the spirit that come with 
beauty,” put in the doctor, notice his hesitation. 

“exactly,” vezin went on, duly encourage and no long so fearful 
of our smile at his expense. “the impression came from somewhere 
else. for instance, down the busy main street where men and women were 
bustle home from work, shop at stalls and barrows, idle gossip 
in groups, and all the rest of it, i saw that i arouse no interest and 
that no one turn to stare at me as a foreigner and stranger. i was 
utterly ignored, and my presence among them excited no special interest 
or attention. 

“and then, quite suddenly, it dawn upon me with conviction that 
all the time this indifference and inattention were merely feigned. 
everybody as a matter of fact was watch me closely. every movement 
i made was known and observed. ignore me was all a pretence--an 
elaborate pretence.” 

he pause a moment and look at us to see if we were smiling, and then 
continued, reassured-- 

“it is useless to ask me how i notice this, because i simply cannot 
explain it. but the discovery gave me something of a shock. before i 
got back to the inn, however, another curious thing rose up strong in 
my mind and forced my recognition of it as true. and this, too, i may 
as well say at once, was equally inexplicable to me. i mean i can only 
give you the fact, as fact it was to me.” 

the little man left his chair and stood on the mat before the fire. 
his diffidence lessen from now onwards, as he lost himself again in 
the magic of the old adventure. his eyes shone a little already as he 
talked. 

“well,” he went on, his soft voice rising somewhat with his excitement, 
“i was in a shop when it came to me first--though the idea must have 
been at work for a long time subconscious to appear in so complete 
a form all at once. i was buy socks, i think,” he laughed, “and 
struggle with my dreadful french, when it struck me that the woman in 
the shop did not care two pin whether i bought anything or not. she 
was indifferent whether she made a sale or did not make a sale. she was 
only pretend to sell. 

“this sound a very small and fanciful incident to build upon what 
follows. but really it was not small. i mean it was the spark that lit 
the line of powder and ran along to the big blaze in my mind. 

“for the whole town, i sudden realised, was something other than i 
so far saw it. the real activity and interests of the people were 
elsewhere and otherwise than appeared. their true lives lay somewhere 
out of sight behind the scenes. their busy-ness was but the outward 
semblance that masked their actual purposes. they bought and sold, and 
ate and drank, and walk about the streets, yet all the while the main 
stream of their existence lay somewhere beyond my ken, underground, in 
secret places. in the shop and at the stalls they did not care whether 
i purchase their articles or not; at the inn, they were indifferent 
to my stay or going; their life lay remote from my own, spring 
from hidden, mysterious sources, coursing out of sight, unknown. it 
was all a great elaborate pretence, assume possibly for my benefit, 
or possibly for purpose of their own. but the main current of their 
energy ran elsewhere. i almost felt as an unwelcome foreign substance 
might be expect to feel when it has found its way into the human 
system and the whole body organise itself to eject it or to absorb it. 
the town was do this very thing to me. 

“this bizarre notion present itself forcibly to my mind as i walk 
home to the inn, and i began busy to wonder wherein the true life of 
this town could lie and what were the actual interests and activity 
of its hidden life. 

“and, now that my eyes were partly opened, i notice other things 
too that puzzle me, first of which, i think, was the extraordinary 
silence of the whole place. positively, the town was muffled. although 
the street were paved with cobble the people move about silently, 
softly, with pad feet, like cats. nothing made noise. all was 
hushed, subdued, muted. the very voice were quiet, low-pitched like 
purring. nothing clamorous, vehement or emphatic seem able to live 
in the drowsy atmosphere of soft dream that soothe this little 
hill-town into its sleep. it was like the woman at the inn--an outward 
repose screening intense inner activity and purpose. 

“yet there was no sign of lethargy or sluggish anywhere about it. 
the people were active and alert. only a magical and uncanny soft 
lay over them all like a spell.” 

vezin pass his hand across his eyes for a moment as though the memory 
had become very vivid. his voice had run off into a whisper so that 
we heard the last part with difficulty. he was telling a true thing 
obviously, yet something that he both like and hate telling. 

“i went back to the inn,” he continue presently in a loud voice, 
“and dined. i felt a new strange world about me. my old world of 
reality receded. here, whether i like it or no, was something new and 
incomprehensible. i regret have left the train so impulsively. 
an adventure was upon me, and i loathe adventure as foreign to my 
nature. moreover, this was the beginning apparently of an adventure 
somewhere deep within me, in a region i could not check or measure, 
and a feeling of alarm mingle itself with my wonder--alarm for the 
stability of what i had for forty years recognise as my ‘personality.’ 

“i went upstairs to bed, my mind teeming with thought that were 
unusual to me, and of rather a haunting description. by way of 
relief i kept thinking of that nice, prosaic noisy train and all 
those wholesome, bluster passengers. i almost wish i were with 
them again. but my dream took me elsewhere. i dream of cats, and 
soft-moving creatures, and the silence of life in a dim muffle world 
beyond the senses.” 


ii 

vezin stay on from day to day, indefinitely, much long than he 
had intended. he felt in a kind of dazed, somnolent condition. he did 
nothing in particular, but the place fascinate him and he could not 
decide to leave. decision were always very difficult for him and he 
sometimes wonder how he had ever brought himself to the point of 
leave the train. it seem as though some one else must have arrange 
it for him, and once or twice his thought ran to the swarthy frenchman 
who had sat opposite. if only he could have understood that long 
sentence ending so strange with “_à cause du sommeil et à cause des 
chats_.” he wonder what it all meant. 

meanwhile the hush soft of the town held him prisoner and he 
sought in his muddling, gentle way to find out where the mystery 
lay, and what it was all about. but his limited france and his 
constitutional hatred of active investigate made it hard for him to 
buttonhole anybody and ask questions. he was content to observe, and 
watch, and remain negative. 

the weather held on calm and hazy, and this just suit him. he 
wander about the town till he knew every street and alley. the 
people suffer him to come and go without let or hindrance, though 
it became clear to him every day that he was never free himself from 
observation. the town watch him as a cat watches a mouse. and he got 
no near to finding out what they were all so busy with or where the 
main stream of their activity lay. this remain hidden. the people 
were as soft and mysterious as cats. 

but that he was continual under observation became more evident from 
day to day. 

for instance, when he stroll to the end of the town and enter a 
little green public garden beneath the rampart and seat himself upon 
one of the empty bench in the sun, he was quite alone--at first. 
not another seat was occupied; the little park was empty, the path 
deserted. yet, within ten minutes of his coming, there must have been 
fully twenty person scattered about him, some strolling aimless 
along the gravel walks, staring at the flowers, and other seat on 
the wooden bench enjoy the sun like himself. none of them appear 
to take any notice of him; yet he understood quite well they had all 
come there to watch. they kept him under close observation. in the 
street they had seem busy enough, hurry upon various errands; yet 
these were sudden all forgotten and they had nothing to do but loll 
and laze in the sun, their duty unremembered. five minutes after 
he left, the garden was again deserted, the seat vacant. but in the 
crowded street it was the same thing again; he was never alone. he was 
ever in their thoughts. 

by degrees, too, he began to see how it was he was so clever watched, 
yet without the appearance of it. the people did nothing _directly_. 
they behave _obliquely_. he laugh in his mind as the thought thus 
clothe itself in words, but the phrase exactly describe it. they 
look at him from angle which naturally should have led their sight 
in another direction altogether. their movements were oblique, too, 
so far as these concerned himself. the straight, direct thing was 
not their way evidently. they did nothing obviously. if he enter a 
shop to buy, the woman walk instantly away and busy herself with 
something at the farther end of the counter, though answer at once 
when he spoke, showing that she knew he was there and that this was 
only her way of attend to him. it was the fashion of the cat she 
followed. even in the dining-room of the inn, the be-whiskered and 
courteous waiter, lithe and silent in all his movements, never seem 
able to come straight to his table for an order or a dish. he came 
by zigzags, indirectly, vaguely, so that he appear to be go to 
another table altogether, and only turn sudden at the last moment, 
and was there beside him. 

vezin smile curious to himself as he describe how he began to 
realise these things. other tourist there were none in the hostel, but 
he recall the figures of one or two old men, inhabitants, who took 
their _déjeuner_ and dinner there, and remember how fantastic 
they enter the room in similar fashion. first, they pause in 
the doorway, peer about the room, and then, after a temporary 
inspection, they came in, as it were, sideways, keeping close to the 
wall so that he wonder which table they were making for, and at the 
last minute making almost a little quick run to their particular seats. 
and again he thought of the ways and method of cats. 

other small incidents, too, impress him as all part of this queer, 
soft town with its muffled, indirect life, for the way some of the 
people appear and disappear with extraordinary swift puzzle 
him exceedingly. it may have been all perfectly natural, he knew, yet 
he could not make it out how the alley swallow them up and shot 
them forth in a second of time when there were no visible doorway or 
opening near enough to explain the phenomenon. once he follow two 
elderly women who, he felt, had been particularly examine him from 
across the street--quite near the inn this was--and saw them turn the 
corner a few feet only in front of him. yet when he sharp follow 
on their heel he saw nothing but an utterly desert alley stretch 
in front of him with no sign of a living thing. and the only opening 
through which they could have escape was a porch some fifty yard 
away, which not the swiftest human runner could have reach in time. 

and in just such sudden fashion people appear when he never expect 
them. once when he heard a great noise of fight go on behind a 
low wall, and hurried up to see what was go on, what should he see 
but a group of girl and women engaged in vociferous conversation which 
instantly hush itself to the normal whisper note of the town when 
his head appear over the wall. and even then none of them turn 
to look at him directly, but slunk off with the most unaccountable 
rapid into door and shed across the yard. and their voices, he 
thought, had sound so like, so strange like, the angry snarl of 
fight animals, almost of cats. 

the whole spirit of the town, however, continue to evade him as 
something elusive, protean, screen from the outer world, and at the 
same time intensely, genuine vital; and, since he now form part of 
its life, this concealment puzzle and irritate him; more--it began 
rather to frighten him. 

out of the mists that slow gather about his ordinary surface 
thoughts, there rose again the idea that the inhabitant were wait 
for him to declare himself, to take an attitude, to do this, or to do 
that; and that when he had done so they in their turn would at length 
make some direct response, accept or reject him. yet the vital 
matter concerning which his decision was await came no near to him. 

once or twice he purposely follow little procession or group of 
the citizen in order to find out, if possible, on what purpose they 
were bent; but they always discover him in time and dwindle away, 
each individual go his or her own way. it was always the same: he 
never could learn what their main interest was. the cathedral was ever 
empty, the old church of st. martin, at the other end of the town, 
deserted. they shop because they had to, and not because they wish 
to. the booth stood neglected, the stalls unvisited, the little cafés 
desolate. yet the street were always full, the townsfolk ever on the 
bustle. 

“can it be,” he thought to himself, yet with a deprecate laugh that 
he should have dare to think anything so odd, “can it be that these 
people are people of the twilight, that they live only at night their 
real life, and come out honestly only with the dusk? that during the 
day they make a sham though brave pretence, and after the sun is down 
their true life begins? have they the soul of night-things, and is the 
whole blessed town in the hand of the cats?” 

the fancy somehow electrify him with little shock of shrink and 
dismay. yet, though he affected to laugh, he knew that he was beginning 
to feel more than uneasy, and that strange forces were tug with a 
thousand invisible cords at the very centre of his being. something 
utterly remote from his ordinary life, something that had not wake for 
years, began faint to stir in his soul, send feeler abroad into 
his brain and heart, shape queer thought and penetrating even into 
certain of his minor actions. something exceedingly vital to himself, 
to his soul, hung in the balance. 

and, always when he return to the inn about the hour of sunset, 
he saw the figures of the townsfolk steal through the dusk from 
their shop doors, moving sentry-wise to and fro at the corner of 
the streets, yet always vanish silent like shadow at his near 
approach. and as the inn invariable closed its door at ten o’clock he 
had never yet found the opportunity he rather half-heartedly sought to 
see for himself what account the town could give of itself at night. 

“----_à cause du sommeil et à cause des chats_”--the words now rang in 
his ear more and more often, though still as yet without any definite 
meaning. 

moreover, something made him sleep like the dead. 


iii 

it was, i think, on the fifth day--though in this detail his story 
sometimes varied--that he made a definite discovery which increase 
his alarm and brought him up to a rather sharp climax. before that he 
had already notice that a change was go forward and certain subtle 
transformation being brought about in his character which modify 
several of his minor habits. and he had affected to ignore them. here, 
however, was something he could no long ignore; and it startle him. 

at the best of times he was never very positive, always negative 
rather, compliant and acquiescent; yet, when necessity arose he was 
capable of reasonably vigorous action and could take a strongish 
decision. the discovery he now made that brought him up with such a 
sharp turn was that this power had positively dwindle to nothing. 
he found it impossible to make up his mind. for, on this fifth day, 
he realise that he had stay long enough in the town and that for 
reason he could only vague define to himself it was wise _and 
safer_ that he should leave. 

and he found that he could not leave! 

this is difficult to describe in words, and it was more by gesture and 
the expression of his face that he convey to dr. silence the state 
of impotence he had reached. all this spy and watching, he said, 
had as it were spun a net about his feet so that he was trap and 
powerless to escape; he felt like a fly that had blunder into the 
intricacy of a great web; he was caught, imprisoned, and could not 
get away. it was a distressing sensation. a numb had crept over 
his will till it had become almost incapable of decision. the mere 
thought of vigorous action--action towards escape--began to terrify 
him. all the current of his life had turn inwards upon himself, 
strive to bring to the surface something that lay bury almost 
beyond reach, determined to force his recognition of something he had 
long forgotten--forgotten years upon years, century almost ago. it 
seem as though a window deep within his being would presently open 
and reveal an entire new world, yet somehow a world that was not 
unfamiliar. beyond that, again, he fancy a great curtain hung; and 
when that too roll up he would see still farther into this region and 
at last understand something of the secret life of these extraordinary 
people. 

“is this why they wait and watch?” he ask himself with rather a 
shake heart, “for the time when i shall join them--or refuse to join 
them? do the decision rest with me after all, and not with them?” 

and it was at this point that the sinister character of the adventure 
first really declared itself, and he became genuine alarmed. the 
stability of his rather fluid little personality was at stake, he felt, 
and something in his heart turn coward. 

why otherwise should he have sudden taken to walking stealthily, 
silently, making as little sound as possible, for ever look behind 
him? why else should he have move almost on tiptoe about the passage 
of the practically desert inn, and when he was abroad have found 
himself deliberate taking advantage of what cover present itself? 
and why, if he was not afraid, should the wisdom of stay indoors 
after sundown have sudden occur to him as eminently desirable? 
why, indeed? 

and, when john silence gently pressed him for an explanation of these 
things, he admitted apologetic that he had none to give. 

“it was simply that i fear something might happen to me unless i kept 
a sharp look-out. i felt afraid. it was instinctive,” was all he could 
say. “i got the impression that the whole town was after me--wanted me 
for something; and that if it got me i should lose myself, or at least 
the self i knew, in some unfamiliar state of consciousness. but i am 
not a psychologist, you know,” he add meekly, “and i cannot define it 
better than that.” 

it was while lounge in the courtyard half an hour before the evening 
meal that vezin made this discovery, and he at once went upstairs to 
his quiet room at the end of the winding passage to think it over 
alone. in the yard it was empty enough, true, but there was always the 
possibility that the big woman whom he dread would come out of some 
door, with her pretence of knitting, to sit and watch him. this had 
happen several times, and he could not endure the sight of her. he 
still remember his original fancy, bizarre though it was, that she 
would spring upon him the moment his back was turn and land with one 
single crush leap upon his neck. of course it was nonsense, but then 
it haunt him, and once an idea begin to do that it cease to be 
nonsense. it has clothe itself in reality. 

he went upstairs accordingly. it was dusk, and the oil lamp had not 
yet been lit in the passages. he stumble over the uneven surface of 
the ancient flooring, passing the dim outline of door along the 
corridor--doors that he had never once seen opened--rooms that seem 
never occupied. he moved, as his habit now was, stealthy and on 
tiptoe. 

half-way down the last passage to his own chamber there was a sharp 
turn, and it was just here, while grope round the wall with 
outstretched hands, that his finger touched something that was 
not wall--something that moved. it was soft and warm in texture, 
indescribable fragrant, and about the height of his shoulder; and he 
immediately thought of a furry, sweet-smelling kitten. the next minute 
he knew it was something quite different. 

instead of investigating, however,--his nerves must have been too 
overwrought for that, he said,--he shrank back as close as possible 
against the wall on the other side. the thing, whatever it was, slip 
past him with a sound of rustling, and retreat with light footstep 
down the passage behind him, was gone. a breath of warm, scent air 
was waft to his nostrils. 

vezin caught his breath for an instant and paused, stockstill, half 
leaning against the wall--and then almost ran down the remain 
distance and enter his room with a rush, lock the door hurried 
behind him. yet it was not fear that made him run: it was excitement, 
pleasurable excitement. his nerves were tingling, and a delicious glow 
made itself felt all over his body. in a flash it came to him that this 
was just what he had felt twenty-five years ago as a boy when he was 
in love for the first time. warm current of life ran all over him and 
mount to his brain in a whirl of soft delight. his mood was sudden 
become tender, melting, loving. 

the room was quite dark, and he collapse upon the sofa by the window, 
wonder what had happen to him and what it all meant. but the only 
thing he understood clearly in that instant was that something in him 
had swiftly, magical changed: he no long wish to leave, or to 
argue with himself about leaving. the encounter in the passage-way 
had change all that. the strange perfume of it still hung about him, 
bemuse his heart and mind. for he knew that it was a girl who had 
pass him, a girl’s face that his finger had brush in the darkness, 
and he felt in some extraordinary way as though he had been actually 
kiss by her, kiss full upon the lips. 

trembling, he sat upon the sofa by the window and struggle to collect 
his thoughts. he was utterly unable to understand how the mere passing 
of a girl in the dark of a narrow passage-way could communicate 
so electric a thrill to his whole being that he still shook with the 
sweet of it. yet, there it was! and he found it as useless to deny 
as to attempt analysis. some ancient fire had enter his veins, and 
now ran coursing through his blood; and that he was forty-five instead 
of twenty did not matter one little jot. out of all the inner turmoil 
and confusion emerge the one salient fact that the mere atmosphere, 
the merest casual touch, of this girl, unseen, unknown in the darkness, 
had been sufficient to stir dormant fire in the centre of his heart, 
and rouse his whole being from a state of feeble sluggish to one of 
tear and tumultuous excitement. 

after a time, however, the number of vezin’s years began to assert 
their cumulative power; he grew calmer; and when a knock came at 
length upon his door and he heard the waiter’s voice suggest that 
dinner was nearly over, he pull himself together and slow made his 
way downstairs into the dining-room. 

every one look up as he entered, for he was very late, but he took 
his customary seat in the far corner and began to eat. the trepidation 
was still in his nerves, but the fact that he had pass through the 
courtyard and hall without catching sight of a petticoat serve to calm 
him a little. he ate so fast that he had almost caught up with the 
current stage of the table d’hôte, when a slight commotion in the room 
drew his attention. 

his chair was so placed that the door and the greater portion of the 
long _salle à manger_ were behind him, yet it was not necessary to 
turn round to know that the same person he had pass in the dark 
passage had now come into the room. he felt the presence long before he 
heard or saw any one. then he became aware that the old men, the only 
other guests, were rising one by one in their places, and exchange 
greeting with some one who pass among them from table to table. and 
when at length he turn with his heart beating furiously to ascertain 
for himself, he saw the form of a young girl, lithe and slim, moving 
down the centre of the room and making straight for his own table in 
the corner. she move wonderfully, with sinuous grace, like a young 
panther, and her approach fill him with such delicious bewilder 
that he was utterly unable to tell at first what her face was like, or 
discover what it was about the whole present of the creature that 
fill him anew with trepidation and delight. 

“ah, ma’mselle est de retour!” he heard the old waiter murmur at his 
side, and he was just able to take in that she was the daughter of the 
proprietress, when she was upon him, and he heard her voice. she was 
address him. something of red lip he saw and laugh white teeth, 
and stray wisp of fine dark hair about the temples; but all the rest 
was a dream in which his own emotion rose like a thick cloud before 
his eyes and prevent his seeing accurately, or knowing exactly what 
he did. he was aware that she greet him with a charming little bow; 
that her beautiful large eyes look searching into his own; that the 
perfume he had notice in the dark passage again assail his nostrils, 
and that she was bend a little towards him and leaning with one 
hand on the table at his side. she was quite close to him--that was 
the chief thing he knew--explaining that she had been ask after the 
comfort of her mother’s guests, and was now introduce herself to the 
latest arrival--himself. 

“m’sieur has already been here a few days,” he heard the waiter say; 
and then her own voice, sweet as singing, replied-- 

“ah, but m’sieur is not go to leave us just yet, i hope. my mother 
is too old to look after the comfort of our guest properly, but now 
i am here i will remedy all that.” she laugh deliciously. “m’sieur 
shall be well look after.” 

vezin, struggle with his emotion and desire to be polite, half rose 
to acknowledge the pretty speech, and to stammer some sort of reply, 
but as he did so his hand by chance touched her own that was rest 
upon the table, and a shock that was for all the world like a shock of 
electricity, pass from her skin into his body. his soul waver and 
shook deep within him. he caught her eyes fixed upon his own with a 
look of most curious intentness, and the next moment he knew that he 
had sat down wordless again on his chair, that the girl was already 
half-way across the room, and that he was try to eat his salad with 
a dessert-spoon and a knife. 

longing for her return, and yet dread it, he gulp down the 
remainder of his dinner, and then went at once to his bedroom to be 
alone with his thoughts. this time the passage were lighted, and he 
suffer no exciting contretemps; yet the winding corridor was dim with 
shadows, and the last portion, from the bend of the wall onwards, 
seem long than he had ever known it. it ran downhill like the 
pathway on a mountain side, and as he tiptoe soft down it he felt 
that by rights it ought to have led him clean out of the house into 
the heart of a great forest. the world was singing with him. strange 
fancies fill his brain, and once in the room, with the door secure 
locked, he did not light the candles, but sat by the open window 
thinking long, long thought that came unbidden in troops to his mind. 


iv 

this part of the story he told to dr. silence, without special coaxing, 
it is true, yet with much stammer embarrassment. he could not in 
the least understand, he said, how the girl had manage to affect him 
so profoundly, and even before he had set eyes upon her. for her mere 
proximity in the dark had been sufficient to set him on fire. he 
knew nothing of enchantments, and for years had been a stranger to 
anything approach tender relations with any member of the opposite 
sex, for he was encase in shyness, and realise his overwhelming 
defect only too well. yet this bewitch young creature came to him 
deliberately. her manner was unmistakable, and she sought him out on 
every possible occasion. chaste and sweet she was undoubtedly, yet 
frankly inviting; and she won him utterly with the first glance of her 
shining eyes, even if she had not already done so in the dark merely by 
the magic of her invisible presence. 

“you felt she was altogether wholesome and good?” query the doctor. 
“you had no reaction of any sort--for instance, of alarm?” 

vezin look up sharp with one of his inimitable little apologetic 
smiles. it was some time before he replied. the mere memory of the 
adventure had suffuse his shy face with blushes, and his brown eyes 
sought the floor again before he answered. 

“i don’t think i can quite say that,” he explain presently. “i 
acknowledge certain qualms, sitting up in my room afterwards. a 
conviction grew upon me that there was something about her--how shall i 
express it?--well, something unholy. it is not impurity in any sense, 
physical or mental, that i mean, but something quite indefinable that 
gave me a vague sensation of the creeps. she drew me, and at the same 
time repel me, more than--than----” 

he hesitated, blush furiously, and unable to finish the sentence. 

“nothing like it has ever come to me before or since,” he concluded, 
with lame confusion. “i suppose it was, as you suggest just now, 
something of an enchantment. at any rate, it was strong enough to make 
me feel that i would stay in that awful little haunt town for years 
if only i could see her every day, hear her voice, watch her wonderful 
movements, and sometimes, perhaps, touch her hand.” 

“can you explain to me what you felt was the source of her power?” john 
silence asked, look purposely anywhere but at the narrator. 

“i am surprise that _you_ should ask me such a question,” answer 
vezin, with the nearest approach to dignity he could manage. “i think 
no man can describe to another convincing wherein lie the magic of 
the woman who ensnare him. i certainly cannot. i can only say this 
slip of a girl bewitch me, and the mere knowledge that she was living 
and sleep in the same house fill me with an extraordinary sense of 
delight. 

“but there’s one thing i can tell you,” he went on earnestly, his eyes 
aglow, “namely, that she seem to sum up and synthesise in herself 
all the strange hidden forces that operate so mysterious in the 
town and its inhabitants. she had the silken movements of the panther, 
go smoothly, silent to and fro, and the same indirect, oblique 
method as the townsfolk, screening, like them, secret purpose of 
her own--purposes that i was sure had _me_ for their objective. she 
kept me, to my terror and delight, ceaseless under observation, yet 
so carelessly, so consummately, that another man less sensitive, if i 
may say so”--he made a deprecate gesture--“or less prepared by what 
had gone before, would never have notice it at all. she was always 
still, always reposeful, yet she seem to be everywhere at once, so 
that i never could escape from her. i was continual meeting the stare 
and laughter of her great eyes, in the corner of the rooms, in the 
passages, calm look at me through the windows, or in the busiest 
parts of the public streets.” 

their intimacy, it seems, grew very rapid after this first encounter 
which had so violent disturbed the little man’s equilibrium. he was 
naturally very prim, and prim folk live mostly in so small a world that 
anything violent unusual may shake them clean out of it, and they 
therefore instinctive distrust originality. but vezin began to forget 
his prim after awhile. the girl was always modest behaved, and 
as her mother’s representative she naturally had to do with the guest 
in the hotel. it was not out of the way that a spirit of camaraderie 
should spring up. besides, she was young, she was charming pretty, 
she was french, and--she obviously like him. 

at the same time, there was something indescribable--a certain 
indefinable atmosphere of other places, other times--that made him try 
hard to remain on his guard, and sometimes made him catch his breath 
with a sudden start. it was all rather like a delirious dream, half 
delight, half dread, he confide in a whisper to dr. silence; and more 
than once he hardly knew quite what he was do or saying, as though 
he were driven forward by impulse he scarcely recognise as his own. 

and though the thought of leave present itself again and again to 
his mind, it was each time with less insistence, so that he stay on 
from day to day, becoming more and more a part of the sleepy life of 
this dreamy mediæval town, lose more and more of his recognise 
personality. soon, he felt, the curtain within would roll up with an 
awful rush, and he would find himself sudden admitted into the 
secret purpose of the hidden life that lay behind it all. only, by 
that time, he would have become transform into an entire different 
being. 

and, meanwhile, he notice various little sign of the intention 
to make his stay attractive to him: flower in his bedroom, a more 
comfortable arm-chair in the corner, and even special little extra 
dishes on his private table in the dining-room. conversations, too, 
with “mademoiselle ilsé” became more and more frequent and pleasant, 
and although they seldom travelled beyond the weather, or the detail 
of the town, the girl, he noticed, was never in a hurry to bring them 
to an end, and often contrived to interject little odd sentence that 
he never properly understood, yet felt to be significant. 

and it was these stray remarks, full of a meaning that evade him, that 
pointed to some hidden purpose of her own and made him feel uneasy. 
they all had to do, he felt sure, with reason for his stay on in 
the town indefinitely. 

“and has m’sieur not even yet come to a decision?” she said soft in 
his ear, sitting beside him in the sunny yard before _déjeuner_, the 
acquaintance have progress with significant rapidity. “because, if 
it’s so difficult, we must all try together to help him!” 

the question startle him, following upon his own thoughts. it was 
spoken with a pretty laugh, and a stray bit of hair across one eye, as 
she turn and peer at him half roguishly. possibly he did not quite 
understand the france of it, for her near presence always confuse 
his small knowledge of the language distressingly. yet the words, and 
her manner, and something else that lay behind it all in her mind, 
frightened him. it gave such point to his feeling that the town was 
wait for him to make his mind up on some important matter. 

at the same time, her voice, and the fact that she was there so close 
beside him in her soft dark dress, thrill him inexpressibly. 

“it is true i find it difficult to leave,” he stammered, lose his 
way delicious in the depths of her eyes, “and especially now that 
mademoiselle ilsé has come.” 

he was surprise at the success of his sentence, and quite delight 
with the little gallantry of it. but at the same time he could have 
bitten his tongue off for have said it. 

“then after all you like our little town, or you would not be pleased 
to stay on,” she said, ignore the compliment. 

“i am enchant with it, and enchant with you,” he cried, feeling 
that his tongue was somehow slip beyond the control of his brain. 
and he was on the verge of saying all manner of other things of the 
wildest description, when the girl sprang lightly up from her chair 
beside him, and made to go. 

“it is _soupe à l’onion_ to-day!” she cried, laugh back at him 
through the sunlight, “and i must go and see about it. otherwise, you 
know, m’sieur will not enjoy his dinner, and then, perhaps, he will 
leave us!” 

he watch her cross the courtyard, moving with all the grace and 
lightness of the feline race, and her simple black dress clothe her, 
he thought, exactly like the fur of the same supple species. she turn 
once to laugh at him from the porch with the glass door, and then 
stop a moment to speak to her mother, who sat knitting as usual in 
her corner seat just inside the hall-way. 

but how was it, then, that the moment his eye fell upon this ungainly 
woman, the pair of them appear sudden as other than they were? 
whence came that transform dignity and sense of power that envelop 
them both as by magic? what was it about that massive woman that 
made her appear instantly regal, and set her on a throne in some 
dark and dreadful scenery, wield a sceptre over the red glare of 
some tempestuous orgy? and why did this slender stripling of a girl, 
graceful as a willow, lithe as a young leopard, assume sudden an air 
of sinister majesty, and move with flame and smoke about her head, and 
the dark of night beneath her feet? 

vezin caught his breath and sat there transfixed. then, almost 
simultaneous with its appearance, the queer notion vanish again, 
and the sunlight of day caught them both, and he heard her laugh to 
her mother about the _soupe à l’onion_, and saw her glancing back at 
him over her dear little shoulder with a smile that made him think of a 
dew-kissed rose bend lightly before summer airs. 

and, indeed, the onion soup was particularly excellent that day, 
because he saw another cover laid at his small table and, with 
flutter heart, heard the waiter murmur by way of explanation that 
“ma’mselle ilsé would honour m’sieur to-day at _déjeuner_, as her 
custom sometimes is with her mother’s guests.” 

so actually she sat by him all through that delirious meal, talk 
quiet to him in easy french, seeing that he was well look after, 
mix the salad-dressing, and even helping him with her own hand. 
and, later in the afternoon, while he was smoking in the courtyard, 
longing for a sight of her as soon as her duty were done, she came 
again to his side, and when he rose to meet her, she stood facing him a 
moment, full of a perplex sweet shy before she spoke-- 

“my mother think you ought to know more of the beauty of our little 
town, and _i_ think so too! would m’sieur like me to be his guide, 
perhaps? i can show him everything, for our family has live here for 
many generations.” 

she had him by the hand, indeed, before he could find a single word 
to express his pleasure, and led him, all unresisting, out into the 
street, yet in such a way that it seem perfectly natural she should 
do so, and without the faintest suggestion of bold or immodesty. 
her face glow with the pleasure and interest of it, and with her 
short dress and tumble hair she look every bit the charming child of 
seventeen that she was, innocent and playful, proud of her native town, 
and alive beyond her years to the sense of its ancient beauty. 

so they went over the town together, and she show him what she 
considered its chief interest: the tumble-down old house where her 
forebear had lived; the sombre, aristocratic-looking mansion where her 
mother’s family dwelt for centuries, and the ancient market-place where 
several hundred years before the witch had been burnt by the score. 
she kept up a lively running stream of talk about it all, of which he 
understood not a fiftieth part as he trudge along by her side, curse 
his forty-five years and feeling all the yearning of his early manhood 
revive and jeer at him. and, as she talked, england and surbiton 
seem very far away indeed, almost in another age of the world’s 
history. her voice touched something immeasurable old in him, something 
that slept deep. it lull the surface parts of his consciousness to 
sleep, allow what was far more ancient to awaken. like the town, 
with its elaborate pretence of modern active life, the upper layer 
of his being became dulled, soothed, muffled, and what lay underneath 
began to stir in its sleep. that big curtain sway a little to and 
fro. presently it might lift altogether.... 

he began to understand a little better at last. the mood of the town 
was reproduce itself in him. in proportion as his ordinary external 
self became muffled, that inner secret life, that was far more real and 
vital, assert itself. and this girl was surely the high-priestess of 
it all, the chief instrument of its accomplishment. new thoughts, with 
new interpretations, flood his mind as she walk beside him through 
the winding streets, while the picturesque old gabled town, soft 
coloured in the sunset, had never appear to him so wholly wonderful 
and seductive. 

and only one curious incident came to disturb and puzzle him, slight 
in itself, but utterly inexplicable, bring white terror into the 
child’s face and a scream to her laugh lips. he had merely pointed 
to a column of blue smoke that rose from the burning autumn leaves 
and made a picture against the red roofs, and had then run to the 
wall and call her to his side to watch the flame shoot here and 
there through the heap of rubbish. yet, at the sight of it, as though 
taken by surprise, her face had alter dreadfully, and she had turn 
and run like the wind, calling out wild sentence to him as she ran, 
of which he had not understood a single word, except that the fire 
apparently frightened her, and she want to get quick away from it, 
and to get him away too. 

yet five minutes later she was as calm and happy again as though 
nothing had happen to alarm or waken trouble thought in her, and 
they had both forgotten the incident. 

they were leaning over the ruin rampart together listen to 
the weird music of the band as he had heard it the first day of his 
arrival. it move him again profound as it had done before, and 
somehow he manage to find his tongue and his best french. the girl 
lean across the stone close beside him. no one was about. driven by 
some remorseless engine within he began to stammer something--he hardly 
knew what--of his strange admiration for her. almost at the first word 
she sprang lightly off the wall and came up smile in front of him, 
just touching his knee as he sat there. she was hatless as usual, and 
the sun caught her hair and one side of her cheek and throat. 

“oh, i’m _so_ glad!” she cried, clap her little hand soft in his 
face, “so very glad, because that means that if you like me you must 
also like what i do, and what i belong to.” 

already he regret bitter have lost control of himself. something 
in the phrase of her sentence chill him. he knew the fear of 
embark upon an unknown and dangerous sea. 

“you will take part in our real life, i mean,” she add softly, 
with an indescribable coax of manner, as though she notice his 
shrinking. “you will come back to us.” 

already this slip of a child seem to dominate him; he felt her power 
coming over him more and more; something emanate from her that stole 
over his senses and made him aware that her personality, for all its 
simple grace, held forces that were stately, imposing, august. he saw 
her again moving through smoke and flame amid broken and tempestuous 
scenery, alarming strong, her terrible mother by her side. dim this 
shone through her smile and appearance of charming innocence. 

“you will, i know,” she repeated, holding him with her eyes. 

they were quite alone up there on the ramparts, and the sensation that 
she was overmaster him stir a wild sensuous in his blood. the 
mingle abandon and reserve in her attract him furiously, and all of 
him that was man rose up and resist the creep influence, at the 
same time acclaim it with the full delight of his forgotten youth. 
an irresistible desire came to him to question her, to summon what 
still remain to him of his own little personality in an effort to 
retain the right to his normal self. 

the girl had grown quiet again, and was now leaning on the broad wall 
close beside him, gaze out across the darken plain, her elbow on 
the coping, motionless as a figure carve in stone. he took his courage 
in both hands. 

“tell me, ilsé,” he said, unconscious imitate her own purr 
soft of voice, yet aware that he was utterly in earnest, “what is 
the meaning of this town, and what is this real life you speak of? and 
why is it that the people watch me from morning to night? tell me what 
it all means? and, tell me,” he add more quick with passion in his 
voice, “what you really are--yourself?” 

she turn her head and look at him through half-closed eyelids, her 
grow inner excitement betray itself by the faint colour that ran 
like a shadow across her face. 

“it seem to me,”--he falter oddly under her gaze--“that i have some 
right to know----” 

sudden she open her eyes to the full. “you love me, then?” she 
ask softly. 

“i swear,” he cry impetuously, move as by the force of a rising 
tide, “i never felt before--i have never known any other girl who----” 

“then you _have_ the right to know,” she calm interrupt his 
confuse confession; “for love shares all secrets.” 

she paused, and a thrill like fire ran swift through him. her words 
lift him off the earth, and he felt a radiant happiness, follow 
almost the same instant in horrible contrast by the thought of death. 
he became aware that she had turn her eyes upon his own and was 
speak again. 

“the real life i speak of,” she whispered, “is the old, old life 
within, the life of long ago, the life to which you, too, once 
belonged, and to which you still belong.” 

a faint wave of memory trouble the deep of his soul as her low 
voice sank into him. what she was saying he knew instinctive to be 
true, even though he could not as yet understand its full purport. 
his present life seem slip from him as he listened, merge his 
personality in one that was far old and greater. it was this loss of 
his present self that brought to him the thought of death. 

“you came here,” she went on, “with the purpose of seek it, and the 
people felt your presence and are wait to know what you decide, 
whether you will leave them without have found it, or whether----” 

her eyes remain fixed upon his own, but her face began to change, 
grow large and dark with an expression of age. 

“it is their thought constant play about your soul that make 
you feel they watch you. they do not watch you with their eyes. the 
purpose of their inner life are calling to you, seek to claim you. 
you were all part of the same life long, long ago, and now they want 
you back again among them.” 

vezin’s timid heart sank with dread as he listened; but the girl’s 
eyes held him with a net of joy so that he had no wish to escape. she 
fascinate him, as it were, clean out of his normal self. 

“alone, however, the people could never have caught and held you,” 
she resumed. “the motive force was not strong enough; it has fade 
through all these years. but i”--she pause a moment and look at him 
with complete confidence in her splendid eyes--“i possess the spell to 
conquer you and hold you: the spell of old love. i can win you back 
again and make you live the old life with me, for the force of the 
ancient tie between us, if i choose to use it, is irresistible. and 
i do choose to use it i still want you. and you, dear soul of my dim 
past”--she pressed close to him so that her breath pass across his 
eyes, and her voice positively sang--“i mean to have you, for you love 
me and are utterly at my mercy.” 

vezin heard, and yet did not hear; understood, yet did not understand. 
he had pass into a condition of exaltation. the world was beneath his 
feet, made of music and flowers, and he was flying somewhere far above 
it through the sunshine of pure delight. he was breathless and giddy 
with the wonder of her words. they intoxicate him. and, still, the 
terror of it all, the dreadful thought of death, pressed ever behind 
her sentences. for flame shot through her voice out of black smoke and 
lick at his soul. 

and they communicate with one another, it seem to him, by a process 
of swift telepathy, for his france could never have compass all he 
said to her. yet she understood perfectly, and what she said to him was 
like the recital of verse long since known. and the mingle pain and 
sweet of it as he listen were almost more than his little soul 
could hold. 

“yet i came here wholly by chance----” he heard himself saying. 

“no,” she cry with passion, “you came here because i call to you. i 
have call to you for years, and you came with the whole force of the 
past behind you. you had to come, for i own you, and i claim you.” 

she rose again and move closer, look at him with a certain 
insole in the face--the insole of power. 

the sun had set behind the tower of the old cathedral and the dark 
rose up from the plain and envelop them. the music of the band had 
ceased. the leaves of the plane tree hung motionless, but the chill 
of the autumn evening rose about them and made vezin shiver. there 
was no sound but the sound of their voice and the occasional soft 
rustle of the girl’s dress. he could hear the blood rush in his 
ears. he scarcely realise where he was or what he was doing. some 
terrible magic of the imagination drew him deep down into the tomb 
of his own being, telling him in no unfaltering voice that her words 
shadow forth the truth. and this simple little france maid, speak 
beside him with so strange authority, he saw curious alter into quite 
another being. as he stare into her eyes, the picture in his mind grew 
and lived, dressing itself vivid to his inner vision with a degree 
of reality he was compel to acknowledge. as once before, he saw her 
tall and stately, moving through wild and broken scenery of forest and 
mountain caverns, the glare of flame behind her head and cloud of 
shift smoke about her feet. dark leaves encircle her hair, flying 
loose in the wind, and her limb shone through the merest rag of 
clothing. other were about her too, and ardent eyes on all side cast 
delirious glance upon her, but her own eyes were always for one only, 
one whom she held by the hand. for she was leading the dance in some 
tempestuous orgy to the music of chant voices, and the dance she led 
circle about a great and awful figure on a throne, brood over the 
scene through lurid vapours, while innumerable other wild face and 
form crowded furiously about her in the dance. but the one she held by 
the hand he knew to be himself, and the monstrous shape upon the throne 
he knew to be her mother. 

the vision rose within him, rush to him down the long years 
of bury time, crying aloud to him with the voice of memory 
reawakened.... and then the scene fade away and he saw the clear 
circle of the girl’s eyes gaze steadfast into his own, and she 
became once more the pretty little daughter of the innkeeper, and he 
found his voice again. 

“and you,” he whisper tremblingly--“you child of vision and 
enchantment, how is it that you so bewitch me that i love you even 
before i saw?” 

she drew herself up beside him with an air of rare dignity. 

“the call of the past,” she said; “and besides,” she add proudly, “in 
the real life i am a princess----” 

“a princess!” he cried. 

“----and my mother is a queen!” 

at this, little vezin utterly lost his head. delight tore at his heart 
and swept him into sheer ecstasy. to hear that sweet singing voice, and 
to see those adorable little lip utter such things, upset his balance 
beyond all hope of control. he took her in his arms and cover her 
unresist face with kisses. 

but even while he did so, and while the hot passion swept him, he 
felt that she was soft and loathsome, and that her answer kiss 
stain his very soul.... and when, presently, she had free herself 
and vanish into the darkness, he stood there, leaning against the 
wall in a state of collapse, creep with horror from the touch of 
her yielding body, and inward rage at the weakness that he already 
dim realise must prove his undoing. 

and from the shadow of the old building into which she disappear 
there rose in the still of the night a singular, long-drawn cry, 
which at first he took for laughter, but which later he was sure he 
recognise as the almost human wail of a cat. 


v 

for a long time vezin leant there against the wall, alone with his 
surge thought and emotions. he understood at length that he had 
done the one thing necessary to call down upon him the whole force of 
this ancient past. for in those passionate kiss he had acknowledge 
the tie of olden days, and had revive it. and the memory of that soft 
impalpable caress in the dark of the inn corridor came back to him 
with a shudder. the girl had first master him, and then led him to 
the one act that was necessary for her purpose. he had been waylaid, 
after the lapse of centuries--caught, and conquered. 

dim he realise this, and sought to make plan for his escape. but, 
for the moment at any rate, he was powerless to manage his thought or 
will, for the sweet, fantastic madness of the whole adventure mount 
to his brain like a spell, and he glory in the feeling that he was 
utterly enchant and moving in a world so much large and wild than 
the one he had ever been accustomed to. 

the moon, pale and enormous, was just rising over the sea-like plain, 
when at last he rose to go. her slant ray drew all the house into 
new perspective, so that their roofs, already glisten with dew, 
seem to stretch much higher into the sky than usual, and their gable 
and quaint old tower lay far away in its purple reaches. 

the cathedral appear unreal in a silver mist. he move softly, 
keeping to the shadows; but the street were all desert and very 
silent; the door were closed, the shutter fastened. not a soul was 
astir. the hush of night lay over everything; it was like a town of 
the dead, a churchyard with gigantic and grotesque tombstones. 

wonder where all the busy life of the day had so utterly disappear 
to, he made his way to a back door that enter the inn by means of 
the stables, thinking thus to reach his room unobserved. he reach 
the courtyard safe and cross it by keeping close to the shadow of 
the wall. he sidle down it, mince along on tiptoe, just as the old 
men did when they enter the _salle à manger_. he was horrify to 
find himself do this instinctively. a strange impulse came to him, 
catching him somehow in the centre of his body--an impulse to drop upon 
all fours and run swift and silently. he glance upwards and the idea 
came to him to leap up upon his window-sill overhead instead of go 
round by the stairs. this occur to him as the easiest, and most 
natural way. it was like the beginning of some horrible transformation 
of himself into something else. he was fearful strung up. 

the moon was higher now, and the shadow very dark along the side of 
the street where he moved. he kept among the deepest of them, and 
reach the porch with the glass doors. 

but here there was light; the inmates, unfortunately, were still about. 
hope to slip across the hall unobserved and reach the stairs, he 
open the door careful and stole in. then he saw that the hall was 
not empty. a large dark thing lay against the wall on his left. at 
first he thought it must be household articles. then it moved, and he 
thought it was an immense cat, distort in some way by the play of 
light and shadow. then it rose straight up before him and he saw that 
it was the proprietress. 

what she had been do in this position he could only venture a 
dreadful guess, but the moment she stood up and face him he was aware 
of some terrible dignity clothing her about that instantly recall the 
girl’s strange saying that she was a queen. huge and sinister she stood 
there under the little oil lamp; alone with him in the empty hall. awe 
stir in his heart, and the roots of some ancient fear. he felt that 
he must bow to her and make some kind of obeisance. the impulse was 
fierce and irresistible, as of long habit. he glance quick about 
him. there was no one there. then he deliberate inclined his head 
towards her. he bowed. 

“enfin! m’sieur s’est donc décidé. c’est bien alors. j’en sui 
contente.” 

her words came to him sonorous as through a great open space. 

then the great figure came sudden across the flag hall at him and 
seize his tremble hands. some overpowering force move with her and 
caught him. 

“on pourrait faire un p’tit tour ensemble, n’est-ce pas? nous y allon 
cette nuit et il faut s’exercer un peu d’avance pour cela. ilsé, ilsé, 
vien donc ici. vien vite!” 

and she whirl him round in the opening steps of some dance that 
seem oddly and horrible familiar. they made no sound on the stones, 
this strange assorted couple. it was all soft and stealthy. and 
presently, when the air seem to thicken like smoke, and a red glare 
as of flame shot through it, he was aware that some one else had join 
them and that his hand the mother had release was now tight held 
by the daughter. ilsé had come in answer to the call, and he saw her 
with leaves of vervain twin in her dark hair, clothe in tattered 
vestige of some curious garment, beautiful as the night, and horribly, 
odiously, loathsome seductive. 

“to the sabbath! to the sabbath!” they cried. “on to the witches’ 
sabbath!” 

up and down that narrow hall they danced, the women on each side of 
him, to the wildest measure he had ever imagined, yet which he dimly, 
dreadfully remembered, till the lamp on the wall flicker and went 
out, and they were left in total darkness. and the devil woke in his 
heart with a thousand vile suggestion and made him afraid. 

sudden they release his hand and he heard the voice of the mother 
cry that it was time, and they must go. which way they went he did 
not pause to see. he only realise that he was free, and he blunder 
through the dark till he found the stairs and then tore up them to 
his room as though all hell was at his heels. 

he flung himself on the sofa, with his face in his hands, and groaned. 
swift review a dozen ways of immediate escape, all equally 
impossible, he finally decided that the only thing to do for the moment 
was to sit quiet and wait. he must see what was go to happen. at 
least in the privacy of his own bedroom he would be fairly safe. the 
door was locked. he cross over and soft open the window which 
gave upon the courtyard and also permit a partial view of the hall 
through the glass doors. 

as he did so the hum and murmur of a great activity reach his ear 
from the street beyond--the sound of footstep and voice muffle by 
distance. he lean out cautious and listened. the moonlight was 
clear and strong now, but his own window was in shadow, the silver 
disc being still behind the house. it came to him irresistible that 
the inhabitant of the town, who a little while before had all been 
invisible behind closed doors, were now issue forth, busy upon some 
secret and unholy errand. he listen intently. 

at first everything about him was silent, but soon he became aware of 
movements go on in the house itself. rustling and cheep came 
to him across that still, moonlit yard. a concourse of living being 
sent the hum of their activity into the night. things were on the move 
everywhere. a biting, pungent odour rose through the air, coming he 
knew not whence. presently his eyes became glue to the window of 
the opposite wall where the moonshine fell in a soft blaze. the roof 
overhead, and behind him, was reflect clearly in the pane of glass, 
and he saw the outline of dark body moving with long footstep over 
the tile and along the coping. they pass swift and silently, 
shaped like immense cats, in an endless procession across the picture 
glass, and then appear to leap down to a lower level where he lost 
sight of them. he just caught the soft thud of their leaps. 
sometimes their shadow fell upon the white wall opposite, and then 
he could not make out whether they were the shadow of human being 
or of cats. they seem to change swift from one to the other. the 
transformation look horrible real, for they leap like human beings, 
yet change swift in the air immediately afterwards, and drop like 
animals. 

the yard, too, beneath him, was now alive with the creep movements 
of dark form all stealthy drawing towards the porch with the glass 
doors. they kept so close to the wall that he could not determine 
their actual shape, but when he saw that they pass on to the great 
congregation that was gathering in the hall, he understood that these 
were the creature whose leap shadow he had first seen reflect in 
the window-panes opposite. they were coming from all parts of the town, 
reach the appoint meeting-place across the roof and tiles, and 
spring from level to level till they came to the yard. 

then a new sound caught his ear, and he saw that the window all about 
him were being soft opened, and that to each window came a face. a 
moment later figures began drop hurried down into the yard. and 
these figures, as they lower themselves down from the windows, were 
human, he saw; but once safe in the yard they fell upon all fours and 
change in the swiftest possible second into--cats--huge, silent cats. 
they ran in stream to join the main body in the hall beyond. 

so, after all, the rooms in the house had not been empty and unoccupied. 

moreover, what he saw no long fill him with amazement. for he 
remember it all. it was familiar. it had all happen before just 
so, hundred of times, and he himself had taken part in it and known 
the wild madness of it all. the outline of the old building changed, 
the yard grew larger, and he seem to be staring down upon it from 
a much greater height through smoky vapours. and, as he looked, half 
remembering, the old pains of long ago, fierce and sweet, furiously 
assail him, and the blood stir horrible as he heard the call of 
the dance again in his heart and taste the ancient magic of ilsé 
whirl by his side. 

sudden he start back. a great lithe cat had leap soft up from 
the shadow below on to the sill close to his face, and was staring 
fixedly at him with the eyes of a human. “come,” it seem to say, 
“come with us to the dance! change as of old! transform yourself 
swift and come!” only too well he understood the creature’s soundless 
call. 

it was gone again in a flash with scarcely a sound of its pad feet 
on the stones, and then other drop by the score down the side of 
the house, past his very eyes, all change as they fell and dart 
away rapidly, softly, towards the gathering point. and again he felt 
the dreadful desire to do likewise; to murmur the old incantation, 
and then drop upon hand and knee and run swift for the great 
flying leap into the air. oh, how the passion of it rose within him 
like a flood, twist his very entrails, send his heart’s desire 
flaming forth into the night for the old, old dance of the sorcerer 
at the witches’ sabbath! the whirl of the stars was about him; once 
more he met the magic of the moon. the power of the wind, rush 
from precipice and forest, leap from cliff to cliff across the 
valleys, tore him away.... he heard the cries of the dance and their 
wild laughter, and with this savage girl in his embrace he dance 
furiously about the dim throne where sate the figure with the sceptre 
of majesty.... 

then, suddenly, all became hush and still, and the fever die down a 
little in his heart. the calm moonlight flood a courtyard empty and 
deserted. they had started. the procession was off into the sky. and he 
was left behind--alone. 

vezin tiptoe soft across the room and unlock the door. the murmur 
from the streets, grow momentarily as he advanced, met his ears. he 
made his way with the utmost caution down the corridor. at the head of 
the stairs he pause and listened. below him, the hall where they had 
gather was dark and still, but through open door and window on 
the far side of the building came the sound of a great throng moving 
farther and farther into the distance. 

he made his way down the creak wooden stairs, dread yet longing 
to meet some straggle who should point the way, but finding no one; 
across the dark hall, so lately throng with living, moving things, 
and out through the open front door into the street. he could not 
believe that he was really left behind, really forgotten, that he had 
been purposely permit to escape. it perplexed him. 

nervous he peer about him, and up and down the street; then, seeing 
nothing, advanced slow down the pavement. 

the whole town, as he went, show itself empty and deserted, as 
though a great wind had blown everything alive out of it. the door 
and window of the house stood open to the night; nothing stirred; 
moonlight and silence lay over all. the night lay about him like a 
cloak. the air, soft and cool, caress his cheek like the touch of a 
great furry paw. he gain confidence and began to walk quickly, though 
still keeping to the shadow side. nowhere could he discover the 
faintest sign of the great unholy exodus he knew had just taken place. 
the moon sail high over all in a sky, cloudless and serene. 

hardly realise where he was going, he cross the open market-place 
and so came to the ramparts, whence he knew a pathway descended to the 
high road and along which he could make good his escape to one of the 
other little town that lay to the northward, and so to the railway. 

but first he pause and gaze out over the scene at his feet where the 
great plain lay like a silver map of some dream country. the still 
beauty of it enter his heart, increase his sense of bewilder 
and unreality. no air stirred, the leaves of the plane tree stood 
motionless, the near detail were define with the sharp of day 
against dark shadows, and in the distance the field and wood melt 
away into haze and shimmer mistiness. 

but the breath caught in his throat and he stood stockstill as though 
transfix when his gaze pass from the horizon and fell upon the near 
prospect in the depth of the valley at his feet. the whole lower slope 
of the hill, that lay hid from the bright of the moon, were aglow, 
and through the glare he saw countless moving forms, shift thick and 
fast between the opening of the trees; while overhead, like leaves 
driven by the wind, he discern flying shape that hover dark one 
moment against the sky and then settled down with cries and weird 
singing through the branch into the region that was aflame. 

spellbound, he stood and stare for a time that he could not measure. 
and then, move by one of the terrible impulse that seem to control 
the whole adventure, he climb swift upon the top of the broad 
coping, and balanced a moment where the valley gape at his feet. but 
in that very instant, as he stood hovering, a sudden movement among the 
shadow of the house caught his eye, and he turn to see the outline 
of a large animal dart swift across the open space behind him, and 
land with a flying leap upon the top of the wall a little lower down. 
it ran like the wind to his feet and then rose up beside him upon the 
ramparts. a shiver seem to run through the moonlight, and his sight 
tremble for a second. his heart pulse fearfully. ilsé stood beside 
him, peer into his face. 

some dark substance, he saw, stain the girl’s face and skin, shining 
in the moonlight as she stretch her hand towards him; she was 
dress in wretched tattered garment that yet became her mightily; rue 
and vervain twin about her temples; her eyes glitter with unholy 
light. he only just control the wild impulse to take her in his arms 
and leap with her from their giddy perch into the valley below. 

“see!” she cried, point with an arm on which the rag flutter in 
the rising wind towards the forest aglow in the distance. “see where 
they await us! the wood are alive! already the great one are there, 
and the dance will soon begin! the salve is here! anoint yourself and 
come!” 

though a moment before the sky was clear and cloudless, yet even while 
she spoke the face of the moon grew dark and the wind began to toss 
in the crest of the plane tree at his feet. stray gust brought the 
sound of hoarse singing and crying from the lower slope of the hill, 
and the pungent odour he had already notice about the courtyard of the 
inn rose about him in the air. 

“transform, transform!” she cry again, her voice rising like a song. 
“rub well your skin before you fly. come! come with me to the sabbath, 
to the madness of its furious delight, to the sweet abandon of 
its evil worship! see! the great one are there, and the terrible 
sacrament prepared. the throne is occupied. anoint and come! anoint 
and come!” 

she grew to the height of a tree beside him, leap upon the wall with 
flaming eyes and hair strewn upon the night. he too began to change 
swiftly. her hand touched the skin of his face and neck, streak him 
with the burning salve that sent the old magic into his blood with the 
power before which fade all that is good. 

a wild roar came up to his ear from the heart of the wood, and the 
girl, when she heard it, leap upon the wall in the frenzy of her 
wicked joy. 

“satan is there!” she screamed, rush upon him and strive to draw 
him with her to the edge of the wall. “satan has come! the sacrament 
call us! come, with your dear apostate soul, and we will worship and 
dance till the moon die and the world is forgotten!” 

just saving himself from the dreadful plunge, vezin struggle to 
release himself from her grasp, while the passion tore at his reins and 
all but master him. he shriek aloud, not knowing what he said, and 
then he shriek again. it was the old impulses, the old awful habit 
instinctive finding voice; for though it seem to him that he merely 
shriek nonsense, the words he utter really had meaning in them, and 
were intelligible. it was the ancient call. and it was heard below. it 
was answered. 

the wind whistle at the skirt of his coat as the air round him 
darken with many flying form crowd upwards out of the valley. the 
crying of hoarse voice smote upon his ears, coming closer. stroke of 
wind buffet him, tear him this way and that along the crumble 
top of the stone wall; and ilsé clung to him with her long shining 
arms, smooth and bare, holding him fast about the neck. but not ilsé 
alone, for a dozen of them surround him, drop out of the air. 
the pungent odour of the anoint body stifle him, exciting him to 
the old madness of the sabbath, the dance of the witch and sorcerer 
do honour to the personify evil of the world. 

“anoint and away! anoint and away!” they cry in wild chorus about 
him. “to the dance that never dies! to the sweet and fearful fantasy of 
evil!” 

another moment and he would have yield and gone, for his will turn 
soft and the flood of passionate memory all but overwhelm him, 
when--so can a small thing alter the whole course of an adventure--he 
caught his foot upon a loose stone in the edge of the wall, and 
then fell with a sudden crash on to the ground below. but he fell 
towards the houses, in the open space of dust and cobble stones, and 
fortunately not into the gape depth of the valley on the farther side. 

and they, too, came in a tumble heap about him, like flies upon a 
piece of food, but as they fell he was release for a moment from 
the power of their touch, and in that brief instant of freedom there 
flash into his mind the sudden intuition that save him. before he 
could regain his feet he saw them scrabble awkward back upon the 
wall, as though bat-like they could only fly by drop from a height, 
and had no hold upon him in the open. then, seeing them perch there 
in a row like cat upon a roof, all dark and singularly shapeless, 
their eyes like lamps, the sudden memory came back to him of ilsé’s 
terror at the sight of fire. 

quick as a flash he found his match and lit the dead leaves that lay 
under the wall. 

dry and withered, they caught fire at once, and the wind carry the 
flame in a long line down the length of the wall, licking upwards as 
it ran; and with shriek and wailings, the crowded row of form upon 
the top melt away into the air on the other side, and were gone with 
a great rush and whirr of their body down into the heart of the 
haunt valley, leave vezin breathless and shaken in the middle of 
the desert ground. 

“ilsé!” he call feebly; “ilsé!” for his heart ache to think that she 
was really gone to the great dance without him, and that he had lost 
the opportunity of its fearful joy. yet at the same time his relief 
was so great, and he was so daze and trouble in mind with the whole 
thing, that he hardly knew what he was saying, and only cry aloud in 
the fierce storm of his emotion.... 

the fire under the wall ran its course, and the moonlight came out 
again, soft and clear, from its temporary eclipse. with one last 
shudder look at the ruin ramparts, and a feeling of horrid wonder 
for the haunt valley beyond, where the shape still crowded and flew, 
he turn his face towards the town and slow made his way in the 
direction of the hotel. 

and as he went, a great wail of cries, and a sound of howling, 
follow him from the gleam forest below, grow faint and 
faint with the burst of wind as he disappear between the houses. 


vi 

“it may seem rather abrupt to you, this sudden tame ending,” said 
arthur vezin, glancing with flushed face and timid eyes at dr. silence 
sitting there with his notebook, “but the fact is--er--from that moment 
my memory seem to have fail rather. i have no distinct recollection 
of how i got home or what precisely i did. 

“it appear i never went back to the inn at all. i only dim recollect 
racing down a long white road in the moonlight, past wood and 
villages, still and deserted, and then the dawn came up, and i saw the 
tower of a biggish town and so came to a station. 

“but, long before that, i remember pause somewhere on the road and 
look back to where the hill-town of my adventure stood up in the 
moonlight, and thinking how exactly like a great monstrous cat it lay 
there upon the plain, its huge front paw lie down the two main 
streets, and the twin and broken tower of the cathedral marking its 
torn ear against the sky. that picture stays in my mind with the 
utmost vivid to this day. 

“another thing remains in my mind from that escape--namely, the sudden 
sharp reminder that i had not paid my bill, and the decision i made, 
standing there on the dusty highroad, that the small baggage i had left 
behind would more than settle for my indebtedness. 

“for the rest, i can only tell you that i got coffee and bread at a 
café on the outskirts of this town i had come to, and soon after found 
my way to the station and caught a train later in the day. that same 
evening i reach london.” 

“and how long altogether,” ask john silence quietly, “do you think 
you stay in the town of the adventure?” 

vezin look up sheepishly. 

“i was coming to that,” he resumed, with apologetic wriggle of his 
body. “in london i found that i was a whole week out in my reckoning of 
time. i had stay over a week in the town, and it ought to have been 
september 15th,--instead of which it was only september 10th!” 

“so that, in reality, you had only stay a night or two in the inn?” 
query the doctor. 

vezin hesitate before replying. he shuffle upon the mat. 

“i must have gain time somewhere,” he said at length--“somewhere or 
somehow. i certainly had a week to my credit. i can’t explain it. i can 
only give you the fact.” 

“and this happen to you last year, since when you have never been 
back to the place?” 

“last autumn, yes,” murmur vezin; “and i have never dare to go 
back. i think i never want to.” 

“and, tell me,” ask dr. silence at length, when he saw that the 
little man had evidently come to the end of his words and had nothing 
more to say, “had you ever read up the subject of the old witchcraft 
practice during the middle ages, or been at all interested in the 
subject?” 

“never!” declared vezin emphatically. “i had never given a thought to 
such matter so far as i know----” 

“or to the question of reincarnation, perhaps?” 

“never--before my adventure; but i have since,” he reply 
significantly. 

there was, however, something still on the man’s mind that he wish 
to relieve himself of by confession, yet could with difficulty bring 
himself to mention; and it was only after the sympathetic tactful 
of the doctor had provided numerous opening that he at length avail 
himself of one of them, and stammer that he would like to show him 
the mark he still had on his neck where, he said, the girl had touched 
him with her anoint hands. 

he took off his collar after infinite fumble hesitation, and lower 
his shirt a little for the doctor to see. and there, on the surface of 
the skin, lay a faint reddish line across the shoulder and extend 
a little way down the back towards the spine. it certainly indicate 
exactly the position an arm might have taken in the act of embracing. 
and on the other side of the neck, slightly higher up, was a similar 
mark, though not quite so clearly defined. 

“that was where she held me that night on the ramparts,” he whispered, 
a strange light coming and go in his eyes. 

* * * * * 

it was some week later when i again found occasion to consult john 
silence concerning another extraordinary case that had come under my 
notice, and we fell to discuss vezin’s story. since hearing it, 
the doctor had made investigate on his own account, and one of his 
secretary had discover that vezin’s ancestor had actually live 
for generation in the very town where the adventure came to him. two 
of them, both women, had been try and convict as witches, and had 
been burn alive at the stake. moreover, it had not been difficult to 
prove that the very inn where vezin stay was built about 1700 upon 
the spot where the funeral pyre stood and the execution took place. 
the town was a sort of headquarters for all the sorcerer and witch 
of the entire region, and after conviction they were burnt there 
literally by scores. 

“it seem strange,” continue the doctor, “that vezin should have 
remain ignorant of all this; but, on the other hand, it was not the 
kind of history that successive generation would have been anxious to 
keep alive, or to repeat to their children. therefore i am inclined to 
think he still know nothing about it. 

“the whole adventure seem to have been a very vivid revival of the 
memory of an early life, cause by coming directly into contact 
with the living forces still intense enough to hang about the place, 
and, by a most singular chance too, with the very soul who had taken 
part with him in the event of that particular life. for the mother 
and daughter who impress him so strange must have been leading 
actors, with himself, in the scene and practice of witchcraft which 
at that period dominate the imagination of the whole country. 

“one has only to read the history of the times to know that 
these witch claim the power of transform themselves into 
various animals, both for the purpose of disguise and also to 
convey themselves swift to the scene of their imaginary orgies. 
lycanthropy, or the power to change themselves into wolves, was 
everywhere believe in, and the ability to transform themselves into 
cat by rubbing their body with a special salve or ointment provided 
by satan himself, found equal credence. the witchcraft trial abound in 
evidence of such universal beliefs.” 

dr. silence quote chapter and verse from many writer on the subject, 
and show how every detail of vezin’s adventure had a basis in the 
practice of those dark days. 

“but that the entire affair took place subjective in the man’s own 
consciousness, i have no doubt,” he went on, in reply to my questions; 
“for my secretary who has been to the town to investigate, discover 
his signature in the visitors’ book, and prove by it that he had 
arrive on september 8th, and left sudden without pay his bill. 
he left two days later, and they still were in possession of his dirty 
brown bag and some tourist clothes. i paid a few franc in settlement 
of his debt, and have sent his luggage on to him. the daughter was 
absent from home, but the proprietress, a large woman very much as he 
describe her, told my secretary that he had seem a very strange, 
absent-minded kind of gentleman, and after his disappearance she had 
fear for a long time that he had met with a violent end in the 
neighbouring forest where he use to roam about alone. 

“i should like to have obtain a personal interview with the daughter 
so as to ascertain how much was subjective and how much actually took 
place with her as vezin told it. for her dread of fire and the sight of 
burning must, of course, have been the intuitive memory of her former 
painful death at the stake, and have thus explain why he fancy more 
than once that he saw her through smoke and flame.” 

“and that mark on his skin, for instance?” i inquired. 

“merely the mark produce by hysterical brooding,” he replied, “like 
the stigmata of the _religieuses_, and the bruise which appear on 
the body of hypnotise subject who have been told to expect them. 
this is very common and easily explained. only it seem curious that 
these mark should have remain so long in vezin’s case. usually they 
disappear quickly.” 

“obviously he is still thinking about it all, brooding, and living it 
all over again,” i ventured. 

“probably. and this make me fear that the end of his trouble is not 
yet. we shall hear of him again. it is a case, alas! i can do little to 
alleviate.” 

dr. silence spoke grave and with sad in his voice. 

“and what do you make of the frenchman in the train?” i ask 
further--“the man who warn him against the place, _à cause du sommeil 
et à cause des chats_? surely a very singular incident?” 

“a _very_ singular incident indeed,” he made answer slowly, “and one i 
can only explain on the basis of a highly improbable coincidence----” 

“namely?” 

“that the man was one who had himself stay in the town and undergone 
there a similar experience. i should like to find this man and ask him. 
but the crystal is useless here, for i have no slightest clue to go 
upon, and i can only conclude that some singular psychic affinity, some 
force still active in his being out of the same past life, drew him 
thus to the personality of vezin, and enable him to fear what might 
happen to him, and thus to warn him as he did. 

“yes,” he presently continued, half talk to himself, “i suspect in 
this case that vezin was swept into the vortex of forces arise out of 
the intense activity of a past life, and that he live over again a 
scene in which he had often play a leading part century before. for 
strong action set up forces that are so slow to exhaust themselves, 
they may be said in a sense never to die. in this case they were not 
vital enough to render the illusion complete, so that the little man 
found himself caught in a very distressing confusion of the present 
and the past; yet he was sufficient sensitive to recognise that it 
was true, and to fight against the degrade of returning, even in 
memory, to a former and lower state of development. 

“ah yes!” he continued, crossing the floor to gaze at the darken 
sky, and seemingly quite oblivious of my presence, “subliminal 
up-rushes of memory like this can be exceedingly painful, and sometimes 
exceedingly dangerous. i only trust that this gentle soul may soon 
escape from this obsession of a passionate and tempestuous past. but i 
doubt it, i doubt it.” 

his voice was hush with sad as he spoke, and when he turn back 
into the room again there was an expression of profound yearning upon 
his face, the yearning of a soul whose desire to help is sometimes 
greater than his power. 




case iii 

the nemesis of fire 


i 

by some means which i never could fathom, john silence always contrived 
to keep the compartment to himself, and as the train had a clear run 
of two hour before the first stop, there was ample time to go over 
the preliminary fact of the case. he had telephone to me that very 
morning, and even through the disguise of the mile of wire the thrill 
of incalculable adventure had sound in his voice. 

“as if it were an ordinary country visit,” he called, in reply to my 
question; “and don’t forget to bring your gun.” 

“with blank cartridges, i suppose?” for i knew his rigid principles 
with regard to the taking of life, and guess that the gun were 
merely for some obvious purpose of disguise. 

then he thank me for coming, mention the train, snap down the 
receiver, and left me vibrate with the excitement of anticipation 
to do my packing. for the honour of accompany dr. john silence on 
one of his big case was what many would have considered an empty 
honour--and risky. certainly the adventure held all manner of 
possibilities, and i arrive at waterloo with the feelings of a man who 
is about to embark on some dangerous and peculiar mission in which the 
danger he expect to run will not be the ordinary danger to life and 
limb, but of some secret character difficult to name and still more 
difficult to cope with. 

“the manor house has a high sound,” he told me, as we sat with our 
feet up and talked, “but i believe it is little more than an overgrown 
farmhouse in the desolate heather country beyond d----, and its owner, 
colonel wragge, a retired soldier with a taste for books, lives there 
practically alone, i understand, with an elderly invalid sister. so you 
need not look forward to a lively visit, unless the case provide some 
excitement of its own.” 

“which is likely?” 

by way of reply he hand me a letter marked “private.” it was dated a 
week ago, and sign “yours faithfully, horace wragge.” 

“he heard of me, you see, through captain anderson,” the doctor 
explain modestly, as though his fame were not almost world-wide; “you 
remember that indian obsession case----” 

i read the letter. why it should have been marked private was difficult 
to understand. it was very brief, direct, and to the point. it refer 
by way of introduction to captain anderson, and then state quite 
simply that the writer need help of a peculiar kind and ask for a 
personal interview--a morning interview, since it was impossible for 
him to be absent from the house at night. the letter was dignified 
even to the point of abruptness, and it is difficult to explain how 
it manage to convey to me the impression of a strong man, shaken 
and perplexed. perhaps the restraint of the wording, and the mystery 
of the affair had something to do with it; and the reference to the 
anderson case, the horror of which lay still vivid in my memory, may 
have touched the sense of something rather ominous and alarming. but, 
whatever the cause, there was no doubt that an impression of serious 
peril rose somehow out of that white paper with the few lines of firm 
writing, and the spirit of a deep uneasy ran between the words and 
reach the mind without any visible form of expression. 

“and when you saw him----?” i asked, return the letter as the train 
rush clatter noisy through clapham junction. 

“i have not seen him,” was the reply. “the man’s mind was charged to 
the brim when he wrote that; full of vivid mental pictures. notice 
the restraint of it. for the main character of his case psychometry 
could be depend upon, and the scrap of paper his hand has touched 
is sufficient to give to another mind--a sensitive and sympathetic 
mind--clear mental pictures of what is go on. i think i have a very 
sound general idea of his problem.” 

“so there may be excitement after all?” 

john silence wait a moment before he replied. 

“something very serious is amiss there,” he said gravely, at length. 
“some one--not himself, i gather,--has been meddle with a rather 
dangerous kind of gunpowder. so--yes, there may be excitement, as you 
put it.” 

“and my duties?” i asked, with a decidedly grow interest. “remember, 
i am your ‘assistant.’” 

“behave like an intelligent confidential secretary. observe everything, 
without seeming to. say nothing--nothing that means anything. be 
present at all interviews. i may ask a good deal of you, for if my 
impression are correct this is----” 

he broke off suddenly. 

“but i won’t tell you my impression yet,” he resume after a moment’s 
thought. “just watch and listen as the case proceeds. form your 
own impression and cultivate your intuitions. we come as ordinary 
visitors, of course,” he added, a twinkle showing for an instant in his 
eye; “hence, the guns.” 

though disappointed not to hear more, i recognise the wisdom of 
his words and knew how valueless my impression would be once the 
powerful suggestion of have heard his own lay behind them. i likewise 
reflect that intuition join to a sense of humour was of more use to 
a man than double the quantity of mere “brains,” as such. 

before putt the letter away, however, he hand it back, telling me 
to place it against my forehead for a few moments and then describe any 
pictures that came spontaneous into my mind. 

“don’t deliberate look for anything. just imagine you see the inside 
of the eyelid, and wait for pictures that rise against its dark screen.” 

i follow his instructions, making my mind as nearly a blank as 
possible. but no vision came. i saw nothing but the lines of light 
that pass to and fro like the change of a kaleidoscope across the 
blackness. a momentary sensation of warmth came and went curiously. 

“you see--what?” he ask presently. 

“nothing,” i was oblige to admit disappointedly; “nothing but the 
usual flash of light one always sees. only, perhaps, they are more 
vivid than usual.” 

he said nothing by way of comment or reply. 

“and they group themselves now and then,” i continued, with painful 
candour, for i long to see the pictures he had spoken of, “group 
themselves into globe and round balls of fire, and the lines that 
flash about sometimes look like triangle and crosses--almost like 
geometric figures. nothing more.” 

i open my eyes again, and gave him back the letter. 

“it make my head hot,” i said, feeling somehow unworthy for not seeing 
anything of interest. but the look in his eyes arrest my attention at 
once. 

“that sensation of heat is important,” he said significantly. 

“it was certainly real, and rather uncomfortable,” i replied, hope 
he would expand and explain. “there was a distinct feeling of 
warmth--internal warmth somewhere--oppressive in a sense.” 

“that is interesting,” he remarked, putt the letter back in his 
pocket, and settle himself in the corner with newspaper and books. 
he vouchsafe nothing more, and i knew the useless of try to 
make him talk. following his example i settled likewise with magazine 
into my corner. but when i closed my eyes again to look for the 
flash lights and the sensation of heat, i found nothing but the 
usual phantasmagoria of the day’s events--faces, scenes, memories,--and 
in due course i fell asleep and then saw nothing at all of any kind. 

when we left the train, after six hours’ travelling, at a little 
wayside station standing without tree in a world of sand and heather, 
the late october shadow had already drop their sombre veil upon the 
landscape, and the sun dip almost out of sight behind the moorland 
hills. in a high dogcart, behind a fast horse, we were soon rattling 
across the undulate stretch of an open and bleak country, the keen 
air sting our cheek and the scent of pine and bracken strong 
about us. bare hill were faint visible against the horizon, and the 
coachman pointed to a bank of distant shadow on our left where he told 
us the sea lay. occasional stone farmhouses, standing back from the 
road among straggle fir trees, and large black barn that seem to 
shift past us with a movement of their own in the gloom, were the only 
sign of humanity and civilisation that we saw, until at the end of a 
bracing five mile the lights of the lodge gate flared before us and 
we plunge into a thick grove of pine tree that conceal the manor 
house up to the moment of actual arrival. 

colonel wragge himself met us in the hall. he was the typical army 
officer who had seen service, real service, and found himself in the 
process. he was tall and well built, broad in the shoulders, but lean 
as a greyhound, with grave eyes, rather stern, and a moustache turning 
grey. i judge him to be about sixty years of age, but his movements 
show a supple of strength and agile that contradict the 
years. the face was full of character and resolution, the face of a man 
to be depend upon, and the straight grey eyes, it seem to me, wore 
a veil of perplexed anxiety that he made no attempt to disguise. the 
whole appearance of the man at once clothe the adventure with gravity 
and importance. a matter that gave such a man cause for serious alarm, 
i felt, must be something real and of genuine moment. 

his speech and manner, as he welcome us, were like his letter, simple 
and sincere. he had a nature as direct and undeviate as a bullet. 
thus, he show plainly his surprise that dr. silence had not come 
alone. 

“my confidential secretary, mr. hubbard,” the doctor said, introduce 
me, and the steady gaze and powerful shake of the hand i then 
received were well calculated, i remember thinking, to drive home the 
impression that here was a man who was not to be trifle with, and 
whose perplexity must spring from some very real and tangible cause. 
and, quite obviously, he was relieved that we had come. his welcome was 
unmistakable genuine. 

he led us at once into a room, half library, half smoking-room, 
that open out of the low-ceilinged hall. the manor house gave the 
impression of a rambling and glorify farmhouse, solid, ancient, 
comfortable, and wholly unpretentious. and so it was. only the heat of 
the place struck me as unnatural. this room with the blazing fire may 
have seem uncomfortable warm after the long drive through the night 
air; yet it seem to me that the hall itself, and the whole atmosphere 
of the house, breathe a warmth that hardly belong to well-filled 
grate or the pipes of hot air and water. it was not the heat of the 
greenhouse; it was an oppressive heat that somehow got into the head 
and mind. it stir a curious sense of uneasy in me, and i caught 
myself thinking of the sensation of warmth that had emanate from the 
letter in the train. 

i heard him thank dr. silence for have come; there was no 
preamble, and the exchange of civility was of the briefest 
description. evidently here was a man who, like my companion, love 
action rather than talk. his manner was straightforward and direct. i 
saw him in a flash: puzzled, worried, harass into a state of alarm by 
something he could not comprehend; forced to deal with things he would 
have prefer to despise, yet facing it all with dogged serious 
and making no attempt to conceal that he felt secret ashamed of his 
incompetence. 

“so i cannot offer you much entertainment beyond that of my own 
company, and the queer business that has been go on here, and is 
still go on,” he said, with a slight inclination of the head towards 
me by way of including me in his confidence. 

“i think, colonel wragge,” reply john silence impressively, “that we 
shall none of us find the time hang heavy. i gather we shall have our 
hand full.” 

the two men look at one another for the space of some seconds, and 
there was an indefinable quality in their silence which for the first 
time made me admit a swift question into my mind; and i wonder a 
little at my rash in coming with so little reflection into a big 
case of this incalculable doctor. but no answer suggest itself, and 
to withdraw was, of course, inconceivable. the gate had closed behind 
me now, and the spirit of the adventure was already besiege my mind 
with its advance guard of a thousand little hope and fears. 

explain that he would wait till after dinner to discuss anything 
serious, as no reference was ever made before his sister, he led the 
way upstairs and show us personally to our rooms; and it was just as 
i was finish dressing that a knock came at my door and dr. silence 
entered. 

he was always what is call a serious man, so that even in moments of 
comedy you felt he never lost sight of the profound gravity of life, 
but as he came across the room to me i caught the expression of his 
face and understood in a flash that he was now in his most grave and 
earnest mood. he look almost troubled. i stop fumble with my 
black tie and stared. 

“it _is_ serious,” he said, speak in a low voice, “more so even than 
i imagined. colonel wragge’s control over his thought conceal a 
great deal in my psychometrise of the letter. i look in to warn you 
to keep yourself well in hand--generally speaking.” 

“haunted house?” i asked, conscious of a distinct shiver down my back. 

but he smile grave at the question. 

“haunted house of life more likely,” he replied, and a look came into 
his eyes which i had only seen there when a human soul was in the toils 
and he was thick in the fight of rescue. he was stir in the deeps. 

“colonel wragge--or the sister?” i ask hurriedly, for the gong was 
sounding. 

“neither directly,” he said from the door. “something far older, 
something very, very remote indeed. this thing has to do with the ages, 
unless i am mistaken greatly, the age on which the mists of memory 
have long lain undisturbed.” 

he came across the floor very quick with a finger on his lips, 
look at me with a peculiar searching of gaze. 

“are you aware yet of anything--odd here?” he ask in a whisper. 
“anything you cannot quite define, for instance. tell me, hubbard, for 
i want to know all your impressions. they may help me.” 

i shook my head, avoid his gaze, for there was something in the eyes 
that scared me a little. but he was so in earnest that i set my mind 
keen searching. 

“nothing yet,” i reply truthfully, wish i could confess to a real 
emotion; “nothing but the strange heat of the place.” 

he gave a little jump forward in my direction. 

“the heat again, that’s it!” he exclaimed, as though glad of my 
corroboration. “and how would you describe it, perhaps?” he ask 
quickly, with a hand on the door knob. 

“it doesn’t seem like ordinary physical heat,” i said, casting about in 
my thought for a definition. 

“more a mental heat,” he interrupted, “a glowing of thought and desire, 
a sort of feverish warmth of the spirit. isn’t that it?” 

i admitted that he had exactly describe my sensations. 

“good!” he said, as he open the door, and with an indescribable 
gesture that combine a warning to be ready with a sign of praise for 
my correct intuition, he was gone. 

i hurried after him, and found the two men wait for me in front of 
the fire. 

“i ought to warn you,” our host was saying as i came in, “that my 
sister, whom you will meet at dinner, is not aware of the real object 
of your visit. she is under the impression that we are interested in 
the same line of study--folklore--and that your research have led to 
my seek acquaintance. she come to dinner in her chair, you know. it 
will be a great pleasure to her to meet you both. we have few visitors.” 

so that on enter the dining-room we were prepared to find miss 
wragge already at her place, seat in a sort of bath-chair. she was 
a vivacious and charming old lady, with smile expression and bright 
eyes, and she chat all through dinner with unfailing spontaneity. 
she had that face, unlined and fresh, that some people carry through 
life from the cradle to the grave; her smooth plump cheek were 
all pink and white, and her hair, still dark, was divide into two 
glossy and sleek halves on either side of a careful parting. she wore 
gold-rimmed glasses, and at her throat was a large scarab of green 
jasper that made a very handsome brooch. 

her brother and dr. silence talk little, so that most of the 
conversation was carry on between herself and me, and she told me a 
great deal about the history of the old house, most of which i fear i 
listen to with but half an ear. 

“and when cromwell stay here,” she babble on, “he occupy the very 
rooms upstairs that use to be mine. but my brother think it safe for 
me to sleep on the ground floor now in case of fire.” 

and this sentence has stay in my memory only because of the sudden 
way her brother interrupt her and instantly led the conversation 
on to another topic. the passing reference to fire seem to have 
disturbed him, and thenceforward he direct the talk himself. 

it was difficult to believe that this lively and animate old lady, 
sitting beside me and taking so eager an interest in the affair of 
life, was practically, we understood, without the use of her lower 
limbs, and that her whole existence for years had been pass between 
the sofa, the bed, and the bath-chair in which she chat so naturally 
at the dinner-table. she made no allusion to her affliction until the 
dessert was reached, and then, touching a bell, she made us a witty 
little speech about leave us “like time, on noiseless feet,” and was 
wheel out of the room by the butler and carry off to her apartments 
at the other end of the house. 

and the rest of us were not long in following suit, for dr. silence and 
myself were quite as eager to learn the nature of our errand as our 
host was to impart it to us. he led us down a long flag passage to a 
room at the very end of the house, a room provided with double doors, 
and windows, i saw, heavy shuttered. books line the wall on every 
side, and a large desk in the bow window was pile up with volumes, 
some open, some shut, some showing scraps of paper stuck between the 
leaves, and all smother in a general cataract of untidy foolscap and 
loose half sheets. 

“my study and workroom,” explain colonel wragge, with a delightful 
touch of innocent pride, as though he were a very serious scholar. 
he placed arm-chairs for us round the fire. “here,” he add 
significantly, “we shall be safe from interrupt and can talk 
securely.” 

during dinner the manner of the doctor had been all that was natural 
and spontaneous, though it was impossible for me, knowing him as i 
did, not to be aware that he was subconscious very keen alert and 
already receiving upon the ultra-sensitive surface of his mind various 
and vivid impressions; and there was now something in the gravity 
of his face, as well as in the significant tone of colonel wragge’s 
speech, and something, too, in the fact that we three were shut away in 
this private chamber about to listen to things probably strange, and 
certainly mysterious--something in all this that touched my imagination 
sharp and sent an undeniable thrill along my nerves. taking the chair 
indicate by my host, i lit my cigar and wait for the opening of the 
attack, fully conscious that we were now too far gone in the adventure 
to admit of withdrawal, and wonder a little anxious where it was 
go to lead. 

what i expect precisely, it is hard to say. nothing definite, 
perhaps. only the sudden change was dramatic. a few hour before the 
prosaic atmosphere of piccadil was about me, and now i was sitting in 
a secret chamber of this remote old building wait to hear an account 
of things that held possibly the genuine heart of terror. i thought of 
the dreary moor and hill outside, and the dark pine copse sough 
in the wind of night; i remember my companion’s singular words up in 
my bedroom before dinner; and then i turn and noted careful the 
stern countenance of the colonel as he face us and lit his big black 
cigar before speaking. 

the threshold of an adventure, i reflect as i wait for the first 
words, is always the most thrill moment--until the climax comes. 

but colonel wragge hesitated--mentally--a long time before he began. 
he talk brief of our journey, the weather, the country, and other 
comparatively trivial topics, while he sought about in his mind for an 
appropriate entry into the subject that was uppermost in the thought 
of all of us. the fact was he found it a difficult matter to speak of 
at all, and it was dr. silence who finally show him the way over the 
hedge. 

“mr hubbard will take a few note when you are ready--you won’t 
object,” he suggested; “i can give my undivided attention in this way.” 

“by all means,” turning to reach some of the loose sheet on the 
writing table, and glancing at me. he still hesitate a little, i 
thought. “the fact is,” he said apologetically, “i wonder if it 
was quite fair to trouble you so soon. the daylight might suit you 
better to hear what i have to tell. your sleep, i mean, might be less 
disturbed, perhaps.” 

“i appreciate your thoughtfulness,” john silence reply with his 
gentle smile, taking command as it were from that moment, “but really 
we are both quite immune. there is nothing, i think, that could prevent 
either of us sleeping, except--an outbreak of fire, or some such very 
physical disturbance.” 

colonel wragge raise his eyes and look fixedly at him. this 
reference to an outbreak of fire i felt sure was made with a purpose. 
it certainly had the desire effect of remove from our host’s manner 
the last sign of hesitancy. 

“forgive me,” he said. “of course, i know nothing of your method in 
matter of this kind--so, perhaps, you would like me to begin at once 
and give you an outline of the situation?” 

dr. silence bowed his agreement. “i can then take my precaution 
accordingly,” he add calmly. 

the soldier look up for a moment as though he did not quite gather 
the meaning of these words; but he made no further comment and 
turn at once to tackle a subject on which he evidently talk with 
diffidence and unwillingness. 

“it’s all so utterly out of my line of things,” he began, puff out 
cloud of cigar smoke between his words, “and there’s so little to tell 
with any real evidence behind it, that it’s almost impossible to make 
a consecutive story for you. it’s the total cumulative effect that is 
so--so disquieting.” he chose his words with care, as though determined 
not to travel one hair’s breadth beyond the truth. 

“i came into this place twenty years ago when my elder brother died,” 
he continued, “but could not afford to live here then. my sister, whom 
you met at dinner, kept house for him till the end, and during all 
these years, while i was seeing service abroad, she had an eye to the 
place--for we never got a satisfactory tenant--and saw that it was not 
allow to go to ruin. i myself took possession, however, only a year 
ago. 

“my brother,” he went on, after a perceptible pause, “spent much of 
his time away, too. he was a great traveller, and fill the house 
with stuff he brought home from all over the world. the laundry--a 
small detached building beyond the servants’ quarters--he turn into a 
regular little museum. the curio and things i have clear away--they 
collected dust and were always get broken--but the laundry-house 
you shall see tomorrow.” 

colonel wragge spoke with such deliberation and with so many pause 
that this beginning took him a long time. but at this point he came to 
a full stop altogether. evidently there was something he wish to say 
that cost him considerable effort. at length he look up steady into 
my companion’s face. 

“may i ask you--that is, if you won’t think it strange,” he said, and a 
sort of hush came over his voice and manner, “whether you have notice 
anything at all unusual--anything queer, since you came into the house?” 

dr. silence answer without a moment’s hesitation. 

“i have,” he said. “there is a curious sensation of heat in the place.” 

“ah!” exclaim the other, with a slight start. “you _have_ notice it. 
this unaccountable heat----” 

“but its cause, i gather, is not in the house itself--but outside,” i 
was astonish to hear the doctor add. 

colonel wragge rose from his chair and turn to unhook a frame map 
that hung upon the wall. i got the impression that the movement was 
made with the deliberate purpose of conceal his face. 

“your diagnosis, i believe, is amazing accurate,” he said after a 
moment, turning round with the map in his hands. “though, of course, i 
can have no idea how you should guess----” 

john silence shrug his shoulder expressively. “merely my 
impression,” he said. “if you pay attention to impressions, and do not 
allow them to be confuse by deduction of the intellect, you will 
often find them surprisingly, uncannily, accurate.” 

colonel wragge resume his seat and laid the map upon his knees. his 
face was very thoughtful as he plunge abrupt again into his story. 

“on coming into possession,” he said, look us alternate in 
the face, “i found a crop of story of the most extraordinary and 
impossible kind i had ever heard--stories which at first i treat with 
amuse indifference, but later was forced to regard seriously, if only 
to keep my servants. these story i thought i trace to the fact of my 
brother’s death--and, in a way, i think so still.” 

he leant forward and hand the map to dr. silence. 

“it’s an old plan of the estate,” he explained, “but accurate enough 
for our purpose, and i wish you would note the position of the 
plantation marked upon it, especially those near the house. that 
one,” indicate the spot with his finger, “is call the twelve acre 
plantation. it was just there, on the side nearest the house, that my 
brother and the head keeper met their deaths.” 

he spoke as a man forced to recognise fact that he deplored, and would 
have prefer to leave untouched--things he personally would rather 
have treat with ridicule if possible. it made his words peculiarly 
dignified and impressive, and i listen with an increase uneasy 
as to the sort of help the doctor would look to me for later. it seem 
as though i were a spectator of some drama of mystery in which any 
moment i might be summon to play a part. 

“it was twenty years ago,” continue the colonel, “but there was much 
talk about it at the time, unfortunately, and you may, perhaps, have 
heard of the affair. stride, the keeper, was a passionate, hot-tempered 
man, but i regret to say, so was my brother, and quarrel between them 
seem to have been frequent.” 

“i do not recall the affair,” said the doctor. “may i ask what was the 
cause of death?” something in his voice made me prick up my ear for 
the reply. 

“the keeper, it was said, from suffocation. and at the inquest the 
doctor aver that both men had been dead the same length of time 
when found.” 

“and your brother?” ask john silence, notice the omission, and 
listen intently. 

“equally mysterious,” said our host, speak in a low voice with 
effort. “but there was one distressing feature i think i ought to 
mention. for those who saw the face--i did not see it myself--and 
though stride carry a gun its chambers were undischarged----” he 
stammer and hesitate with confusion. again that sense of terror 
move between his words. he stuck. 

“yes,” said the chief listener sympathetically. 

“my brother’s face, they said, look as though it had been scorched. 
it had been swept, as it were, by something that burned--blasted. it 
was, i am told, quite dreadful. the body were found lie side by 
side, face downwards, both point away from the wood, as though they 
had been in the act of running, and not more than a dozen yard from 
its edge.” 

dr. silence made no comment. he appear to be study the map 
attentively. 

“i did not see the face myself,” repeated the other, his manner somehow 
express the sense of awe he contrived to keep out of his voice, 
“but my sister unfortunately did, and her present state i believe to 
be entire due to the shock it gave to her nerves. she never can be 
brought to refer to it, naturally, and i am even inclined to think that 
the memory has merciful been permit to vanish from her mind. but 
she spoke of it at the time as a face swept by flame--blasted.” 

john silence look up from his contemplation of the map, but with the 
air of one who wish to listen, not to speak, and presently colonel 
wragge went on with his account. he stood on the mat, his broad 
shoulder hiding most of the mantelpiece. 

“they all centre about this particular plantation, these stories. that 
was to be expected, for the people here are as superstitious as ireland 
peasantry, and though i made one or two example among them to stop the 
foolish talk, it had no effect, and new version came to my ear every 
week. you may imagine how little good dismissal did, when i tell you 
that the servant dismiss themselves. it was not the house servants, 
but the men who work on the estate outside. the keeper gave notice 
one after another, none of them with any reason i could accept; the 
forester refuse to enter the wood, and the beater to beat in it. 
word flew all over the countryside that twelve acre plantation was a 
place to be avoided, day or night. 

“there came a point,” the colonel went on, now well in his swing, “when 
i felt compel to make investigate on my own account. i could 
not kill the thing by ignore it; so i collected and analyse the 
story at first hand. for this twelve acre wood, you will see by the 
map, come rather near home. its lower end, if you will look, almost 
touch the end of the back lawn, as i will show you tomorrow, and its 
dense growth of pine form the chief protection the house enjoy from 
the east wind that blow up from the sea. and in olden days, before my 
brother interfere with it and frightened all the game away, it was one 
of the best pheasant covert on the whole estate.” 

“and what form, if i may ask, did this interference take?” ask dr. 
silence. 

“in detail, i cannot tell you, for i do not know--except that i 
understand it was the subject of his frequent difference with the head 
keeper; but during the last two years of his life, when he gave up 
travel and settled down here, he took a special interest in this 
wood, and for some unaccountable reason began to build a low stone wall 
round it. this wall was never finished, but you shall see the ruins 
tomorrow in the daylight.” 

“and the result of your investigations--these stories, i mean?” the 
doctor broke in, anxious to keep him to the main issues. 

“yes, i’m coming to that,” he said slowly, “but the wood first, for 
this wood out of which they grew like mushroom has nothing in any way 
peculiar about it. it is very thick grown, and rise to a clear 
part in the centre, a sort of mound where there is a circle of large 
boulders--old druid stones, i’m told. at another place there’s a small 
pond. there’s nothing distinctive about it that i could mention--just 
an ordinary pine-wood, a very ordinary pine-wood--only the tree are a 
bit twist in the trunks, some of ’em, and very dense. nothing more. 

“and the stories? well, none of them had anything to do with my poor 
brother, or the keeper, as you might have expected; and they were all 
odd--such odd things, i mean, to invent or imagine. i never could make 
out how these people got such notions into their heads.” 

he pause a moment to relight his cigar. 

“there’s no regular path through it,” he resumed, puff vigorously, 
“but the field round it are constant used, and one of the garden 
whose cottage lie over that way declared he often saw moving lights in 
it at night, and luminous shape like globe of fire over the tops of 
the trees, skim and floating, and making a soft hiss sound--most 
of ’em said that, in fact--and another man saw shape flit in and 
out among the trees, things that were neither men nor animals, and all 
faint luminous. no one ever pretended to see human forms--always 
queer, huge things they could not properly describe. sometimes the 
whole wood was lit up, and one fellow--he’s still here and you shall 
see him--has a most circumstantial yarn about have seen great stars 
lie on the ground round the edge of the wood at regular intervals----” 

“what kind of stars?” put in john silence sharply, in a sudden way that 
made me start. 

“oh, i don’t know quite; ordinary stars, i think he said, only very 
large, and apparently blazing as though the ground was alight. he was 
too terrify to go close and examine, and he has never seen them 
since.” 

he stoop and stir the fire into a welcome blaze--welcome for its 
blaze of light rather than for its heat. in the room there was already 
a strange pervade sensation of warmth that was oppressive in its 
effect and far from comforting. 

“of course,” he went on, straighten up again on the mat, “this was 
all commonplace enough--this seeing lights and figures at night. most 
of these fellow drink, and imagination and terror between them may 
account for almost anything. but other saw things in broad daylight. 
one of the woodmen, a sober, respectable man, took the shortcut home to 
his midday meal, and swore he was follow the whole length of the wood 
by something that never show itself, but dodge from tree to tree, 
always keeping out of sight, yet solid enough to make the branch sway 
and the twig snap on the ground. and it made a noise, he declared--but 
really”--the speaker stop and gave a short laugh--“it’s too 
absurd----” 

“_please!_” insist the doctor; “for it is these small detail that 
give me the best clue always.” 

“----it made a crackling noise, he said, like a bonfire. those were his 
very words: like the crackling of a bonfire,” finished the soldier, 
with a repetition of his short laugh. 

“most interesting,” dr. silence observe gravely. “please omit nothing.” 

“yes” he went on, “and it was soon after that the fire began--the 
fire in the wood. they start mysterious burning in the patch of 
coarse white grass that cover the more open parts of the plantation. no 
one ever actually saw them start, but many, myself among the number, 
have seen them burning and smouldering. they are always small and 
circular in shape, and for all the world like a picnic fire. the head 
keeper has a dozen explanations, from sparks flying out of the house 
chimney to the sunlight focus through a dewdrop, but none of them, 
i must admit, convince me as being in the least likely or probable. 
they are most singular, i consider, most singular, these mysterious 
fires, and i am glad to say that they come only at rather long 
interval and never seem to spread. 

“but the keeper had other queer story as well, and about things that 
are verifiable. he declared that no life ever willing enter the 
plantation; more, that no life exist in it at all. no bird nest in 
the trees, or flew into their shade. he set countless traps, but never 
caught so much as a rabbit or a weasel. animal avoid it, and more 
than once he had picked up dead creature round the edge that bore no 
obvious sign of how they had met their death. 

“moreover, he told me one extraordinary tale about his retriever 
chase some invisible creature across the field one day when he was 
out with his gun. the dog sudden pointed at something in the field at 
his feet, and then gave chase, yelp like a mad thing. it follow 
its imaginary quarry to the border of the wood, and then went in--a 
thing he had never known it to do before. the moment it cross the 
edge--it is darkish in there even in daylight--it began fight 
in the most frenzied and terrific fashion. it made him afraid to 
interfere, he said. and at last, when the dog came out, hanging its 
tail down and panting, he found something like white hair stuck to its 
jaws, and brought it to show me. i tell you these detail because----” 

“they are important, believe me,” the doctor stop him. “and you have 
it still, this hair?” he asked. 

“it disappear in the oddest way,” the colonel explained. “it was 
curious look stuff, something like asbestos, and i sent it to be 
analyse by the local chemist. but either the man got wind of its 
origin, or else he didn’t like the look of it for some reason, because 
he return it to me and said it was neither animal, vegetable, nor 
mineral, so far as he could make out, and he didn’t wish to have 
anything to do with it. i put it away in paper, but a week later, on 
opening the package--it was gone! oh, the story are simply endless. i 
could tell you hundred all on the same lines.” 

“and personal experience of your own, colonel wragge?” ask john 
silence earnestly, his manner showing the greatest possible interest 
and sympathy. 

the soldier gave an almost imperceptible start. he look distinct 
uncomfortable. 

“nothing, i think,” he said slowly, “nothing--er--i should like to rely 
on. i mean nothing i have the right to speak of, perhaps--yet.” 

his mouth closed with a snap. dr. silence, after wait a little to 
see if he would add to his reply, did not seek to press him on the 
point. 

“well,” he resume presently, and as though he would speak 
contemptuously, yet dare not, “this sort of thing has gone on at 
interval ever since. it spread like wildfire, of course, mysterious 
chatter of this kind, and people began trespass all over the estate, 
coming to see the wood, and making themselves a general nuisance. 
notice of man-traps and spring-guns only seem to increase their 
persistence; and--think of it,” he snorted, “some local research 
society actually wrote and ask permission for one of their member 
to spend a night in the wood! bold fools, who didn’t write for 
leave, came and took away bit of bark from the tree and gave them 
to clairvoyants, who invent in their turn a further batch of tales. 
there was simply no end to it all.” 

“most distressing and annoying, i can well believe,” interpose the 
doctor. 

“then sudden the phenomena cease as mysterious as they had begun, 
and the interest flagged. the tale stopped. people got interested in 
something else. it all seem to die out. this was last july. i can 
tell you exactly, for i’ve kept a diary more or less of what happened.” 

“ah!” 

“but now, quite recently, within the past three weeks, it has all 
revive again with a rush--with a kind of furious attack, so to speak. 
it has really become unbearable. you may imagine what it means, and the 
general state of affairs, when i say that the possibility of leave 
has occur to me.” 

“incendiarism?” suggest dr. silence, half under his breath, but not 
so low that colonel wragge did not hear him. 

“by jove, sir, you take the very words out of my mouth!” exclaim 
the astonish man, glancing from the doctor to me and from me to the 
doctor, and rattling the money in his pocket as though some explanation 
of my friend’s divine powers were to be found that way. 

“it’s only that you are thinking very vividly,” the doctor said 
quietly, “and your thought form pictures in my mind before you utter 
them. it’s merely a little elementary thought-reading.” 

his intention, i saw, was not to perplex the good man, but to impress 
him with his powers so as to ensure obedience later. 

“good lord! i had no idea----” he did not finish the sentence, and 
dive again abrupt into his narrative. 

“i did not see anything myself, i must admit, but the story of 
independent eye-witnesses were to the effect that lines of light, like 
stream of thin fire, move through the wood and sometimes were seen 
to shoot out precisely as flame might shoot out--in the direction of 
this house. there,” he explained, in a loud voice that made me jump, 
point with a thick finger to the map, “where the westerly fringe of 
the plantation come up to the end of the lower lawn at the back of 
the house--where it links on to those dark patches, which are laurel 
shrubberies, running right up to the back premises--that’s where these 
lights were seen. they pass from the wood to the shrubberies, and 
in this way reach the house itself. like silent rockets, one man 
describe them, rapid as lightning and exceedingly bright.” 

“and this evidence you spoke of?” 

“they actually reach the side of the house. they’ve left a mark of 
scorching on the walls--the wall of the laundry building at the other 
end. you shall see ’em tomorrow.” he pointed to the map to indicate the 
spot, and then straighten himself and glare about the room as though 
he had said something no one could believe and expect contradiction. 

“scorched--just as the face were,” the doctor murmured, look 
significant at me. 

“scorched--yes,” repeated the colonel, failing to catch the rest of the 
sentence in his excitement. 

there was a prolonged silence in the room, in which i heard the 
gurgle of the oil in the lamp and the click of the coal and the 
heavy breathing of our host. the most unwelcome sensation were 
creep about my spine, and i wonder whether my companion would 
scorn me utterly if i ask to sleep on the sofa in his room. it was 
eleven o’clock, i saw by the clock on the mantelpiece. we had cross 
the divide line and were now well in the movement of the adventure. 
the fight between my interest and my dread became acute. but, even if 
turning back had been possible, i think the interest would have easily 
gain the day. 

“i have enemies, of course,” i heard the colonel’s rough voice break 
into the pause presently, “and have discharge a number of servants----” 

“it’s not that,” put in john silence briefly. 

“you think not? in a sense i am glad, and yet--there are some things 
that can be met and dealt with----” 

he left the sentence unfinished, and look down at the floor with 
an expression of grim severity that betray a momentary glimpse of 
character. this fight man loathe and abhor the thought of an 
enemy he could not see and come to grip with. presently he move over 
and sat down in the chair between us. something like a sigh escape 
him. dr. silence said nothing. 

“my sister, of course, is kept in ignorance, as far as possible, of all 
this,” he said disconnectedly, and as if talk to himself. “but even 
if she knew, she would find matter-of-fact explanations. i only wish i 
could. i’m sure they exist.” 

there came then an interval in the conversation that was very 
significant. it did not seem a real pause, or the silence real silence, 
for both men continue to think so rapid and strong that one almost 
imagine their thought clothe themselves in words in the air of the 
room. i was more than a little key up with the strange excitement 
of all i had heard, but what stimulate my nerves more than anything 
else was the obvious fact that the doctor was clearly upon the trail of 
discovery. in his mind at that moment, i believe, he had already solve 
the nature of this perplex psychic problem. his face was like a 
mask, and he employ the absolute minimum of gesture and words. all 
his energy were direct inwards, and by those incalculable method 
and process he had master with such infinite patience and study, i 
felt sure he was already in touch with the forces behind these singular 
phenomena and lay his deep plan for bring them into the open, 
and then effectively dealing with them. 

colonel wragge meanwhile grew more and more fidgety. from time to time 
he turn towards my companion, as though about to speak, yet always 
change his mind at the last moment. once he went over and open 
the door suddenly, apparently to see if any one were listen at 
the keyhole, for he disappear a moment between the two doors, and i 
then heard him open the outer one. he stood there for some seconds and 
made a noise as though he were sniff the air like a dog. then he 
closed both door cautious and came back to the fireplace. a strange 
excitement seem grow upon him. evidently he was try to make up 
his mind to say something that he found it difficult to say. and john 
silence, as i rightly judged, was wait patient for him to choose 
his own opportunity and his own way of saying it. at last he turn and 
face us, square his great shoulders, and stiffening perceptibly. 

dr. silence look up sympathetically. 

“your own experience help me most,” he observe quietly. 

“the fact is,” the colonel said, speak very low, “this past week 
there have been outbreak of fire in the house itself. three separate 
outbreaks--and all--in my sister’s room.” 

“yes,” the doctor said, as if this was just what he had expect to 
hear. 

“utterly unaccountable--all of them,” add the other, and then sat 
down. i began to understand something of the reason of his excitement. 
he was realise at last that the “natural” explanation he had held to 
all along was becoming impossible, and he hate it. it made him angry. 

“fortunately,” he went on, “she was out each time and do not know. 
but i have made her sleep now in a room on the ground floor.” 

“a wise precaution,” the doctor said simply. he ask one or two 
questions. the fire had start in the curtains--once by the window 
and once by the bed. the third time smoke had been discover by the 
maid coming from the cupboard, and it was found that miss wragge’s 
clothes hanging on the hook were smouldering. the doctor listen 
attentively, but made no comment. 

“and now can you tell me,” he said presently, “what your own feeling 
about it is--your general impression?” 

“it sound foolish to say so,” reply the soldier, after a moment’s 
hesitation, “but i feel exactly as i have often felt on active service 
in my indian campaigns: just as if the house and all in it were in a 
state of siege; as though a conceal enemy were encamp about us--in 
ambush somewhere.” he utter a soft nervous laugh. “as if the next 
sign of smoke would precipitate a panic--a dreadful panic.” 

the picture came before me of the night shadow the house, and the 
twist pine tree he had describe crowd about it, conceal some 
powerful enemy; and, glancing at the resolute face and figure of the 
old soldier, forced at length to his confession, i understood something 
of all he had been through before he sought the assistance of john 
silence. 

“and tomorrow, unless i am mistaken, is full moon,” said the doctor 
suddenly, watch the other’s face for the effect of his apparently 
careless words. 

colonel wragge gave an uncontrollable start, and his face for the first 
time show unmistakable pallor. 

“what in the world----?” he began, his lip quivering. 

“only that i am beginning to see light in this extraordinary affair,” 
return the other calmly, “and, if my theory is correct, each month 
when the moon is at the full should witness an increase in the activity 
of the phenomena.” 

“i don’t see the connection,” colonel wragge answer almost savagely, 
“but i am bound to say my diary bear you out.” he wore the most 
puzzle expression i have ever seen upon an honest face, but he 
abhor this additional corroboration of an explanation that perplexed 
him. 

“i confess,” he repeated; “i cannot see the connection.” 

“why should you?” said the doctor, with his first laugh that evening. 
he got up and hung the map upon the wall again. “but i do--because 
these things are my special study--and let me add that i have yet 
to come across a problem that is not natural, and has not a natural 
explanation. it’s merely a question of how much one knows--and admits.” 

colonel wragge eye him with a new and curious respect in his face. but 
his feelings were soothed. moreover, the doctor’s laugh and change of 
manner came as a relief to all, and broke the spell of grave suspense 
that had held us so long. we all rose and stretch our limbs, and took 
little walk about the room. 

“i am glad, dr. silence, if you will allow me to say so, that you are 
here,” he said simply, “very glad indeed. and now i fear i have kept 
you both up very late,” with a glance to include me, “for you must be 
tired, and ready for your beds. i have told you all there is to tell,” 
he added, “and tomorrow you must feel perfectly free to take any steps 
you think necessary.” 

the end was abrupt, yet natural, for there was nothing more to say, and 
neither of these men talk for mere talking’s sake. 

out in the cold and chilly hall he lit our candle and took us 
upstairs. the house was at rest and still, every one asleep. we move 
softly. through the window on the stairs we saw the moonlight fall 
across the lawn, throw deep shadows. the near pine tree were just 
visible in the distance, a wall of impenetrable blackness. 

our host came for a moment to our rooms to see that we had everything. 
he pointed to a coil of strong rope lie beside the window, fasten 
to the wall by means of an iron ring. evidently it had been recently 
put in. 

“i don’t think we shall need it,” dr. silence said, with a smile. 

“i trust not,” reply our host gravely. “i sleep quite close to you 
across the landing,” he whispered, point to his door, “and if 
you--if you want anything in the night you will know where to find me.” 

he wish us pleasant dream and disappear down the passage into his 
room, shading the candle with his big muscular hand from the draughts. 

john silence stop me a moment before i went. 

“you know what it is?” i asked, with an excitement that even overcame 
my weariness. 

“yes,” he said, “i’m almost sure. and you?” 

“not the smallest notion.” 

he look disappointed, but not half as disappointed as i felt. 

“egypt,” he whispered, “egypt!” 


ii 

nothing happen to disturb me in the night--nothing, that is, except a 
nightmare in which colonel wragge chase me amid thin streak of fire, 
and his sister always prevent my escape by sudden rising up out of 
the ground in her chair--dead. the deep bay of dogs woke me once, 
just before the dawn, it must have been, for i saw the window frame 
against the sky; there was a flash of lightning, too, i thought, as i 
turn over in bed. and it was warm, for october oppressive warm. 

it was after eleven o’clock when our host suggest go out with 
the guns, these, we understood, being a somewhat thin disguise for 
our true purpose. personally, i was glad to be in the open air, for 
the atmosphere of the house was heavy with presentiment. the sense 
of impending disaster hung over all. fear stalk the passages, and 
lurk in the corner of every room. it was a house haunted, but really 
haunted; not by some vague shadow of the dead, but by a definite 
though incalculable influence that was active alive, and dangerous. 
at the least smell of smoke the entire household quivered. an odour 
of burning, i was convinced, would paralyse all the inmates. for the 
servants, though professedly ignorant by the master’s unspoken orders, 
yet share the common dread; and the hideous uncertainty, join with 
this display of so spiteful and calculate a spirit of malignity, 
provided a kind of black doom that drape not only the walls, but also 
the mind of the people living within them. 

only the bright and cheerful vision of old miss wragge being pushed 
about the house in her noiseless chair, chat and nod brisk 
to every one she met, prevent us from give way entire to the 
depression which govern the majority. the sight of her was like a 
gleam of sunshine through the depths of some ill-omened wood, and just 
as we went out i saw her being wheel along by her attendant into the 
sunshine of the back lawn, and caught her cheery smile as she turn 
her head and wish us good sport. 

the morning was october at its best. sunshine glisten on the 
dew-drenched grass and on leaves turn golden-red. the dainty 
messenger of coming hoar-frost were already in the air, asearch for 
permanent winter quarters. from the wide moor that everywhere swept up 
against the sky, like a purple sea splash by the occasional grey of 
rocky clefts, there stole down the cool and perfume wind of the west. 
and the keen taste of the sea ran through all like a master-flavour, 
borne over the space perhaps by the seagull that cry and circle 
high in the air. 

but our host took little interest in this sparkle beauty, and had 
no thought of showing off the scenery of his property. his mind was 
otherwise intent, and, for that matter, so were our own. 

“those bleak moor and hill stretch unbroken for hours,” he said, with 
a sweep of the hand; “and over there, some four miles,” point in 
another direction, “lies s---- bay, a long, swampy inlet of the sea, 
haunt by myriad of seabirds. on the other side of the house are the 
plantation and pine-woods. i thought we would get the dogs and go 
first to the twelve acre wood i told you about last night. it’s quite 
near.” 

we found the dogs in the stable, and i recall the deep bay of the 
night when a fine bloodhound and two great dane leap out to greet 
us. singular companion for guns, i thought to myself, as we struck out 
across the field and the great creature bound and ran beside us, 
nose to ground. 

the conversation was scanty. john silence’s grave face did not 
encourage talk. he wore the expression i knew well--that look of 
earnest solicitude which meant that his whole being was deep absorb 
and preoccupied. frightened, i had never seen him, but anxious 
often--it always move me to witness it--and he was anxious now. 

“on the way back you shall see the laundry building,” colonel wragge 
observe shortly, for he, too, found little to say. “we shall attract 
less attention then.” 

yet not all the crisp beauty of the morning seem able to dispel the 
feelings of uneasy dread that gather increasingly about our mind as 
we went. 

in a very few minutes a clump of pine tree conceal the house from 
view, and we found ourselves on the outskirts of a densely-grown 
plantation of conifers. colonel wragge stop abruptly, and, produce 
a map from his pocket, explain once more very brief its position 
with regard to the house. he show how it ran up almost to the wall 
of the laundry building--though at the moment beyond our actual 
view--and pointed to the window of his sister’s bedroom where the 
fire had been. the room, now empty, look straight on to the wood. 
then, glancing nervous about him, and calling the dogs to heel, 
he propose that we should enter the plantation and make as thorough 
examination of it as we thought worth while. the dogs, he added, might 
perhaps be persuade to accompany us a little way--and he pointed to 
where they cower at his feet--but he doubt it. “neither voice 
nor whip will get them very far, i’m afraid,” he said. “i know by 
experience.” 

“if you have no objection,” reply dr. silence, with decision, and 
speak almost for the first time, “we will make our examination 
alone--mr. hubbard and myself. it will be best so.” 

his tone was absolutely final, and the colonel acquiesce so polite 
that even a less intuitive man than myself must have seen that he was 
genuine relieved. 

“you doubtless have good reasons,” he said. 

“merely that i wish to obtain my impression uncoloured. this delicate 
clue i am working on might be so easily blur by the thought-currents 
of another mind with strong preconceived ideas.” 

“perfectly. i understand,” rejoin the soldier, though with an 
expression of countenance that plainly contradict his words. “then i 
will wait here with the dogs; and we’ll have a look at the laundry on 
our way home.” 

i turn once to look back as we clamber over the low stone wall 
built by the late owner, and saw his straight, soldierly figure 
standing in the sunlit field watch us with a curious intent look 
on his face. there was something to me incongruous, yet distinct 
pathetic, in the man’s effort to meet all far-fetched explanation 
of the mystery with contempt, and at the same time in his stolid, 
unswerving investigate of it all. he nod at me and made a gesture 
of farewell with his hand. that picture of him, standing in the 
sunshine with his big dogs, steady watch us, remains with me to 
this day. 

dr. silence led the way in among the twist trunks, plant close 
together in serried ranks, and i follow sharp at his heels. the 
moment we were out of sight he turn and put down his gun against the 
roots of a big tree, and i did likewise. 

“we shall hardly want these cumbersome weapon of murder,” he observed, 
with a passing smile. 

“you are sure of your clue, then?” i ask at once, burst with 
curiosity, yet fear to betray it lest he should think me unworthy. 
his own method were so absolutely simple and untheatrical. 

“i am sure of my clue,” he answer gravely. “and i think we have come 
just in time. you shall know in due course. for the present--be content 
to follow and observe. and think steadily. the support of your mind 
will help me.” 

his voice had that quiet mastery in it which leads men to face death 
with a sort of happiness and pride. i would have follow him anywhere 
at that moment. at the same time his words convey a sense of dread 
seriousness. i caught the thrill of his confidence; but also, in this 
broad light of day, i felt the measure of alarm that lay behind. 

“you still have no strong impressions?” he asked. “nothing happen in 
the night, for instance? no vivid dreamings?” 

he look close for my answer, i was aware. 

“i slept almost an unbroken sleep. i was tremendous tired, you know, 
and, but for the oppressive heat----” 

“good! you still notice the heat, then,” he said to himself, rather 
than expect an answer. “and the lightning?” he added, “that 
lightning out of a clear sky--that flashing--did you notice _that_?” 

i answer truly that i thought i had seen a flash during a moment of 
wakefulness, and he then drew my attention to certain fact before 
moving on. 

“you remember the sensation of warmth when you put the letter to your 
forehead in the train; the heat generally in the house last evening, 
and, as you now mention, in the night. you heard, too, the colonel’s 
story about the appearances of fire in this wood and in the house 
itself, and the way his brother and the gamekeeper came to their death 
twenty years ago.” 

i nodded, wonder what in the world it all meant. 

“and you get no clue from these facts?” he asked, a trifle surprised. 

i search every corner of my mind and imagination for some inkling of 
his meaning, but was oblige to admit that i understood nothing so far. 

“never mind; you will later. and now,” he added, “we will go over the 
wood and see what we can find.” 

his words explain to me something of his method. we were to keep our 
mind alert and report to each other the least fancy that cross the 
picture-gallery of our thoughts. then, just as we started, he turn 
again to me with a final warning. 

“and, for your safety,” he said earnestly, “imagine _now_--and for that 
matter, imagine always until we leave this place--imagine with the 
utmost keenness, that you are surround by a shell that protect you. 
picture yourself inside a protective envelope, and build it up with the 
most intense imagination you can evoke. pour the whole force of your 
thought and will into it. believe vivid all through this adventure 
that such a shell, construct of your thought, will and imagination, 
surround you completely, and that nothing can pierce it to attack.” 

he spoke with dramatic conviction, gaze hard at me as though to 
enforce his meaning, and then move forward and began to pick his way 
over the rough, tussocky ground into the wood. and meanwhile, knowing 
the efficacy of his prescription, i adopt it to the best of my 
ability. 

the tree at once closed about us like the night. their branch met 
overhead in a continuous tangle, their stem crept close and closer, 
the bramble undergrowth thicken and multiplied. we tore our trousers, 
scratch our hands, and our eyes fill with fine dust that made it 
most difficult to avoid the clinging, prickly network of branch and 
creepers. coarse white grass that caught our feet like string grew here 
and there in patches. it crown the lump of peaty growth that stuck 
up like human heads, fantastic dressed, thrust up at us out of 
the ground with crest of dead hair. we stumble and flounder among 
them. it was hard going, and i could well conceive it impossible to 
find a way at all in the night-time. we jumped, when possible, from 
tussock to tussock, and it seem as though we were spring among 
head on a battlefield, and that this dead white grass conceal eyes 
that turn to stare as we passed. 

here and there the sunlight shot in with vivid spot of white light, 
dazzle the sight, but only making the surrounding gloom deep by 
contrast and on two occasion we pass dark circular place in the 
grass where fire had eaten their mark and left a ring of ashes. dr. 
silence pointed to them, but without comment and without pausing, and 
the sight of them woke in me a singular realisation of the dread that 
lay so far only just out of sight in this adventure. 

it was exhaust work, and heavy going. we kept close together. the 
warmth, too, was extraordinary. yet it did not seem the warmth of the 
body due to violent exertion, but rather an inner heat of the mind that 
laid glowing hand of fire upon the heart and set the brain in a kind 
of steady blaze. when my companion found himself too far in advance, 
he wait for me to come up. the place had evidently been untouched by 
hand of man, keeper, forester or sportsman, for many a year; and my 
thoughts, as we advanced painfully, were not unlike the state of the 
wood itself--dark, confused, full of a haunting wonder and the shadow 
of fear. 

by this time all sign of the open field behind us were hid. no 
single gleam penetrated. we might have been grope in the heart of 
some primeval forest. then, suddenly, the bramble and tussock and 
string-like grass came to an end; the tree open out; and the ground 
began to slope upwards towards a large central mound. we had reach 
the middle of the plantation, and before us stood the broken druid 
stone our host had mentioned. we walk easily up the little hill, 
between the sparse stems, and, rest upon one of the ivy-covered 
boulders, look round upon a comparatively open space, as large, 
perhaps, as a small london square. 

thinking of the ceremony and sacrifice this rough circle of 
prehistoric monolith might have witnessed, i look up into my 
companion’s face with an unspoken question. but he read my thought and 
shook his head. 

“our mystery has nothing to do with these dead symbols,” he said, 
“but with something perhaps even more ancient, and of another country 
altogether.” 

“egypt?” i said half under my breath, hopeless puzzled, but recall 
his words in my bedroom. 

he nodded. mental i still floundered, but he seem intense 
preoccupied and it was no time for ask questions; so while his words 
circle unintelligib in my mind i look round at the scene before 
me, glad of the opportunity to recover breath and some measure of 
composure. but hardly had i time to notice the twist and contort 
shape of many of the pine tree close at hand when dr. silence lean 
over and touched me on the shoulder. he pointed down the slope. and the 
look i saw in his eyes key up every nerve in my body to its utmost 
pitch. 

a thin, almost imperceptible column of blue smoke was rising among the 
tree some twenty yard away at the foot of the mound. it curl up and 
up, and disappear from sight among the tangle branch overhead. it 
was scarcely thick than the smoke from a small brand of burning wood. 

“protect yourself! imagine your shell strongly,” whisper the doctor 
sharply, “and follow me closely.” 

he rose at once and move swift down the slope towards the smoke, 
and i followed, afraid to remain alone. i heard the soft crunch of 
our steps on the pine needles. over his shoulder i watch the thin 
blue spiral, without once taking my eyes off it. i hardly know how 
to describe the peculiar sense of vague horror inspired in me by the 
sight of that streak of smoke pencil its way upwards among the 
dark trees. and the sensation of increase heat as we approach was 
phenomenal. it was like walking towards a glowing yet invisible fire. 

as we drew near his pace slackened. then he stop and pointed, and 
i saw a small circle of burnt grass upon the ground. the tussock were 
blacken and smouldering, and from the centre rose this line of smoke, 
pale, blue, steady. then i notice a movement of the atmosphere beside 
us, as if the warm air were rising and the cooler air rush in to 
take its place: a little centre of wind in the stillness. overhead the 
bough stir and tremble where the smoke disappeared. otherwise, not 
a tree sighed, not a sound made itself heard. the wood was still as a 
graveyard. a horrible idea came to me that the course of nature was 
about to change without warning, _had_ change a little already, that 
the sky would drop, or the surface of the earth crash inwards like a 
broken bubble. something, certainly, reach up to the citadel of my 
reason, cause its throne to shake. 

john silence move forward again. i could not see his face, but his 
attitude was plainly one of resolution, of muscle and mind ready for 
vigorous action. we were within ten feet of the blacken circle when 
the smoke of a sudden cease to rise, and vanished. the tail of the 
column disappear in the air above, and at the same instant it seem 
to me that the sensation of heat pass from my face, and the motion 
of the wind was gone. the calm spirit of the fresh october day resume 
command. 

side by side we advanced and examine the place. the grass was 
smouldering, the ground still hot. the circle of burn earth was a 
foot to a foot and a half in diameter. it look like an ordinary 
picnic fire-place. i bent down cautious to look, but in a second 
i sprang back with an involuntary cry of alarm, for, as the doctor 
stamp on the ashes to prevent them spreading, a sound of hiss rose 
from the spot as though he had kick a living creature. this hiss 
was faint audible in the air. it move past us, away towards the 
thick portion of the wood in the direction of our field, and in a 
second dr. silence had left the fire and start in pursuit. 

and then began the most extraordinary hunt of invisible i can ever 
conceive. 

he went fast even at the beginning, and, of course, it was perfectly 
obvious that he was following something. to judge by the poise of his 
head he kept his eyes steady at a certain level--just above the 
height of a man--and the consequence was he stumble a good deal over 
the roughness of the ground. the hiss sound had stopped. there was 
no sound of any kind, and what he saw to follow was utterly beyond me. 
i only know, that in mortal dread of being left behind, and with a 
biting curiosity to see whatever there was to be seen, i follow as 
quick as i could, and even then barely succeed in keeping up with 
him. 

and, as we went, the whole mad jumble of the colonel’s story ran 
through my brain, touching a sense of frightened laughter that was only 
held in check by the sight of this earnest, hurry figure before me. 
for john silence at work inspired me with a kind of awe. he look 
so diminutive among these giant twist trees, while yet i knew that 
his purpose and his knowledge were so great, and even in hurry he was 
dignified. the fancy that we were play some queer, exaggerate game 
together met the fact that we were two men dance upon the brink of 
some possible tragedy, and the mingle of the two emotion in my mind 
was both grotesque and terrifying. 

he never turn in his mad chase, but pushed rapid on, while i pant 
after him like a figure in some unreasoning nightmare. and, as i ran, 
it came upon me that he had been aware all the time, in his quiet, 
internal way, of many things that he had kept for his own secret 
consideration; he had been watching, waiting, plan from the very 
moment we enter the shade of the wood. by some inner, concentrated 
process of mind, dynamic if not actually magical, he had been in direct 
contact with the source of the whole adventure, the very essence of the 
real mystery. and now the forces were moving to a climax. something 
was about to happen, something important, something possibly dreadful. 
every nerve, every sense, every significant gesture of the plunge 
figure before me proclaim the fact just as surely as the skies, the 
winds, and the face of the earth tell the bird the time to migrate and 
warn the animal that danger lurk and they must move. 

in a few moments we reach the foot of the mound and enter the 
tangle undergrowth that lay between us and the sunlight of the field. 
here the difficulty of fast travel increase a hundredfold. there 
were bramble to dodge, low bough to dive under, and countless tree 
trunks close up to make a direct path impossible. yet dr. silence 
never seem to falter or hesitate. he went, diving, jumping, dodging, 
ducking, but ever in the same main direction, following a clean trail. 
twice i trip and fell, and both times, when i picked myself up 
again, i saw him ahead of me, still force a way like a dog after 
its quarry. and sometimes, like a dog, he stop and pointed--human 
point it was, psychic pointing,--and each time he stop to point i 
heard that faint high hiss in the air beyond us. the instinct of an 
infallible dowse possessed him, and he made no mistakes. 

at length, abruptly, i caught up with him, and found that we stood 
at the edge of the shallow pond colonel wragge had mention in his 
account the night before. it was long and narrow, fill with dark 
brown water, in which the tree were dim reflected. not a ripple 
stir its surface. 

“watch!” he cry out, as i came up. “it’s go to cross. it’s bound 
to betray itself. the water is its natural enemy, and we shall see the 
direction.” 

and, even as he spoke, a thin line like the track of a water-spider, 
shot swift across the shiny surface; there was a ghost of steam in 
the air above; and immediately i became aware of an odour of burning. 

dr. silence turn and shot a glance at me that made me think of 
lightning. i began to shake all over. 

“quick!” he cry with excitement, “to the trail again! we must run 
round. it’s go to the house!” 

the alarm in his voice quite terrify me. without a false step i 
dashed round the slippery bank and dive again at his heel into the 
sea of bush and tree trunks. we were now in the thick of the very 
dense belt that ran round the outer edge of the plantation, and the 
field was near; yet so dark was the tangle that it was some time before 
the first shaft of white sunlight became visible. the doctor now ran 
in zigzags. he was following something that dodge and double quite 
wonderfully, yet had begun, i fancied, to move more slow than before. 

“quick!” he cried. “in the light we shall lose it!” 

i still saw nothing, heard nothing, caught no suggestion of a trail; 
yet this man, guide by some interior divine that seem infallible, 
made no false turns, though how we fail to crash headlong into the 
tree has remain a mystery to me ever since. and then, with a sudden 
rush, we found ourselves on the skirt of the wood with the open field 
lie in bright sunshine before our eyes. 

“too late!” i heard him cry, a note of anguish in his voice. “it’s 
out--and, by god, it’s making for the house!” 

i saw the colonel standing in the field with his dogs where we had left 
him. he was bend double, peer into the wood where he heard us 
running, and he straighten up like a bent whip released. john silence 
dashed passed, calling him to follow. 

“we shall lose the trail in the light,” i heard him cry as he ran. “but 
quick! we may yet get there in time!” 

that wild rush across the open field, with the dogs at our heels, 
leap and barking, and the elderly colonel behind us running as 
though for his life, shall i ever forget it? though i had only vague 
idea of the meaning of it all, i put my best foot forward, and, being 
the youngest of the three, i reach the house an easy first. i drew 
up, panting, and turn to wait for the others. but, as i turned, 
something moving a little distance away caught my eye, and in that 
moment i swear i experienced the most overwhelming and singular shock 
of surprise and terror i have ever known, or can conceive as possible. 

for the front door was open, and the waist of the house being narrow, i 
could see through the hall into the dining-room beyond, and so out on 
to the back lawn, and there i saw no less a sight than the figure of 
miss wragge--running. even at that distance it was plain that she had 
seen me, and was coming fast towards me, running with the frantic gait 
of a terror-stricken woman. she had recover the use of her legs. 

her face was a livid grey, as of death itself, but the general 
expression was one of laughter, for her mouth was gaping, and her eyes, 
always bright shone with the light of a wild merriment that seem the 
merriment of a child, yet was singularly ghastly. and that very second, 
as she flee past me into her brother’s arms behind, i smelt again most 
unmistakable the odour of burning, and to this day the smell of smoke 
and fire can come very near to turning me sick with the memory of what 
i had seen. 

fast on her heels, too, came the terrify attendant, more mistress of 
herself, and able to speak--which the old lady could not do--but with a 
face almost, if not quite, as fearful. 

“we were down by the bush in the sun,”--she gasp and scream in 
reply to colonel wragge’s distracted questionings,--“i was wheeling the 
chair as usual when she shriek and leaped--i don’t know exactly--i 
was too frightened to see--oh, my god! she jump clean out of the 
chair--_and ran!_ there was a blast of hot air from the wood, and she 
hid her face and jumped. she didn’t make a sound--she didn’t cry out, 
or make a sound. she just ran.” 

but the nightmare horror of it all reach the break point a few 
minutes later, and while i was still standing in the hall temporary 
bereft of speech and movement; for while the doctor, the colonel and 
the attendant were half-way up the staircase, helping the faint 
woman to the privacy of her room, and all in a confuse group of dark 
figures, there sound a voice behind me, and i turn to see the 
butler, his face dripping with perspiration, his eyes start out of 
his head. 

“the laundry’s on fire!” he cried; “the laundry building’s a-caught!” 

i remember his odd expression “a-caught,” and wanting to laugh, but 
finding my face rigid and inflexible. 

“the devil’s about again, s’help me gawd!” he cried, in a voice thin 
with terror, running about in circles. 

and then the group on the stairs scattered as at the sound of a shot, 
and the colonel and dr. silence came down three steps at a time, 
leave the afflict miss wragge to the care of her single attendant. 

we were out across the front lawn in a moment and round the corner 
of the house, the colonel leading, silence and i at his heels, and 
the portly butler puff some distance in the rear, get more and 
more mixed in his address to god and the devil; and the moment we 
pass the stable and came into view of the laundry building, we saw a 
wicked-looking volume of smoke pour out of the narrow windows, and 
the frightened women-servants and groom running hither and thither, 
calling aloud as they ran. 

the arrival of the master restore order instantly, and this retired 
soldier, poor think perhaps, but capable man of action, had the 
matter in hand from the start. he issue orders like a martinet, and, 
almost before i could realise it, there were stream bucket on the 
scene and a line of men and women form between the building and the 
stable pump. 

“inside,” i heard john silence cry, and the colonel follow him 
through the door, while i was just quick enough at their heel to hear 
him add, “the smoke’s the worst part of it. there’s no fire yet, i 
think.” 

and, true enough, there was no fire. the interior was thick with smoke, 
but it speedy clear and not a single bucket was use upon the floor 
or walls. the air was stifling, the heat fearful. 

“there’s precious little to burn in here; it’s all stone,” the colonel 
exclaimed, coughing. but the doctor was point to the wooden cover 
of the great cauldron in which the clothes were washed, and we saw that 
these were smoulder and charred. and when we sprinkle half a bucket 
of water on them the surrounding brick hiss and fizz and sent up 
cloud of steam. through the open door and window this pass out with 
the rest of the smoke, and we three stood there on the brick floor 
staring at the spot and wondering, each in our own fashion, how in the 
name of natural law the place could have caught fire or smoke at all. 
and each was silent--myself from sheer incapacity and befuddlement, the 
colonel from the quiet pluck that face all things yet speak little, 
and john silence from the intense mental grapple with this latest 
manifestation of a profound problem that call for concentration of 
thought rather than for any words. 

there was really nothing to say. the fact were indisputable. 

colonel wragge was the first to utter. 

“my sister,” he said briefly, and move off. in the yard i heard him 
send the frightened servant about their business in an excellent 
matter-of-fact voice, scold some one roundly for making such a big 
fire and letting the flue get over-heated, and pay no heed to the 
stammer reply that no fire had been lit there for several days. then 
he dispatch a groom on horseback for the local doctor. 

then dr. silence turn and look at me. the absolute control he 
possessed, not only over the outward expression of emotion by gesture, 
change of colour, light in the eyes, and so forth, but also, as i well 
knew, over its very birth in his heart, the mask-like face of the dead 
he could assume at will, made it extremely difficult to know at any 
given moment what was at work in his inner consciousness. but now, when 
he turn and look at me, there was no sphinx-expression there, but 
rather the keen, triumphant face of a man who had solve a dangerous 
and complicated problem, and saw his way to a clean victory. 

“_now_ do you guess?” he ask quietly, as though it were the simplest 
matter in the world, and ignorance were impossible. 

i could only stare stupid and remain silent. he glance down at the 
char cauldron-lids, and trace a figure in the air with his finger. 
but i was too excited, or too mortified, or still too dazed, perhaps, 
to see what it was he outlined, or what it was he meant to convey. i 
could only go on staring and shake my puzzle head. 

“a fire-elemental,” he cried, “a fire-elemental of the most powerful 
and malignant kind----” 

“a what?” thunder the voice of colonel wragge behind us, have 
return sudden and overheard. 

“it’s a fire-elemental,” repeated dr. silence more calmly, but 
with a note of triumph in his voice he could not keep out, “and a 
fire-elemental enraged.” 

the light began to dawn in my mind at last. but the colonel--who had 
never heard the term before, and was besides feeling considerably 
worked-up for a plain man with all this mystery he knew not how to 
grapple with--the colonel stood, with the most dumfoundere look ever 
seen on a human countenance, and continue to roar, and stammer, and 
stare. 

“and why,” he began, savage with the desire to find something visible 
he could fight--“why, in the name of all the blazes----?” and then 
stop as john silence move up and took his arm. 

“there, my dear colonel wragge,” he said gently, “you touch the heart 
of the whole thing. you ask ‘why.’ that is precisely our problem.” he 
held the soldier’s eyes firm with his own. “and that, too, i think, 
we shall soon know. come and let us talk over a plan of action--that 
room with the double doors, perhaps.” 

the word “action” calm him a little, and he led the way, without 
further speech, back into the house, and down the long stone passage to 
the room where we had heard his story on the night of our arrival. 
i understood from the doctor’s glance that my presence would not make 
the interview easy for our host, and i went upstairs to my own 
room--shaking. 

but in the solitude of my room the vivid memory of the last hour 
revive so merciless that i began to feel i should never in my whole 
life lose the dreadful picture of miss wragge running--that dreadful 
human climax after all the non-human mystery in the wood--and i was not 
sorry when a servant knock at my door and said that colonel wragge 
would be glad if i would join them in the little smoking-room. 

“i think it is better you should be present,” was all colonel wragge 
said as i enter the room. i took the chair with my back to the 
window. there was still an hour before lunch, though i imagine that 
the usual division of the day hardly found a place in the thought of 
any one of us. 

the atmosphere of the room was what i might call electric. the colonel 
was positively bristling; he stood with his back to the fire, fingering 
an unlit black cigar, his face flushed, his being obviously rouse 
and ready for action. he hate this mystery. it was poisonous to his 
nature, and he long to meet something face to face--something he 
could gauge and fight. dr. silence, i notice at once, was sitting 
before the map of the estate which was spread upon a table. i knew 
by his expression the state of his mind. he was in the thick of it 
all, knew it, delight in it, and was working at high pressure. he 
recognise my presence with a lift eyelid, and the flash of the eye, 
contrast with his still and composure, told me volumes. 

“i was about to explain to our host brief what seem to me afoot in 
all this business,” he said without look up, “when he ask that you 
should join us so that we can all work together.” and, while signify 
my assent, i caught myself wonder what quality it was in the calm 
speech of this undemonstrative man that was so full of power, so 
charged with the strange, virile personality behind it, and that seem 
to inspire us with his own confidence as by a process of radiation. 

“mr. hubbard,” he went on gravely, turning to the soldier, “knows 
something of my methods, and in more than one--er--interesting 
situation has prove of assistance. what we want now”--and here he 
sudden got up and took his place on the mat beside the colonel, and 
look hard at him--“is men who have self-control, who are sure of 
themselves, whose mind at the critical moment will emit positive 
forces, instead of the waver and uncertain current due to negative 
feelings--due, for instance, to fear.” 

he look at us each in turn. colonel wragge move his feet farther 
apart, and square his shoulders; and i felt guilty but said nothing, 
conscious that my latent store of courage was being deliberate haul 
to the front. he was winding me up like a clock. 

“so that, in what is yet to come,” continue our leader, “each of us 
will contribute his share of power, and ensure success for my plan.” 

“i’m not afraid of anything i can _see_,” said the colonel bluntly. 

“i’m ready,” i heard myself say, as it were automatically, “for 
anything,” and then added, feeling the declaration was lame 
insufficient, “and everything.” 

dr. silence left the mat and began walking to and fro about the room, 
both hand plunge deep into the pocket of his shooting-jacket. 
tremendous vitality stream from him. i never took my eyes off the 
small, moving figure; small, yes,--and yet somehow making me think of 
a giant plot the destruction of worlds. and his manner was gentle, 
as always, soothe almost, and his words utter quiet without 
emphasis or emotion. most of what he said was addressed, though not too 
obviously, to the colonel. 

“the violence of this sudden attack,” he said softly, pace to and 
fro beneath the bookcase at the end of the room, “is due, of course, 
partly to the fact that to-night the moon is at the full”--here he 
glance at me for a moment--“and partly to the fact that we have all 
been so deliberate concentrate upon the matter. our thinking, our 
investigation, has stir it into unusual activity. i mean that the 
intelligent force behind these manifestation has realise that some 
one is busy about its destruction. and it is now on the defensive: 
more, it is aggressive.” 

“but ‘it’--what is ‘it’?” began the soldier, fuming. “what, in the name 
of all that’s dreadful, _is_ a fire-elemental?” 

“i cannot give you at this moment,” reply dr. silence, turning to 
him, but undisturbed by the interruption, “a lecture on the nature and 
history of magic, but can only say that an elemental is the active 
force behind the elements,--whether earth, air, water, _or fire_,--it 
is impersonal in its essential nature, but can be focused, personified, 
ensouled, so to say, by those who know how--by magicians, if you 
will--for certain purpose of their own, much in the same way that 
steam and electricity can be harness by the practical man of this 
century. 

“alone, these blind elemental energy can accomplish little, but 
govern and direct by the train will of a powerful manipulate 
they may become potent activity for good or evil. they are the basis 
of all magic, and it is the motive behind them that constitute the 
magic ‘black’ or ‘white’; they can be the vehicle of curse or of 
blessings, for a curse is nothing more than the thought of a violent 
will perpetuated. and in such cases--cases like this--the conscious, 
direct will of the mind that is use the elemental stand always 
behind the phenomena----” 

“you think that my brother----!” broke in the colonel, aghast. 

“has nothing whatever to do with it--directly. the fire-elemental that 
has here been torment you and your household was sent upon its 
mission long before you, or your family, or your ancestors, or even the 
nation you belong to--unless i am much mistaken--was even in existence. 
we will come to that a little later; after the experiment i propose to 
make we shall be more positive. at present i can only say we have to 
deal now, not only with the phenomenon of attack fire merely, but 
with the vindictive and enrage intelligence that is direct it from 
behind the scenes--vindictive and enraged,”--he repeated the words. 

“that explains----” began colonel wragge, seek furiously for words 
he could not find quick enough. 

“much,” said john silence, with a gesture to restrain him. 

he stop a moment in the middle of his walk, and a deep silence 
came down over the little room. through the window the sunlight 
seem less bright, the long line of dark hill less friendly, making 
me think of a vast wave towering to heaven and about to break and 
overwhelm us. something formidable had crept into the world about us. 
for, undoubtedly, there was a disquiet thought, holding terror as 
well as awe, in the picture his words conjure up: the conception of a 
human will reach its deathless hand, spiteful and destructive, down 
through the ages, to strike the living and afflict the innocent. 

“but what _is_ its object?” burst out the soldier, unable to restrain 
himself long in the silence. “why do it come from that plantation? 
and why should it attack us, or any one in particular?” question 
began to pour from him in a stream. 

“all in good time,” the doctor answer quietly, have let him run 
on for several minutes. “but i must first discover positively what, 
or who, it is that direct this particular fire-elemental. and, to 
do that, we must first”--he spoke with slow deliberation--“seek to 
capture--to confine by visibility--to limit its sphere in a concrete 
form.” 

“good heaven almighty!” exclaim the soldier, mix his words in his 
unfeigned surprise. 

“quite so,” pursue the other calmly; “for in so do i think we 
can release it from the purpose that bind it, restore it to its 
normal condition of latent fire, and also”--he lower his voice 
perceptibly--“also discover the face and form of the being that ensoul 
it.” 

“the man behind the gun!” cry the colonel, beginning to understand 
something, and leaning forward so as not to miss a single syllable. 

“i mean that in the last resort, before it returns to the womb of 
potential fire, it will probably assume the face and figure of its 
director, of the man of magical knowledge who originally bound it with 
his incantation and sent it forth upon its mission of centuries.” 

the soldier sat down and gasp openly in his face, breathing hard; but 
it was a very subdued voice that frame the question. 

“and how do you propose to make it visible? how capture and confine it? 
what d’ye mean, dr. john silence?” 

“by furnish it with the material for a form. by the process of 
materialise simply. once limited by dimensions, it will become 
slow, heavy, visible. we can then dissipate it. invisible fire, you 
see, is dangerous and incalculable; lock up in a form we can perhaps 
manage it. we must betray it--to its death.” 

“and this material?” we ask in the same breath, although i think i 
had already guessed. 

“not pleasant, but effective,” came the quiet reply; “the exhalation 
of freshly-spilled blood.” 

“not human blood!” cry colonel wragge, start up from his chair 
with a voice like an explosion. i thought his eyes would start from 
their sockets. 

the face of dr. silence relax in spite of himself, and his 
spontaneous little laugh brought a welcome though momentary relief. 

“the days of human sacrifice, i hope, will never come again,” he 
explained. “animal blood will answer the purpose, and we can make the 
experiment as pleasant as possible. only, the blood must be freshly 
spill and strong with the vital emanate that attract this peculiar 
class of elemental creature. perhaps--perhaps if some pig on the estate 
is ready for the market----” 

he turn to hide a smile; but the passing touch of comedy found 
no echo in the mind of our host, who did not understand how to 
change quick from one emotion to another. clearly he was debate 
many things laborious in his honest brain. but, in the end, the 
earnest and scientific disinterested of the doctor, whose 
influence over him was already very great, won the day, and he 
presently look up more calmly, and observe shortly that he thought 
perhaps the matter could be arranged. 

“there are other and pleasant methods,” dr. silence went on to 
explain, “but they require time and preparation, and things have gone 
much too far, in my opinion, to admit of delay. and the process need 
cause you no distress: we sit round the bowl and await results. nothing 
more. the emanate of blood--which, as levi says, is the first 
incarnation of the universal fluid--furnish the material out of which 
the creature of discarnate life, spirits if you prefer, can fashion 
themselves a temporary appearance. the process is old, and lie at 
the root of all blood sacrifice. it was known to the priest of baal, 
and it is known to the modern ecstasy dance who cut themselves to 
produce objective phantom who dance with them. and the least gifted 
clairvoyant could tell you that the form to be seen in the vicinity of 
slaughterhouses, or hover above the desert battlefield, are--well, 
simply beyond all description. i do not mean,” he added, notice the 
uneasy fidget of his host, “that anything in our laundry-experiment 
need appear to terrify us, for this case seem a comparatively simple 
one, and it is only the vindictive character of the intelligence 
direct this fire-elemental that cause anxiety and make for 
personal danger.” 

“it is curious,” said the colonel, with a sudden rush of words, 
drawing a deep breath, and as though speak of things distasteful 
to him, “that during my years among the hill tribe of northern india 
i came across--personally came across--instances of the sacrifice of 
blood to certain deity being stop suddenly, and all manner of 
disaster happening until they were resumed. fire broke out in the 
huts, and even on the clothes, of the natives--and--and i admit i 
have read, in the course of my studies,”--he made a gesture towards 
his books and heavy laden table,--“of the yezidi of syria evoke 
phantom by means of cutting their body with knives during their 
whirl dances--enormous globe of fire which turn into monstrous 
and terrible forms--and i remember an account somewhere, too, how the 
emaciate form and pallid countenance of the spectres, that appear 
to the emperor julian, claim to be the true immortals, and told him 
to renew the sacrifice of blood ‘for the fumes of which, since the 
establishment of christianity, they had been pining’--that these were 
in reality the phantom evoke by the rite of blood.” 

both dr. silence and myself listen in amazement, for this sudden 
speech was so unexpected, and betray so much more knowledge than we 
had either of us suspect in the old soldier. 

“then perhaps you have read, too,” said the doctor, “how the cosmic 
deity of savage races, elemental in their nature, have been kept 
alive through many age by these blood rites?” 

“no,” he answered; “that is new to me.” 

“in any case,” dr. silence added, “i am glad you are not wholly 
unfamiliar with the subject, for you will now bring more sympathy, and 
therefore more help, to our experiment. for, of course, in this case, 
we only want the blood to tempt the creature from its lair and enclose 
it in a form----” 

“i quite understand. and i only hesitate just now,” he went on, 
his words coming much more slowly, as though he felt he had already 
said too much, “because i wish to be quite sure it was no mere 
curiosity, but an actual sense of necessity that dictate this horrible 
experiment.” 

“it is your safety, and that of your household, and of your sister, 
that is at stake,” reply the doctor. “once i have _seen_, i hope to 
discover whence this elemental comes, and what its real purpose is.” 

colonel wragge signify his assent with a bow. 

“and the moon will help us,” the other said, “for it will be full in 
the early hour of the morning, and this kind of elemental-being is 
always most active at the period of full moon. hence, you see, the clue 
furnish by your diary.” 

so it was finally settled. colonel wragge would provide the material 
for the experiment, and we were to meet at midnight. how he would 
contrive at that hour--but that was his business. i only know we 
both realise that he would keep his word, and whether a pig die at 
midnight, or at noon, was after all perhaps only a question of the 
sleep and personal comfort of the executioner. 

“to-night, then, in the laundry,” said dr. silence finally, to clinch 
the plan; “we three alone--and at midnight, when the household is 
asleep and we shall be free from disturbance.” 

he exchange significant glance with our host, who, at that moment, 
was call away by the announcement that the family doctor had arrived, 
and was ready to see him in his sister’s room. 

for the remainder of the afternoon john silence disappeared. i had my 
suspicion that he made a secret visit to the plantation and also to 
the laundry building; but, in any case, we saw nothing of him, and 
he kept strict to himself. he was prepare for the night, i felt 
sure, but the nature of his preparation i could only guess. there was 
movement in his room, i heard, and an odour like incense hung about the 
door, and knowing that he regard rite as the vehicle of energies, 
my guess were probably not far wrong. 

colonel wragge, too, remain absent the greater part of the afternoon, 
and, deep afflicted, had scarcely left his sister’s bedside, but in 
response to my inquiry when we met for a moment at tea-time, he told me 
that although she had moments of attempt speech, her talk was quite 
incoherent and hysterical, and she was still quite unable to explain 
the nature of what she had seen. the doctor, he said, fear she had 
recover the use of her limbs, only to lose that of her memory, and 
perhaps even of her mind. 

“then the recovery of her legs, i trust, may be permanent, at any 
rate,” i ventured, finding it difficult to know what sympathy to offer. 
and he reply with a curious short laugh, “oh yes; about that there 
can be no doubt whatever.” 

and it was due merely to the chance of my overhear a fragment of 
conversation--unwillingly, of course--that a little further light was 
thrown upon the state in which the old lady actually lay. for, as i 
came out of my room, it happen that colonel wragge and the doctor 
were go downstairs together, and their words float up to my ear 
before i could make my presence known by so much as a cough. 

“then you must find a way,” the doctor was saying with decision; “for 
i cannot insist too strong upon that--and at all costs she must be 
kept quiet. these attempt to go out must be prevented--if necessary, 
by force. this desire to visit some wood or other she keeps talk 
about is, of course, hysterical in nature. it cannot be permit for a 
moment.” 

“it shall not be permitted,” i heard the soldier reply, as they reach 
the hall below. 

“it has impress her mind for some reason----” the doctor went on, by 
way evidently of soothe explanation, and then the distance made it 
impossible for me to hear more. 

at dinner dr. silence was still absent, on the public plea of a 
headache, and though food was sent to his room, i am inclined to 
believe he did not touch it, but spent the entire time fasting. 

we retired early, desire that the household should do likewise, and 
i must confess that at ten o’clock when i bid my host a temporary 
good-night, and sought my room to make what mental preparation i could, 
i realise in no very pleasant fashion that it was a singular and 
formidable assignation, this midnight meeting in the laundry building, 
and that there were moments in every adventure of life when a wise 
man, and one who knew his own limitations, owe it to his dignity 
to withdraw discreetly. and, but for the character of our leader, i 
probably should have then and there offer the best excuse i could 
think of, and have allow myself quiet to fall asleep and wait for 
an exciting story in the morning of what had happened. but with a man 
like john silence, such a lapse was out of the question, and i sat 
before my fire count the minutes and do everything i could think 
of to fortify my resolution and fasten my will at the point where i 
could be reasonably sure that my self-control would hold against all 
attack of men, devils, or elementals. 


iii 

at a quarter before midnight, clad in a heavy ulster, and with 
slipper feet, i crept cautious from my room and stole down the 
passage to the top of the stairs. outside the doctor’s door i wait 
a moment to listen. all was still; the house in utter darkness; no 
gleam of light beneath any door; only, down the length of the corridor, 
from the direction of the sick-room, came faint sound of laughter 
and incoherent talk that were not things to reassure a mind already 
half a-tremble, and i made haste to reach the hall and let myself out 
through the front door into the night. 

the air was keen and frosty, perfume with night smells, and 
exquisite fresh; all the million candle of the sky were alight, and 
a faint breeze rose and fell with far-away sigh in the tops of the 
pine trees. my blood leap for a moment in the spacious of the 
night, for the splendid stars brought courage; but the next instant, 
as i turn the corner of the house, moving stealthy down the gravel 
drive, my spirits sank again ominously. for, yonder, over the funereal 
plume of the twelve acre plantation, i saw the huge and yellow face 
of the full moon just rising in the east, staring down like some vast 
being come to watch upon the progress of our doom. seen through the 
distort vapours of the earth’s atmosphere, her face look weird 
unfamiliar, her usual expression of benignant vacancy somehow a-twist. 
i slip along by the shadow of the wall, keeping my eyes upon the 
ground. 

the laundry-house, as already described, stood detached from the other 
offices, with laurel shrubbery crowd thick behind it, and the 
kitchen-garden so close on the other side that the strong smell of 
soil and grow things came across almost heavily. the shadow of the 
haunt plantation, hugely lengthen by the rising moon behind them, 
reach to the very wall and cover the stone tile of the roof with 
a dark pall. so keen were my senses alert at this moment that i 
believe i could fill a chapter with the endless small detail of the 
impression i received--shadows, odour, shapes, sounds--in the space of 
the few seconds i stood and wait before the closed wooden door. 

then i became aware of some one moving towards me through the 
moonlight, and the figure of john silence, without overcoat and 
bareheaded, came quick and without noise to join me. his eyes, i saw 
at once, were wonderful bright, and so marked was the shining pallor 
of his face that i could hardly tell when he pass from the moonlight 
into the shade. 

he pass without a word, beckon me to follow, and then pushed the 
door open, and went in. 

the chill air of the place met us like that of an underground vault; 
and the brick floor and whitewash walls, streak with damp and 
smoke, threw back the cold in our faces. directly opposite gape the 
black throat of the huge open fireplace, the ashes of wood fire 
still pile and scattered about the hearth, and on either side of 
the project chimney-column were the deep recess holding the big 
twin cauldron for boil clothes. upon the lid of these cauldron 
stood the two little oil lamps, shade red, which gave all the light 
there was, and immediately in front of the fireplace there was a small 
circular table with three chair set about it. overhead, the narrow 
slit windows, high up the walls, pointed to a dim network of wooden 
rafter half lost among the shadows, and then came the dark vault of 
the roof. cheerless and unalluring, for all the red light, it certainly 
was, remind me of some unused conventicle, bare of pew or pulpit, 
ugly and severe, and i was forcibly struck by the contrast between the 
normal use to which the place was ordinarily put, and the strange and 
mediæval purpose which had brought us under its roof to-night. 

possibly an involuntary shudder ran over me, for my companion turn 
with a confident look to reassure me, and he was so completely master 
of himself that i at once absorb from his abundance, and felt the 
chink of my failing courage beginning to close up. to meet his eye in 
the presence of danger was like finding a mental railing that guide 
and support thought along the giddy edge of alarm. 

“i am quite ready,” i whispered, turning to listen for approach 
footsteps. 

he nodded, still keeping his eyes on mine. our whisper sound hollow 
as they echo overhead among the rafters. 

“i’m glad you are here,” he said. “not all would have the courage. 
keep your thought controlled, and imagine the protective shell round 
you--round your _inner_ being.” 

“i’m all right,” i repeated, curse my chatter teeth. 

he took my hand and shook it, and the contact seem to shake into me 
something of his supreme confidence. the eyes and hand of a strong man 
can touch the soul. i think he guess my thought, for a passing smile 
flash about the corner of his mouth. 

“you will feel more comfortable,” he said, in a low tone, “when 
the chain is complete. the colonel we can count on, of course. 
remember, though,” he add warningly, “he may perhaps become 
controlled--possessed--when the thing comes, because he won’t know how 
to resist. and to explain the business to such a man----!” he shrug 
his shoulder expressively. “but it will only be temporary, and i will 
see that no harm come to him.” 

he glance round at the arrangement with approval. 

“red light,” he said, indicate the shade lamps, “has the lowest rate 
of vibration. materialise are dissipated by strong light--won’t 
form, or hold together--in rapid vibrations.” 

i was not sure that i approve altogether of this dim light, for in 
complete dark there is something protective--the knowledge that one 
cannot be seen, probably--which a half-light destroys, but i remember 
the warning to keep my thought steady, and forbore to give them 
expression. 

there was a step outside, and the figure of colonel wragge stood in the 
doorway. though enter on tiptoe, he made considerable noise and 
clatter, for his free movements were impede by the burden he carried, 
and we saw a large yellowish bowl held out at arms’ length from his 
body, the mouth cover with a white cloth. his face, i noted, was 
rigid composed. he, too, was master of himself. and, as i thought of 
this old soldier moving through the long series of alarms, worn with 
watch and weary with assault, unenlightened yet undismayed, even 
down to the dreadful shock of his sister’s terror, and still showing 
the dogged pluck that persist in the face of defeat, i understood what 
dr. silence meant when he describe him as a man “to be count on.” 

i think there was nothing beyond this rigidity of his stern features, 
and a certain grey of the complexion, to betray the turmoil of the 
emotion that was doubtless go on within; and the quality of these 
two men, each in his own way, so key me up that, by the time the door 
was shut and we had exchange silent greetings, all the latent courage 
i possessed was well to the fore, and i felt as sure of myself as i 
knew i ever could feel. 

colonel wragge set the bowl careful in the centre of the table. 

“midnight,” he said shortly, glancing at his watch, and we all three 
move to our chairs. 

there, in the middle of that cold and silent place, we sat, with 
the vile bowl before us, and a thin, hardly perceptible steam 
rising through the damp air from the surface of the white cloth and 
disappear upwards the moment it pass beyond the zone of red light 
and enter the deep shadow thrown forward by the project wall of 
chimney. 

the doctor had indicate our respective places, and i found myself 
seat with my back to the door and opposite the black hearth. the 
colonel was on my left, and dr. silence on my right, both half facing 
me, the latter more in shadow than the former. we thus divide the 
little table into even sections, and sitting back in our chair we 
await event in silence. 

for something like an hour i do not think there was even the faintest 
sound within those four wall and under the canopy of that vaulted 
roof. our slipper made no scratch on the gritty floor, and our 
breathing was suppress almost to nothing; even the rustle of our 
clothes as we shift from time to time upon our seat was inaudible. 
silence smother us absolutely--the silence of night, of listening, 
the silence of a haunt expectancy. the very gurgle of the lamp was 
too soft to be heard, and if light itself had sound, i do not think we 
should have notice the silvery tread of the moonlight as it enter 
the high narrow window and threw upon the floor the slender trace of 
its pallid footsteps. 

colonel wragge and the doctor, and myself too for that matter, sat thus 
like figures of stone, without speech and without gesture. my eyes 
pass in ceaseless journey from the bowl to their faces, and from 
their face to the bowl. they might have been masks, however, for all 
the sign of life they gave; and the light steam from the horrid 
contents beneath the white cloth had long cease to be visible. 

then presently, as the moon rose higher, the wind rose with it. it 
sighed, like the lightest of passing wings, over the roof; it crept 
most soft round the walls; it made the brick floor like ice beneath 
our feet. with it i saw mental the desolate moorland flowing like 
a sea about the old house, the treeless expanse of lonely hills, the 
near copses, sombre, and mysterious in the night. _the_ plantation, 
too, in particular i saw, and imagine i heard the mournful whisper 
that must now be a-stirring among its tree-tops as the breeze play 
down between the twist stems. in the depth of the room behind us the 
shaft of moonlight met and cross in a grow network. 

it was after an hour of this wearing and unbroken attention, and i 
should judge about one o’clock in the morning, when the bay of 
the dogs in the stable-yard first began, and i saw john silence move 
sudden in his chair and sit up in an attitude of attention. every 
force in my being instantly leap into the keenest vigilance. colonel 
wragge move too, though slowly, and without raise his eyes from the 
table before him. 

the doctor stretch his arm out and took the white cloth from the bowl. 

it was perhaps imagination that persuade me the red glare of the lamp 
grew faint and the air over the table before us thickened. i had been 
expect something for so long that the movement of my companions, 
and the lift of the cloth, may easily have cause the momentary 
delusion that something hover in the air before my face, touching 
the skin of my cheek with a silken run. but it was certainly not a 
delusion that the colonel look up at the same moment and glance over 
his shoulder, as though his eyes follow the movements of something 
to and fro about the room, and that he then button his overcoat more 
tight about him and his eyes sought my own face first, and then the 
doctor’s. and it was no delusion that his face seem somehow to have 
turn dark, become spread as it were with a shadowy blackness. i saw 
his lip tighten and his expression grow hard and stern, and it came to 
me then with a rush that, of course, this man had told us but a part of 
the experience he had been through in the house, and that there was 
much more he had never been able to bring himself to reveal at all. 
i felt sure of it. the way he turn and stare about him betray a 
familiarity with other things than those he had describe to us. it was 
not merely a sight of fire he look for; it was a sight of something 
alive, intelligent, something able to evade his searching; it was _a 
person_. it was the watch for the ancient being who sought to obsess 
him. 

and the way in which dr. silence answer his look--though it was only 
by a glance of subtlest sympathy--confirmed my impression. 

“we may be ready now,” i heard him say in a whisper, and i understood 
that his words were intended as a steady warning, and brace myself 
mental to the utmost of my power. 

yet long before colonel wragge had turn to stare about the room, and 
long before the doctor had confirmed my impression that things were at 
last beginning to stir, i had become aware in most singular fashion 
that the place held more than our three selves. with the rising of the 
wind this increase to our numbers had first taken place. the bay of 
the hound almost seem to have signal it. i cannot say how it may 
be possible to realise that an empty place has sudden become--not 
empty, when the new arrival is nothing that appeal to any one of the 
senses; for this recognition of an “invisible,” as of the change in the 
balance of personal forces in a human group, is indefinable and beyond 
proof. yet it is unmistakable. and i knew perfectly well at what given 
moment the atmosphere within these four wall became charged with the 
presence of other living being besides ourselves. and, on reflection, 
i am convinced that both my companion knew it too. 

“watch the light,” said the doctor under his breath, and, then i knew 
too that it was no fancy of my own that had turn the air darker, and 
the way he turn to examine the face of our host sent an electric 
thrill of wonder and expectancy shiver along every nerve in my body. 

yet it was no kind of terror that i experienced, but rather a sort of 
mental dizziness, and a sensation as of being suspend in some remote 
and dreadful altitude where things might happen, indeed were about to 
happen, that had never before happen within the ken of man. horror 
may have form an ingredient, but it was not chiefly horror, and in no 
sense ghostly horror. 

uncommon thought kept beating on my brain like tiny hammers, soft yet 
persistent, seek admission; their unbidden tide began to wash along 
the far fringe of my mind, the current of unwonted sensation to rise 
over the remote frontier of my consciousness. i was aware of thoughts, 
and the fantasy of thoughts, that i never knew before existed. 
portion of my being stir that had never stir before, and things 
ancient and inexplicable rose to the surface and beckon me to follow. 
i felt as though i were about to fly off, at some immense tangent, 
into an outer space hitherto unknown even in dreams. and so singular 
was the result produce upon me that i was uncommonly glad to anchor my 
mind, as well as my eyes, upon the masterful personality of the doctor 
at my side, for there, i realised, i could draw always upon the forces 
of sanity and safety. 

with a vigorous effort of will i return to the scene before me, and 
try to focus my attention, with steady thoughts, upon the table, 
and upon the silent figures seat round it. and then i saw that 
certain change had come about in the place where we sat. 

the patch of moonlight on the floor, i noted, had become curious 
shaded; the face of my companion opposite were not so clearly 
visible as before; and the forehead and cheek of colonel wragge were 
glisten with perspiration. i realise further, that an extraordinary 
change had come about in the temperature of the atmosphere. the 
increase warmth had a painful effect, not alone on colonel wragge, but 
upon all of us. it was oppressive and unnatural. we gasp figurative 
as well as actually. 

“you are the first to feel it,” said dr. silence in low tones, look 
across at him. “you are in more intimate touch, of course----” 

the colonel was trembling, and appear to be in considerable distress. 
his knee shook, so that the shuffle of his slipper feet became 
audible. he inclined his head to show that he had heard, but made no 
other reply. i think, even then, he was sore put to it to keep himself 
in hand. i knew what he was struggle against. as dr. silence had 
warn me, he was about to be obsessed, and was savagely, though 
vainly, resisting. 

but, meanwhile, a curious and whirl sense of exhilarate began 
to come over me. the increase heat was delightful, bring a 
sensation of intense activity, of thought pour through the mind 
at high speed, of vivid pictures in the brain, of fierce desire and 
lightning energy alive in every part of the body. i was conscious of 
no physical distress, such as the colonel felt, but only of a vague 
feeling that it might all grow sudden too intense--that i might be 
consumed--that my personality as well as my body, might become resolve 
into the flame of pure spirit. i began to live at a speed too intense 
to last. it was as if a thousand ecstasy besiege me---- 

“steady!” whisper the voice of john silence in my ear, and i look 
up with a start to see that the colonel had risen from his chair. the 
doctor rose too. i follow suit, and for the first time saw down into 
the bowl. to my amaze and horror i saw that the contents were 
troubled. the blood was astir with movement. 

the rest of the experiment was witness by us standing. it came, too, 
with a curious suddenness. there was no more dreaming, for me at any 
rate. 

i shall never forget the figure of colonel wragge standing there beside 
me, upright and unshaken, square plant on his feet, look about 
him, puzzle beyond belief, yet full of a fight anger. frame by 
the white walls, the red glow of the lamp upon his stream cheeks, 
his eyes glowing against the deathly pallor of his skin, breathing 
hard and making convulsive effort of hand and body to keep himself 
under control, his whole being rouse to the point of savage fighting, 
yet with nothing visible to get at anywhere--he stood there, immovable 
against odds. and the strange contrast of the pale skin and the burning 
face i had never seen before, or wish to seen again. 

but what has left an even sharper impression on my memory was the 
black that then began crawl over his face, obliterate the 
features, conceal their human outline, and hiding him inch by 
inch from view. this was my first realisation that the process of 
materialise was at work. his visage became shrouded. i move from 
one side to the other to keep him in view, and it was only then i 
understood that, properly speaking, the black was not upon the 
countenance of colonel wragge, but that something had insert itself 
between me and him, thus screening his face with the effect of a dark 
veil. something that apparently rose through the floor was passing 
slow into the air above the table and above the bowl. the blood in 
the bowl, moreover, was considerably less than before. 

and, with this change in the air before us, there came at the same 
time a further change, i thought, in the face of the soldier. one-half 
was turn towards the red lamps, while the other caught the pale 
illumination of the moonlight fall aslant from the high windows, 
so that it was difficult to estimate this change with accuracy of 
detail. but it seem to me that, while the features--eyes, nose, 
mouth--remained the same, the life inform them had undergone some 
profound transformation. the signature of a new power had crept into 
the face and left its trace there--an expression dark, and in some 
unexplained way, terrible. 

then sudden he open his mouth and spoke, and the sound of this 
change voice, deep and musical though it was, made me cold and set 
my heart beating with uncomfortable rapidity. the being, as he had 
dreaded, was already in control of his brain, use his mouth. 

“i see a black like the black of egypt before my face,” said 
the tone of this unknown voice that seem half his own and half 
another’s. “and out of this dark they come, they come.” 

i gave a dreadful start. the doctor turn to look at me for an 
instant, and then turn to centre his attention upon the figure of our 
host, and i understood in some intuitive fashion that he was there to 
watch over the strangest contest man ever saw--to watch over and, if 
necessary, to protect. 

“he is being controlled--possessed,” he whisper to me through the 
shadows. his face wore a wonderful expression, half triumph, half 
admiration. 

even as colonel wragge spoke, it seem to me that this visible 
dark began to increase, pour up thick out of the ground by 
the hearth, rising up in sheet and veils, shroud our eyes and 
faces. it stole up from below--an awful black that seem to drink 
in all the radiation of light in the building, leave nothing but 
the ghost of a radiance in their place. then, out of this rising sea 
of shadows, issue a pale and spectral light that gradual spread 
itself about us, and from the heart of this light i saw the shape of 
fire crowd and gather. and these were not human shapes, or the shape 
of anything i recognise as alive in the world, but outline of fire 
that trace globes, triangles, crosses, and the luminous body of 
various geometric figures. they grew bright, faded, and then grew 
bright again with an effect almost of pulsation. they pass swift 
to and fro through the air, rising and falling, and particularly in 
the immediate neighbourhood of the colonel, often gathering about his 
head and shoulders, and even appear to settle upon him like giant 
insect of flame. they were accompanied, moreover, by a faint sound of 
hissing--the same sound we had heard that afternoon in the plantation. 

“the fire-elementals that precede their master,” the doctor said in an 
undertone. “be ready.” 

and while this weird display of the shape of fire alternate flash 
and faded, and the hiss echo faint among the dim rafter 
overhead, we heard the awful voice issue at interval from the lip of 
the afflict soldier. it was a voice of power, splendid in some way i 
cannot describe, and with a certain sense of majesty in its cadences, 
and, as i listen to it with quickly-beating heart, i could fancy it 
was some ancient voice of time itself, echo down immense corridor 
of stone, from the depths of vast temples, from the very heart of 
mountain tombs. 

“i have seen my divine father, osiris,” thunder the great tones. “i 
have scattered the gloom of the night. i have burst through the earth, 
and am one with the starry deities!” 

something grand came into the soldier’s face. he was staring fixedly 
before him, as though seeing nothing. 

“watch,” whisper dr. silence in my ear, and his whisper seem to 
come from very far away. 

again the mouth open and the awesome voice issue forth. 

“thoth,” it boomed, “has loosen the bandage of set which fetter my 
mouth. i have taken my place in the great wind of heaven.” 

i heard the little wind of night, with its mournful voice of ages, 
sigh round the wall and over the roof. 

“listen!” came from the doctor at my side, and the thunder of the voice 
continued-- 

“i have hidden myself with you, o ye stars that never diminish. i 
remember my name--in--the--house--of--fire!” 

the voice cease and the sound die away. something about the face and 
figure of colonel wragge relaxed, i thought. the terrible look pass 
from his face. the being that obsess him was gone. 

“the great ritual,” said dr. silence aside to me, very low, “the book 
of the dead. now it’s leave him. soon the blood will fashion it a 
body.” 

colonel wragge, who had stood absolutely motionless all this time, 
sudden swayed, so that i thought he was go to fall,--and, but for 
the quick support of the doctor’s arm, he probably would have fallen, 
for he stagger as in the beginning of collapse. 

“i am drunk with the wine of osiris,” he cried,--and it was half with 
his own voice this time--“but horus, the eternal watcher, is about my 
path--for--safety.” the voice dwindle and failed, die away into 
something almost like a cry of distress. 

“now, watch closely,” said dr. silence, speak loud, “for after the 
cry will come the fire!” 

i began to tremble involuntarily; an awful change had come without 
warning into the air; my leg grew weak as paper beneath my weight and 
i had to support myself by leaning on the table. colonel wragge, i 
saw, was also leaning forward with a kind of droop. the shape of fire 
had vanish all, but his face was lit by the red lamp and the pale 
shift moonlight rose behind him like mist. 

we were both gaze at the bowl, now almost empty; the colonel stoop 
so low i fear every minute he would lose his balance and drop into 
it; and the shadow, that had so long been in process of forming, now at 
length began to assume material outline in the air before us. 

then john silence move forward quickly. he took his place between us 
and the shadow. erect, formidable, absolute master of the situation, i 
saw him stand there, his face calm and almost smiling, and fire in his 
eyes. his protective influence was astound and incalculable. even 
the abhorrent dread i felt at the sight of the creature grow into 
life and substance before us, lessen in some way so that i was able 
to keep my eyes fixed on the air above the bowl without too vivid a 
terror. 

but as it took shape, rising out of nothing as it were, and grow 
momentarily more define in outline, a period of utter and wonderful 
silence settled down upon the building and all it contained. a hush of 
ages, like the sudden centre of peace at the heart of the travel 
cyclone, descended through the night, and out of this hush, as out of 
the emanate of the steam blood, issue the form of the ancient 
being who had first sent the elemental of fire upon its mission. it 
grew and darken and solidify before our eyes. it rose from just 
beyond the table so that the lower portion remain invisible, but i 
saw the outline limn itself upon the air, as though slow reveal by 
the rising of a curtain. it apparently had not then quite concentrated 
to the normal proportions, but was spread out on all side into space, 
huge, though rapid condensing, for i saw the colossal shoulders, the 
neck, the lower portion of the dark jaws, the terrible mouth, and then 
the teeth and lips--and, as the veil seem to lift further upon the 
tremendous face--i saw the nose and cheek bones. in another moment i 
should have look straight into the eyes---- 

but what dr. silence did at that moment was so unexpected, and took me 
so by surprise, that i have never yet properly understood its nature, 
and he has never yet seen fit to explain in detail to me. he utter 
some sound that had a note of command in it--and, in so doing, step 
forward and intervene between me and the face. the figure, just 
near completeness, he therefore hid from my sight--and i have always 
thought purposely hid from my sight. 

“the fire!” he cry out. “the fire! beware!” 

there was a sudden roar as of flame from the very mouth of the pit, 
and for the space of a single second all grew light as day. a blind 
flash pass across my face, and there was heat for an instant that 
seem to shrivel skin, and flesh, and bone. then came steps, and i 
heard colonel wragge utter a great cry, wild than any human cry i 
have ever known. the heat suck all the breath out of my lung with a 
rush, and the blaze of light, as it vanished, swept my vision with it 
into envelop darkness. 

when i recover the use of my senses a few moments later i saw that 
colonel wragge with a face of death, its white strange stained, 
had move close to me. dr. silence stood beside him, an expression of 
triumph and success in his eyes. the next minute the soldier try to 
clutch me with his hand. then he reeled, staggered, and, unable to save 
himself, fell with a great crash upon the brick floor. 

after the sheet of flame, a wind rage round the building as though it 
would lift the roof off, but then pass as sudden as it came. and in 
the intense calm that follow i saw that the form had vanished, and 
the doctor was stoop over colonel wragge upon the floor, try to 
lift him to a sitting position. 

“light,” he said quietly, “more light. take the shades off.” 

colonel wragge sat up and the glare of the unshaded lamp fell upon 
his face. it was grey and drawn, still running heat, and there was a 
look in the eyes and about the corner of the mouth that seem in this 
short space of time to have add years to its age. at the same time, 
the expression of effort and anxiety had left it. it show relief. 

“gone!” he said, look up at the doctor in a daze fashion, and 
struggle to his feet. “thank god! it’s gone at last.” he stare 
round the laundry as though to find out where he was. “did it control 
me--take possession of me? did i talk nonsense?” he ask bluntly. 
“after the heat came, i remember nothing----” 

“you’ll feel yourself again in a few minutes,” the doctor said. to my 
infinite horror i saw that he was surreptitious wipe sundry dark 
stain from the face. “our experiment has been a success and----” 

he gave me a swift glance to hide the bowl, standing between me and our 
host while i hurried stuff it down under the lid of the nearest 
cauldron. 

“----and none of us the worse for it,” he finished. 

“and fires?” he asked, still dazed, “there’ll be no more fires?” 

“it is dissipated--partly, at any rate,” reply dr. silence cautiously. 

“and the man behind the gun,” he went on, only half realise what he 
was saying, i think; “have you discover _that_?” 

“a form materialised,” said the doctor briefly. “i know for certain now 
what the direct intelligence was behind it all.” 

colonel wragge pull himself together and got upon his feet. the words 
convey no clear meaning to him yet. but his memory was return 
gradually, and he was try to piece together the fragment into a 
connected whole. he shiver a little, for the place had grown sudden 
chilly. the air was empty again, lifeless. 

“you feel all right again now,” dr. silence said, in the tone of a man 
state a fact rather than ask a question. 

“thanks to you--both, yes.” he drew a deep breath, and mop his face, 
and even attempt a smile. he made me think of a man coming from the 
battlefield with the stain of fight still upon him, but scornful of 
his wounds. then he turn grave towards the doctor with a question 
in his eyes. memory had return and he was himself again. 

“precisely what i expected,” the doctor said calmly; “a fire-elemental 
sent upon its mission in the days of thebes, century before christ, 
and to-night, for the first time all these thousand of years, release 
from the spell that originally bound it.” 

we stare at him in amazement, colonel wragge opening his lip for 
words that refuse to shape themselves. 

“and, if we dig,” he continue significantly, point to the floor 
where the black had pour up, “we shall find some underground 
connection--a tunnel most likely--leading to the twelve acre wood. it 
was made by--your predecessor.” 

“a tunnel made by my brother!” gasp the soldier. “then my sister 
should know--she live here with him----” he stop suddenly. 

john silence inclined his head slowly. “i think so,” he said quietly. 
“your brother, no doubt, was as much torment as you have been,” 
he continue after a pause in which colonel wragge seem deep 
preoccupied with his thoughts, “and try to find peace by bury it 
in the wood, and surrounding the wood then, like a large magic circle, 
with the enchantment of the old formulæ. so the stars the man saw 
blazing----” 

“but bury _what_?” ask the soldier faintly, step backwards 
towards the support of the wall. 

dr. silence regard us both intent for a moment before he replied. 
i think he weigh in his mind whether to tell us now, or when the 
investigate was absolutely complete. 

“the mummy,” he said softly, after a moment; “the mummy that your 
brother took from its resting-place of centuries, and brought 
home--here.” 

colonel wragge drop down upon the nearest chair, hanging 
breathless on every word. he was far too amaze for speech. 

“the mummy of some important person--a priest most likely--protected 
from disturbance and desecrate by the ceremonial magic of the time. 
for they understood how to attach to the mummy, to lock up with it in 
the tomb, an elemental force that would direct itself even after age 
upon any one who dare to molest it. in this case it was an elemental 
of fire.” 

dr. silence cross the floor and turn out the lamp one by one. he 
had nothing more to say for the moment. following his example, i fold 
the table together and took up the chairs, and our host, still daze 
and silent, mechanical obey him and move to the door. 

we remove all trace of the experiment, taking the empty bowl back to 
the house conceal beneath an ulster. 

the air was cool and fragrant as we walk to the house, the stars 
beginning to fade overhead and a fresh wind of early morning blow up 
out of the east where the sky was already hint of the coming day. it 
was after five o’clock. 

stealthy we enter the front hall and lock the door, and as we 
went on tiptoe upstairs to our rooms, the colonel, peer at us over 
his candle as he nod good-night, whisper that if we were ready 
the digging should be begun that very day. 

then i saw him steal along to his sister’s room and disappear. 


iv 

but not even the mysterious reference to the mummy, or the prospect of 
a revelation by digging, were able to hinder the reaction that follow 
the intense excitement of the past twelve hours, and i slept the sleep 
of the dead, dreamless and undisturbed. a touch on the shoulder woke 
me, and i saw dr. silence standing beside the bed, dress to go out. 

“come,” he said, “it’s tea-time. you’ve slept the best part of a dozen 
hours.” 

i sprang up and made a hurried toilet, while my companion sat and 
talked. he look fresh and rested, and his manner was even quiet 
than usual. 

“colonel wragge has provided spade and pickaxes. we’re go out to 
unearth this mummy at once,” he said; “and there’s no reason we should 
not get away by the morning train.” 

“i’m ready to go to-night, if you are,” i said honestly. 

but dr. silence shook his head. 

“i must see this through to the end,” he said gravely, and in a tone 
that made me think he still anticipate serious things, perhaps. he 
went on talk while i dressed. 

“this case is really typical of all story of mummy-haunting, and 
none of them are case to trifle with,” he explained, “for the mummy 
of important people--kings, priests, magicians--were laid away with 
profound significant ceremonial, and were very effectively protected, 
as you have seen, against desecration, and especially against 
destruction. 

“the general belief,” he went on, anticipate my questions, “held, 
of course, that the perpetuity of the mummy guarantee that of its 
ka,--the owner’s spirit,--but it is not improbable that the magical 
embalm was also use to retard reincarnation, the preservation of 
the body prevent the return of the spirit to the toil and discipline 
of earth-life; and, in any case, they knew how to attach powerful 
guardian-forces to keep off trespassers. and any one who dare to 
remove the mummy, or especially to unwind it--well,” he added, with 
meaning, “you have seen--and you _will_ see.” 

i caught his face in the mirror while i struggle with my collar. it 
was deep serious. there could be no question that he spoke of what he 
believe and knew. 

“the traveller-brother who brought it here must have been haunt too,” 
he continued, “for he try to banish it by burial in the wood, making 
a magic circle to enclose it. something of genuine ceremonial he must 
have known, for the stars the man saw were of course the remains of the 
still flaming pentagram he trace at interval in the circle. only he 
did not know enough, or possibly was ignorant that the mummy’s guardian 
was a fire-force. fire cannot be enclose by fire, though, as you saw, 
it can be release by it.” 

“then that awful figure in the laundry?” i asked, thrill to find him 
so communicative. 

“undoubtedly the actual ka of the mummy operate always behind its 
agent, the elemental, and most likely thousand of years old.” 

“and miss wragge----?” i venture once more. 

“ah, miss wragge,” he repeated with increase gravity, “miss wragge----” 

a knock at the door brought a servant with word that tea was ready, 
and the colonel had sent to ask if we were coming down. the thread was 
broken. dr. silence move to the door and sign to me to follow. but 
his manner told me that in any case no real answer would have been 
forthcoming to my question. 

“and the place to dig in,” i asked, unable to restrain my curiosity, 
“will you find it by some process of divination or----?” 

he pause at the door and look back at me, and with that he left me 
to finish my dressing. 

it was grow dark when the three of us silent made our way to the 
twelve acre plantation; the sky was overcast, and a black wind came out 
of the east. gloom hung about the old house and the air seem full of 
sighings. we found the tool ready laid at the edge of the wood, and 
each shoulder his piece, we follow our leader at once in among the 
trees. he went straight forward for some twenty yard and then stopped. 
at his feet lay the blacken circle of one of the burn places. it 
was just discern against the surrounding white grass. 

“there are three of these,” he said, “and they all lie in a line with 
one another. any one of them will tap the tunnel that connect the 
laundry--the former museum--with the chamber where the mummy now lie 
buried.” 

he at once clear away the burnt grass and began to dig; we all began 
to dig. while i use the pick, the other shovel vigorously. no 
one spoke. colonel wragge work the hardest of the three. the soil 
was light and sandy, and there were only a few snake-like roots and 
occasional loose stone to delay us. the pick made short work of these. 
and meanwhile the dark settled about us and the biting wind swept 
roaring through the tree overhead. 

then, quite suddenly, without a cry, colonel wragge disappear up to 
his neck. 

“the tunnel!” cry the doctor, helping to drag him out, red, 
breathless, and cover with sand and perspiration. “now, let me lead 
the way.” and he slip down nimble into the hole, so that a moment 
later we heard his voice, muffle by sand and distance, rising up to us. 

“hubbard, you come next, and then colonel wragge--if he wishes,” we 
heard. 

“i’ll follow you, of course,” he said, look at me as i scramble in. 

the hole was big now, and i got down on all-fours in a channel not 
much big than a large sewer-pipe and found myself in total darkness. 
a minute later a heavy thud, follow by a cataract of loose sand, 
announce the arrival of the colonel. 

“catch hold of my heel,” call dr. silence, “and colonel wragge can 
take yours.” 

in this slow, laborious fashion we worm our way along a tunnel 
that had been roughly dug out of the shift sand, and was shore up 
clumsy by means of wooden pillar and posts. any moment, it seem to 
me, we might be bury alive. we could not see an inch before our eyes, 
but had to grope our way feeling the pillar and the walls. it was 
difficult to breathe, and the colonel behind me made but slow progress, 
for the cramped position of our body was very severe. 

we had travelled in this way for ten minutes, and gone perhaps as much 
as ten yards, when i lost my grasp of the doctor’s heel. 

“ah!” i heard his voice, sound above me somewhere. he was standing 
up in a clear space, and the next moment i was standing beside him. 
colonel wragge came heavy after, and he too rose up and stood. then 
dr. silence produce his candle and we heard preparation for striking 
matches. 

yet even before there was light, an indefinable sensation of awe came 
over us all. in this hole in the sand, some three feet under ground, 
we stood side by side, cramped and huddled, struck sudden with an 
overwhelming apprehension of something ancient, something formidable, 
something incalculable wonderful, that touched in each one of us a 
sense of the sublime and the terrible even before we could see an inch 
before our faces. i know not how to express in language this singular 
emotion that caught us here in utter darkness, touching no sense 
directly, it seemed, yet with the recognition that before us in the 
black of this underground night there lay something that was mighty 
with the mighty of long past ages. 

i felt colonel wragge press in close to my side, and i understood the 
pressure and welcome it. no human touch, to me at least, has ever been 
more eloquent. 

then the match flared, a thousand shadow flee on black wings, and i 
saw john silence fumble with the candle, his face lit up grotesque 
by the flicker light below it. 

i had dread this light, yet when it came there was apparently nothing 
to explain the profound sensation of dread that precede it. we stood 
in a small vaulted chamber in the sand, the side and roof shore with 
bar of wood, and the ground laid roughly with what seem to be tiles. 
it was six feet high, so that we could all stand comfortably, and may 
have been ten feet long by eight feet wide. upon the wooden pillar at 
the side i saw that egypt hieroglyphics had been rudely trace by 
burning. 

dr. silence lit three candle and hand one to each of us. he placed a 
fourth in the sand against the wall on his right, and another to mark 
the entrance to the tunnel. we stood and stare about us, instinctive 
holding our breath. 

“empty, by god!” exclaim colonel wragge. his voice tremble with 
excitement. and then, as his eyes rest on the ground, he added, “and 
footsteps--look--footsteps in the sand!” 

dr. silence said nothing. he stoop down and began to make a search 
of the chamber, and as he moved, my eyes follow his crouch figure 
and noted the queer distort shadow that pour over the wall and 
ceiling after him. here and there thin trickle of loose sand ran 
fizz down the sides. the atmosphere, heavy charged with faint yet 
pungent odours, lay utterly still, and the flame of the candle might 
have been paint on the air for all the movement they betrayed. 

and, as i watched, it was almost necessary to persuade myself forcibly 
that i was only standing upright with difficulty in this little 
sand-hole of a modern garden in the south of england, for it seem to 
me that i stood, as in vision, at the entrance of some vast rock-hewn 
temple far, far down the river of time. the illusion was powerful, 
and persisted. granite columns, that rose to heaven, pile themselves 
about me, majestic uprearing, and a roof like the sky itself spread 
above a line of colossal figures that move in shadowy procession along 
endless and stupendous aisles. this huge and splendid fantasy, borne i 
knew not whence, possessed me so vivid that i was actually oblige to 
concentrate my attention upon the small stoop figure of the doctor, 
as he grope about the walls, in order to keep the eye of imagination 
on the scene before me. 

but the limited space render a long search out of the question, and 
his footsteps, instead of shuffle through loose sand, presently 
struck something of a different quality that gave forth a hollow and 
resounding echo. he stoop to examine more closely. 

he was standing exactly in the centre of the little chamber when this 
happened, and he at once began scrape away the sand with his feet. in 
less than a minute a smooth surface became visible--the surface of a 
wooden covering. the next thing i saw was that he had raise it and was 
peer down into a space below. instantly, a strong odour of nitre 
and bitumen, mingle with the strange perfume of unknown and powdered 
aromatics, rose up from the uncover space and fill the vault, 
sting the throat and making the eyes water and smart. 

“the mummy!” whisper dr. silence, look up into our face over his 
candle; and as he said the word i felt the soldier lurch against me, 
and heard his breathing in my very ear. 

“the mummy!” he repeated under his breath, as we pressed forward to 
look. 

it is difficult to say exactly why the sight should have stir in 
me so prodigious an emotion of wonder and veneration, for i have had 
not a little to do with mummies, have unwound score of them, and even 
experiment magical with not a few. but there was something in the 
sight of that grey and silent figure, lie in its modern box of lead 
and wood at the bottom of this sandy grave, swathe in the bandage of 
century and wrap in the perfume linen that the priest of egypt 
had pray over with their mighty enchantment thousand of years 
before--something in the sight of it lie there and breathing its own 
spice-laden atmosphere even in the dark of its exile in this remote 
land, something that pierce to the very core of my being and touched 
that root of awe which slumber in every man near the birth of tear 
and the passion of true worship. 

i remember turning quick from the colonel, lest he should see my 
emotion, yet fail to understand its cause, turn and clutch john silence 
by the arm, and then fall tremble to see that he, too, had lower 
his head and was hiding his face in his hands. 

a kind of whirl storm came over me, rising out of i know not what 
utter deep of memory, and in a white of vision i heard the magical 
old chaunt from the book of the dead, and saw the gods pass by in 
dim procession, the mighty, immemorial being who were yet themselves 
only the personify attribute of the true gods, the god with the 
eyes of fire, the god with the face of smoke. i saw again anubis, the 
dog-faced deity, and the children of horus, eternal watch of the 
ages, as they swathe osiris, the first mummy of the world, in the 
scent and mystic bands, and i taste again something of the ecstasy 
of the justified soul as it embark in the golden boat of ra, and 
journey onwards to rest in the field of the blessed. 

and then, as dr. silence, with infinite reverence, stoop and touched 
the still face, so dreadfully staring with its paint eyes, there rose 
again to our nostril wave upon wave of this perfume of thousand of 
years, and time flee backwards like a thing of naught, showing me in 
haunt panorama the most wonderful dream of the whole world. 

a gentle hiss became audible in the air, and the doctor move 
quick backwards. it came close to our face and then seem to play 
about the wall and ceiling. 

“the last of the fire--still wait for its full accomplishment,” he 
muttered; but i heard both words and hiss as things far away, for i 
was still busy with the journey of the soul through the seven hall of 
death, listen for echo of the grandest ritual ever known to men. 

the earthen plate cover with hieroglyphics still lay beside the 
mummy, and round it, careful arrange at the points of the compass, 
stood the four jar with the head of the hawk, the jackal, the 
cynocephalus, and man, the jar in which were placed the hair, the nail 
parings, the heart, and other special portion of the body. even the 
amulets, the mirror, the blue clay statue of the ka, and the lamp with 
seven wick were there. only the sacred scarabæus was missing. 

“not only has it been torn from its ancient resting-place,” i heard dr. 
silence saying in a solemn voice as he look at colonel wragge with 
fixed gaze, “but it has been partially unwound,”--he pointed to the 
wrapping of the breast,--“and--the scarabæus has been remove from the 
throat.” 

the hissing, that was like the hiss of an invisible flame, had 
ceased; only from time to time we heard it as though it pass 
backwards and forward in the tunnel; and we stood look into each 
other’s face without speaking. 

presently colonel wragge made a great effort and brace himself. i 
heard the sound catch in his throat before the words actually became 
audible. 

“my sister,” he said, very low. and then there follow a long pause, 
broken at length by john silence. 

“it must be replaced,” he said significantly. 

“i knew nothing,” the soldier said, force himself to speak the words 
he hate saying. “absolutely nothing.” 

“it must be returned,” repeated the other, “if it is not now too late. 
for i fear--i fear----” 

colonel wragge made a movement of assent with his head. 

“it shall be,” he said. 

the place was still as the grave. 

i do not know what it was then that made us all three turn round with 
so sudden a start, for there was no sound audible to my ears, at least. 

the doctor was on the point of replace the lid over the mummy, when 
he straighten up as if he had been shot. 

“there’s something coming,” said colonel wragge under his breath, and 
the doctor’s eyes, peer down the small opening of the tunnel, show 
me the true direction. 

a distant shuffle noise became distinct audible coming from a point 
about half-way down the tunnel we had so laborious penetrated. 

“it’s the sand fall in,” i said, though i knew it was foolish. 

“no,” said the colonel calmly, in a voice that seem to have the ring 
of iron, “i’ve heard it for some time past. it is something alive--and 
it is coming nearer.” 

he stare about him with a look of resolution that made his face almost 
noble. the horror in his heart was overmastering, yet he stood there 
prepared for anything that might come. 

“there’s no other way out,” john silence said. 

he lean the lid against the sand, and waited. i knew by the mask-like 
expression of his face, the pallor, and the steady of the eyes, 
that he anticipate something that might be very terrible--appalling. 

the colonel and myself stood on either side of the opening. i still 
held my candle and was ashamed of the way it shook, dripping the 
grease all over me; but the soldier had set his into the sand just 
behind his feet. 

thought of being bury alive, of being smother like rats in a trap, 
of being caught and done to death by some invisible and merciless force 
we could not grapple with, rush into my mind. then i thought of 
fire--of suffocation--of being roast alive. the perspiration began to 
pour from my face. 

“steady!” came the voice of dr. silence to me through the vault. 

for five minutes, that seem fifty, we stood waiting, look from 
each other’s face to the mummy, and from the mummy to the hole, and 
all the time the shuffle sound, soft and stealthy, came gradual 
nearer. the tension, for me at least, was very near the break point 
when at last the cause of the disturbance reach the edge. it was 
hidden for a moment just behind the broken rim of soil. a jet of sand, 
shaken by the close vibration, trickle down on to the ground; i have 
never in my life seen anything fall with such laborious leisure. the 
next second, utter a cry of curious quality, it came into view. 

and it was far more distressing horrible than anything i had 
anticipated. 

for the sight of some egypt monster, some god of the tombs, or 
even of some demon of fire, i think i was already half prepared; but 
when, instead, i saw the white visage of miss wragge frame in that 
round opening of sand, follow by her body crawl on all-fours, her 
eyes bulge and reflect the yellow glare of the candles, my first 
instinct was to turn and run like a frantic animal seek a way of 
escape. 

but dr. silence, who seem no whit surprised, caught my arm and 
steady me, and we both saw the colonel then drop upon his knee and 
come thus to a level with his sister. for more than a whole minute, as 
though struck in stone, the two face gaze silent at each other: 
her’s, for all the dreadful emotion in it, more like a gargoyle than 
anything human; and his, white and blank with an expression that was 
beyond either astonishment or alarm. she look up; he look down. it 
was a picture in a nightmare, and the candle, stuck in the sand close 
to the hole, threw upon it the glare of impromptu footlights. 

then john silence move forward and spoke in a voice that was very low, 
yet perfectly calm and natural. 

“i am glad you have come,” he said. “you are the one person whose 
presence at this moment is most required. and i hope that you may yet 
be in time to appease the anger of the fire, and to bring peace again 
to your household, and,” he add lower still so that no one heard it 
but myself, “_safety to yourself_.” 

and while her brother stumble backwards, crush a candle into the 
sand in his awkwardness, the old lady crawl farther into the vaulted 
chamber and slow rose upon her feet. 

at the sight of the wrap figure of the mummy i was fully prepared 
to see her scream and faint, but on the contrary, to my complete 
amazement, she merely bowed her head and drop quiet upon her 
knees. then, after a pause of more than a minute, she raise her eyes 
to the roof and her lip began to mutter as in prayer. her right hand, 
meanwhile, which had been fumble for some time at her throat, 
sudden came away, and before the gaze of all of us she held it out, 
palm upwards, over the grey and ancient figure outstretched below. and 
in it we beheld glisten the green jasper of the stolen scarabæus. 

her brother, leaning heavy against the wall behind, utter a sound 
that was half cry, half exclamation, but john silence, standing 
directly in front of her, merely fixed his eyes on her and pointed 
downwards to the staring face below. 

“replace it,” he said sternly, “where it belongs.” 

miss wragge was kneel at the feet of the mummy when this happened. 
we three men all had our eyes rivet on what followed. only the reader 
who by some remote chance may have witness a line of mummies, freshly 
laid from their tomb upon the sand, slow stir and bend as the heat 
of the egypt sun warm their ancient body into the semblance of 
life, can form any conception of the ultimate horror we experienced 
when the silent figure before us move in its grave of lead and sand. 
slowly, before our eyes, it writhed, and, with a faint rustling of the 
immemorial cerements, rose up, and, through sightless and bandage 
eyes, stare across the yellow candle-light at the woman who had 
violate it. 

i try to move--her brother try to move--but the sand seem to hold 
our feet. i try to cry--her brother try to cry--but the sand seem 
to fill our lung and throat. we could only stare--and, even so, the 
sand seem to rise like a desert storm and cloud our vision.... 

and when i manage at length to open my eyes again, the mummy was lie 
once more upon its back, motionless, the shrunken and paint face 
upturned towards the ceiling, and the old lady had tumble forward and 
was lie in the semblance of death with her head and arms upon its 
crumble body. 

but upon the wrapping of the throat i saw the green jasper of the 
sacred scarabæus shining again like a living eye. 

colonel wragge and the doctor recover themselves long before i did, 
and i found myself helping them clumsy and unintelligent to raise 
the frail body of the old lady, while john silence careful replace 
the covering over the grave and scrape back the sand with his foot, 
while he issue brief directions. 

i heard his voice as in a dream; but the journey back along that 
cramped tunnel, weighted by a dead woman, blind with sand, suffocate 
with heat, was in no sense a dream. it took us the best part of half 
an hour to reach the open air. and, even then, we had to wait a 
considerable time for the appearance of dr. silence. we carry her 
undiscovered into the house and up to her own room. 

“the mummy will cause no further disturbance,” i heard dr. silence say 
to our host later that evening as we prepared to drive for the night 
train, “provided always,” he add significantly, “that you, and yours, 
cause _it_ no disturbance.” 

it was in a dream, too, that we left. 

“you did not see her face, i know,” he said to me as we wrap our 
rug about us in the empty compartment. and when i shook my head, quite 
unable to explain the instinct that had come to me not to look, he 
turn towards me, his face pale, and genuine sad. 

“scorched and blasted,” he whispered. 




case iv 

secret worship 


harris, the silk merchant, was in south germany on his way home from 
a business trip when the idea came to him sudden that he would take 
the mountain railway from strassbourg and run down to revisit his old 
school after an interval of something more than thirty years. and it 
was to this chance impulse of the junior partner in harris brother of 
st. paul’s churchyard that john silence owe one of the most curious 
case of his whole experience, for at that very moment he happen to 
be tramp these same mountain with a holiday knapsack, and from 
different points of the compass the two men were actually converge 
towards the same inn. 

now, deep down in the heart that for thirty years had been concerned 
chiefly with the profitable buy and sell of silk, this school had 
left the imprint of its peculiar influence, and, though perhaps unknown 
to harris, had strong coloured the whole of his subsequent existence. 
it belong to the deep religious life of a small protestant 
community (which it is unnecessary to specify), and his father had 
sent him there at the age of fifteen, partly because he would learn 
the germany requisite for the conduct of the silk business, and partly 
because the discipline was strict, and discipline was what his soul and 
body need just then more than anything else. 

the life, indeed, had prove exceedingly severe, and young harris 
benefit accordingly; for though corporal punishment was unknown, 
there was a system of mental and spiritual correction which somehow 
made the soul stand proud erect to receive it, while it struck at the 
very root of the fault and taught the boy that his character was being 
clean and strengthened, and that he was not merely being torture in 
a kind of personal revenge. 

that was over thirty years ago, when he was a dreamy and impressionable 
youth of fifteen; and now, as the train climb slow up the winding 
mountain gorges, his mind travelled back somewhat loving over the 
intervene period, and forgotten detail rose vivid again before him 
out of the shadows. the life there had been very wonderful, it seem 
to him, in that remote mountain village, protect from the tumult 
of the world by the love and worship of the devout brotherhood that 
minister to the needs of some hundred boys from every country in 
europe. sharp the scene came back to him. he smelt again the long 
stone corridors, the hot pinewood rooms, where the sultry hour of 
summer study were pass with bee drone through open window in the 
sunshine, and germany character struggle in the mind with dream of 
english lawns--and then the sudden awful cry of the master in german-- 

“harris, stand up! you sleep!” 

and he recall the dreadful standing motionless for an hour, book in 
hand, while the knee felt like wax and the head grew heavy than a 
cannon-ball. 

the very smell of the cooking came back to him--the daily _sauerkraut_, 
the watery chocolate on sundays, the flavour of the stringy meat 
serve twice a week at _mittagessen_; and he smile to think again of 
the half-rations that was the punishment for speak english. the 
very odour of the milk-bowls,--the hot sweet aroma that rose from the 
soaking peasant-bread at the six-o’clock breakfast,--came back to him 
pungently, and he saw the huge _speisesaal_ with the hundred boys in 
their school uniform, all eat sleepy in silence, gulp down 
the coarse bread and scalding milk in terror of the bell that would 
presently cut them short--and, at the far end where the master sat, 
he saw the narrow slit window with the vista of entice field and 
forest beyond. 

and this, in turn, made him think of the great barn-like room on the 
top floor where all slept together in wooden cots, and he heard in 
memory the clamour of the cruel bell that woke them on winter mornings 
at five o’clock and summon them to the stone-flagged _waschkammer_, 
where boys and master alike, after scanty and icy washing, dress in 
complete silence. 

from this his mind pass swiftly, with vivid picture-thoughts, 
to other things, and with a passing shiver he remember how 
the lonely of never being alone had eaten into him, and how 
everything--work, meals, sleep, walks, leisure--was done with his 
“division” of twenty other boys and under the eyes of at least two 
masters. the only solitude possible was by ask for half an hour’s 
practice in the cell-like music rooms, and harris smile to himself as 
he recall the zeal of his violin studies. 

then, as the train puffed laborious through the great pine forest 
that cover these mountain with a giant carpet of velvet, he found the 
pleasant layer of memory give up their dead, and he recall with 
admiration the kindness of the masters, whom all address as brother, 
and marvel afresh at their devotion in bury themselves for years 
in such a place, only to leave it, in most cases, for the still rough 
life of missionary in the wild place of the world. 

he thought once more of the still, religious atmosphere that hung 
over the little forest community like a veil, barring the distressful 
world; of the picturesque ceremony at easter, christmas, and new 
year; of the numerous feast-days and charming little festivals. the 
_beschehr-fest_, in particular, came back to him,--the feast of gift 
at christmas,--when the entire community pair off and gave presents, 
many of which had taken week to make or the savings of many days to 
purchase. and then he saw the midnight ceremony in the church at new 
year, with the shining face of the _prediger_ in the pulpit,--the 
village preach who, on the last night of the old year, saw in the 
empty gallery beyond the organ loft the face of all who were to die 
in the ensue twelve months, and who at last recognise himself among 
them, and, in the very middle of his sermon, pass into a state of 
rapt ecstasy and burst into a torrent of praise. 

thick the memory crowded upon him. the picture of the small village 
dream its unselfish life on the mountain-tops, clean, wholesome, 
simple, searching vigorous for its god, and training hundred of 
boys in the grand way, rose up in his mind with all the power of an 
obsession. he felt once more the old mystical enthusiasm, deep than 
the sea and more wonderful than the stars; he heard again the wind 
sigh from league of forest over the red roof in the moonlight; he 
heard the brothers’ voice talk of the things beyond this life as 
though they had actually experienced them in the body; and, as he sat 
in the jolt train, a spirit of unutterable longing pass over his 
sear and tired soul, stirring in the depths of him a sea of emotion 
that he thought had long since frozen into immobility. 

and the contrast pained him,--the idealist dreamer then, the man of 
business now,--so that a spirit of unworld peace and beauty known 
only to the soul in meditation laid its feather finger upon his 
heart, moving strange the surface of the waters. 

harris shiver a little and look out of the window of his empty 
carriage. the train had long pass hornberg, and far below the stream 
tumble in white foam down the limestone rocks. in front of him, dome 
upon dome of wooded mountain stood against the sky. it was october, 
and the air was cool and sharp, wood-smoke and damp moss exquisite 
mingle in it with the subtle odour of the pines. overhead, between 
the tip of the highest firs, he saw the first stars peeping, and the 
sky was a clean, pale amethyst that seem exactly the colour all these 
memory clothe themselves with in his mind. 

he lean back in his corner and sighed. he was a heavy man, and he had 
not known sentiment for years; he was a big man, and it took much to 
move him, literally and figuratively; he was a man in whom the dream 
of god that haunt the soul in youth, though overlaid by the scum that 
gather in the fight for money, had not, as with the majority, utterly 
die the death. 

he came back into this little neglect pocket of the years, where 
so much fine gold had collected and lain undisturbed, with all his 
semi-spiritual emotion aquiver; and, as he watch the mountain-tops 
come nearer, and smelt the forgotten odour of his boyhood, something 
melt on the surface of his soul and left him sensitive to a degree he 
had not known since, thirty years before, he had live here with his 
dreams, his conflicts, and his youthful suffering. 

a thrill ran through him as the train stop with a jolt at a tiny 
station and he saw the name in large black lettering on the grey stone 
building, and below it, the number of metre it stood above the level 
of the sea. 

“the highest point on the line!” he exclaimed. “how well i remember 
it--sommerau--summer meadow. the very next station is mine!” 

and, as the train ran downhill with brake on and steam shut off, he 
put his head out of the window and one by one saw the old familiar 
landmark in the dusk. they stare at him like dead face in a dream. 
queer, sharp feelings, half poignant, half sweet, stir in his heart. 

“there’s the hot, white road we walk along so often with the two 
brüder always at our heels,” he thought; “and there, by jove, is the 
turn through the forest to ‘_die galgen_,’ the stone gallows where they 
hang the witch in olden days!” 

he smile a little as the train slid past. 

“and there’s the copse where the lily of the valley powdered the 
ground in spring; and, i swear,”--he put his head out with a sudden 
impulse,--“if that’s not the very clearing where calame, the france 
boy, chase the swallow-tail with me, and bruder pagel gave us 
half-rations for leave the road without permission, and for shouting 
in our mother tongues!” and he laugh again as the memory came back 
with a rush, flood his mind with vivid detail. 

the train stopped, and he stood on the grey gravel platform like a man 
in a dream. it seem half a century since he last wait there with 
cord wooden boxes, and got into the train for strassbourg and home 
after the two years’ exile. time drop from him like an old garment 
and he felt a boy again. only, things look so much small than his 
memory of them; shrunk and dwindle they looked, and the distance 
seem on a curious small scale. 

he made his way across the road to the little gasthaus, and, as he 
went, face and figures of former schoolfellows,--german, swiss, 
italian, french, russian,--slipped out of the shadowy wood and 
silent accompany him. they flit by his side, raise their eyes 
questioningly, sadly, to his. but their name he had forgotten. some 
of the brothers, too, came with them, and most of these he remember 
by name--bruder röst, bruder pagel, bruder schliemann, and the bearded 
face of the old preach who had seen himself in the haunt gallery 
of those about to die--bruder gysin. the dark forest lay all about 
him like a sea that any moment might rush with velvet wave upon the 
scene and sweep all the face away. the air was cool and wonderful 
fragrant, but with every perfume breath came also a pallid memory.... 

yet, in spite of the underlying sad inseparable from such an 
experience, it was all very interesting, and held a pleasure peculiarly 
its own, so that harris engaged his room and ordered supper feeling 
well pleased with himself, and intend to walk up to the old school 
that very evening. it stood in the centre of the community’s village, 
some four mile distant through the forest, and he now recollect for 
the first time that this little protestant settlement dwelt isolated 
in a section of the country that was otherwise catholic. crucifix 
and shrine surround the clearing like the sentry of a beleagure 
army. once beyond the square of the village, with its few acre of 
field and orchard, the forest crowded up in solid phalanxes, and beyond 
the rim of tree began the country that was rule by the priest of 
another faith. he vague remembered, too, that the catholic had 
show sometimes a certain hostility towards the little protestant 
oasis that flourish so quiet and benign in their midst. he had 
quite forgotten this. how trumpery it all seem now with his wide 
experience of life and his knowledge of other country and the great 
outside world. it was like step back, not thirty years, but three 
hundred. 

there were only two other besides himself at supper. one of them, a 
bearded, middle-aged man in tweeds, sat by himself at the far end, 
and harris kept out of his way because he was english. he fear he 
might be in business, possibly even in the silk business, and that 
he would perhaps talk on the subject. the other traveller, however, 
was a catholic priest. he was a little man who ate his salad with a 
knife, yet so gently that it was almost inoffensive, and it was the 
sight of “the cloth” that recall his memory of the old antagonism. 
harris mention by way of conversation the object of his sentimental 
journey, and the priest look up sharp at him with raise eyebrow 
and an expression of surprise and suspicion that somehow pique him. he 
ascribe it to his difference of belief. 

“yes,” went on the silk merchant, pleased to talk of what his mind was 
so full, “and it was a curious experience for an english boy to be 
drop down into a school of a hundred foreigners. i well remember the 
lonely and intolerable heimweh of it at first.” his germany was very 
fluent. 

the priest opposite look up from his cold veal and potato salad and 
smiled. it was a nice face. he explain quiet that he did not belong 
here, but was making a tour of the parish of württemberg and baden. 

“it was a strict life,” add harris. “we english, i remember, use to 
call it _gefängnisleben_--prison life!” 

the face of the other, for some unaccountable reason, darkened. after a 
slight pause, and more by way of polite than because he wish to 
continue the subject, he said quietly-- 

“it was a flourish school in those days, of course. afterwards, 
i have heard----” he shrug his shoulder slightly, and the odd 
look--it almost seem a look of alarm--came back into his eyes. the 
sentence remain unfinished. 

something in the tone of the man seem to his listener uncall 
for--in a sense reproachful, singular. harris bridle in spite of 
himself. 

“it has changed?” he asked. “i can hardly believe----” 

“you have not heard, then?” observe the priest gently, making a 
gesture as though to cross himself, yet not actually complete it. 
“you have not heard what happen there before it was abandoned----?” 

it was very childish, of course, and perhaps he was overtire and 
overwrought in some way, but the words and manner of the little priest 
seem to him so offensive--so disproportionate offensive--that he 
hardly notice the conclude sentence. he recall the old bitter 
and the old antagonism, and for a moment he almost lost his temper. 

“nonsense,” he interrupt with a forced laugh, “_unsinn!_ you must 
forgive me, sir, for contradict you. but i was a pupil there 
myself. i was at school there. there was no place like it. i cannot 
believe that anything serious could have happen to--to take away its 
character. the devotion of the brother would be difficult to equal 
anywhere----” 

he broke off suddenly, realise that his voice had been raise unduly 
and that the man at the far end of the table might understand german; 
and at the same moment he look up and saw that this individual’s 
eyes were fixed upon his face intently. they were peculiarly bright. 
also they were rather wonderful eyes, and the way they met his own 
serve in some way he could not understand to convey both a reproach 
and a warning. the whole face of the stranger, indeed, made a vivid 
impression upon him, for it was a face, he now notice for the first 
time, in whose presence one would not willing have said or done 
anything unworthy. harris could not explain to himself how it was he 
had not become conscious soon of its presence. 

but he could have bitten off his tongue for have so far forgotten 
himself. the little priest lapsed into silence. only once he said, 
look up and speak in a low voice that was not intended to be 
overheard, but that evidently _was_ overheard, “you will find it 
different.” presently he rose and left the table with a polite bow that 
included both the others. 

and, after him, from the far end rose also the figure in the tweed 
suit, leave harris by himself. 

he sat on for a bit in the darken room, sip his coffee and 
smoking his fifteen-pfennig cigar, till the girl came in to light the 
oil lamps. he felt vex with himself for his lapse from good manners, 
yet hardly able to account for it. most likely, he reflected, he 
had been annoy because the priest had unintentional change the 
pleasant character of his dream by introduce a jar note. later he 
must seek an opportunity to make amends. at present, however, he was 
too impatient for his walk to the school, and he took his stick and hat 
and pass out into the open air. 

and, as he cross before the gasthaus, he notice that the priest 
and the man in the tweed suit were engaged already in such deep 
conversation that they hardly notice him as he pass and raise his 
hat. 

he start off briskly, well remember the way, and hope to reach 
the village in time to have a word with one of the brüder. they might 
even ask him in for a cup of coffee. he felt sure of his welcome, and 
the old memory were in full possession once more. the hour of return 
was a matter of no consequence whatever. 

it was then just after seven o’clock, and the october evening was 
drawing in with chill airs from the recess of the forest. the road 
plunge straight from the railway clearing into its depths, and in a 
very few minutes the tree engulf him and the clack of his boots 
fell dead and echoless against the serried stem of a million firs. it 
was very black; one trunk was hardly distinguishable from another. he 
walk smartly, swinging his holly stick. once or twice he pass a 
peasant on his way to bed, and the guttural “gruss got,” unheard for 
so long, emphasise the passage of time, while yet making it seem as 
nothing. a fresh group of pictures crowded his mind. again the figures 
of former schoolfellow flit out of the forest and kept pace by his 
side, whisper of the doings of long ago. one reverie step hard 
upon the heel of another. every turn in the road, every clearing of 
the forest, he knew, and each in turn brought forgotten association to 
life. he enjoy himself thoroughly. 

he march on and on. there was powdered gold in the sky till the moon 
rose, and then a wind of faint silver spread silent between the 
earth and stars. he saw the tip of the fir tree shimmer, and heard 
them whisper as the breeze turn their needle towards the light. the 
mountain air was indescribable sweet. the road shone like the foam of a 
river through the gloom. white moth flit here and there like silent 
thought across his path, and a hundred smell greet him from the 
forest cavern across the years. 

then, when he least expect it, the tree fell away abrupt on both 
sides, and he stood on the edge of the village clearing. 

he walk faster. there lay the familiar outline of the houses, 
sheet with silver; there stood the tree in the little central square 
with the fountain and small green lawns; there loom the shape of 
the church next to the gasthof der brüdergemeinde; and just beyond, 
dim rising into the sky, he saw with a sudden thrill the mass of 
the huge school building, block castle-like with deep shadow in 
the moonlight, standing square and formidable to face him after the 
silence of more than a quarter of a century. 

he pass quick down the desert village street and stop close 
beneath its shadow, staring up at the wall that had once held 
him prisoner for two years--two unbroken years of discipline and 
homesickness. memory and emotion surge through his mind; for the 
most vivid sensation of his youth had focus about this spot, and 
it was here he had first begun to live and learn values. not a single 
footstep broke the silence, though lights glimmer here and there 
through cottage windows; but when he look up at the high wall of 
the school, drape now in shadow, he easily imagine that well-known 
face crowded to the window to greet him--closed window that really 
reflect only moonlight and the gleam of stars. 

this, then, was the old school building, standing foursquare to the 
world, with its shutter windows, its lofty, tile roof, and the 
spike lightning-conductors point like black and talon finger 
from the corners. for a long time he stood and stared. then, 
presently, he came to himself again, and realise to his joy that a 
light still shone in the window of the _bruderstube_. 

he turn from the road and pass through the iron railings; then 
climb the twelve stone steps and stood facing the black wooden door 
with the heavy bar of iron, a door he had once loathe and dread 
with the hatred and passion of an imprison soul, but now look upon 
tender with a sort of boyish delight. 

almost timorous he pull the rope and listen with a tremor of 
excitement to the clang of the bell deep within the building. and 
the long-forgotten sound brought the past before him with such a 
vivid sense of reality that he positively shivered. it was like the 
magic bell in the fairy-tale that rolls back the curtain of time and 
summons the figures from the shadow of the dead. he had never felt so 
sentimental in his life. it was like being young again. and, at the 
same time, he began to bulk rather large in his own eyes with a certain 
spurious importance. he was a big man from the world of strife and 
action. in this little place of peaceful dream would he, perhaps, not 
cut something of a figure? 

“i’ll try once more,” he thought after a long pause, seize the iron 
bell-rope, and was just about to pull it when a step sound on the 
stone passage within, and the huge door slow swung open. 

a tall man with a rather severe cast of countenance stood facing him in 
silence. 

“i must apologise--it is somewhat late,” he began a trifle pompously, 
“but the fact is i am an old pupil. i have only just arrive and really 
could not restrain myself.” his germany seem not quite so fluent as 
usual. “my interest is so great. i was here in ’70.” 

the other open the door wide and at once bowed him in with a smile 
of genuine welcome. 

“i am bruder kalkmann,” he said quiet in a deep voice. “i myself was 
a master here about that time. it is a great pleasure always to welcome 
a former pupil.” he look at him very keen for a few seconds, 
and then added, “i think, too, it is splendid of you to come--very 
splendid.” 

“it is a very great pleasure,” harris replied, delight with his 
reception. 

the dimly-lighted corridor with its flooring of grey stone, and the 
familiar sound of a germany voice echo through it,--with the peculiar 
intonation the brother always use in speaking,--all combine to lift 
him bodily, as it were, into the dream-atmosphere of long-forgotten 
days. he step gladly into the building and the door shut with the 
familiar thunder that complete the reconstruction of the past. he 
almost felt the old sense of imprisonment, of ache nostalgia, of 
have lost his liberty. 

harris sigh involuntary and turn towards his host, who return 
his smile faint and then led the way down the corridor. 

“the boys have retired,” he explained, “and, as you remember, we keep 
early hour here. but, at least, you will join us for a little while in 
the _bruderstube_ and enjoy a cup of coffee.” this was precisely what 
the silk merchant had hoped, and he accept with an alacrity that he 
intended to be temper by graciousness. “and tomorrow,” continue the 
bruder, “you must come and spend a whole day with us. you may even find 
acquaintances, for several pupil of your day have come back here as 
masters.” 

for one brief second there pass into the man’s eyes a look that 
made the visitor start. but it vanish as quick as it came. it was 
impossible to define. harris convinced himself it was the effect of a 
shadow cast by the lamp they had just pass on the wall. he dismiss 
it from his mind. 

“you are very kind, i’m sure,” he said politely. “it is perhaps a 
greater pleasure to me than you can imagine to see the place again. 
ah,”--he stop short opposite a door with the upper half of glass 
and peer in--“surely there is one of the music rooms where i use to 
practise the violin. how it come back to me after all these years!” 

bruder kalkmann stop indulgently, smiling, to allow his guest a 
moment’s inspection. 

“you still have the boys’ orchestra? i remember i use to play ‘_zweite 
geige_’ in it. bruder schliemann conduct at the piano. dear me, i can 
see him now with his long black hair and--and----” he stop abruptly. 
again the odd, dark look pass over the stern face of his companion. 
for an instant it seem curious familiar. 

“we still keep up the pupils’ orchestra,” he said, “but bruder 
schliemann, i am sorry to say----” he hesitate an instant, and then 
added, “bruder schliemann is dead.” 

“indeed, indeed,” said harris quickly. “i am sorry to hear it.” he was 
conscious of a faint feeling of distress, but whether it arose from 
the news of his old music teacher’s death, or--from something else--he 
could not quite determine. he gaze down the corridor that lost itself 
among shadows. in the street and village everything had seem so 
much small than he remembered, but here, inside the school building, 
everything seem so much bigger. the corridor was lofty and longer, 
more spacious and vast, than the mental picture he had preserved. his 
thought wander dreamy for an instant. 

he glance up and saw the face of the bruder watch him with a smile 
of patient indulgence. 

“your memory possess you,” he observe gently, and the stern look 
pass into something almost pitying. 

“you are right,” return the man of silk, “they do. this was the most 
wonderful period of my whole life in a sense. at the time i hate 
it----” he hesitated, not wish to hurt the brother’s feelings. 

“according to english idea it seem strict, of course,” the other 
said persuasively, so that he went on. 

“----yes, partly that; and partly the ceaseless nostalgia, and the 
solitude which came from never being really alone. in english school 
the boys enjoy peculiar freedom, you know.” 

bruder kalkmann, he saw, was listen intently. 

“but it produce one result that i have never wholly lost,” he 
continue self-consciously, “and am grateful for.” 

“_ach! wie so, denn?_” 

“the constant inner pain threw me headlong into your religious life, so 
that the whole force of my being seem to project itself towards the 
search for a deep satisfaction--a real resting-place for the soul. 
during my two years here i yearn for god in my boyish way as perhaps 
i have never yearn for anything since. moreover, i have never quite 
lost that sense of peace and inward joy which accompany the search. i 
can never quite forget this school and the deep things it taught me.” 

he pause at the end of his long speech, and a brief silence fell 
between them. he fear he had said too much, or express himself 
clumsy in the foreign language, and when bruder kalkmann laid a hand 
upon his shoulder, he gave a little involuntary start. 

“so that my memory perhaps do possess me rather strongly,” he add 
apologetically; “and this long corridor, these rooms, that barred and 
gloomy front door, all touch chord that--that----” his germany fail 
him and he glance at his companion with an explanatory smile and 
gesture. but the brother had remove the hand from his shoulder and was 
standing with his back to him, look down the passage. 

“naturally, naturally so,” he said hasty without turning round. “_es 
ist doch selbstverständlich._ we shall all understand.” 

then he turn suddenly, and harris saw that his face had turn most 
oddly and disagreeable sinister. it may only have been the shadow 
again play their trick with the wretched oil lamp on the wall, 
for the dark expression pass instantly as they retrace their steps 
down the corridor, but the englishman somehow got the impression that 
he had said something to give offence, something that was not quite to 
the other’s taste. opposite the door of the _bruderstube_ they stopped. 
harris realise that it was late and he had possibly stay talk too 
long. he made a tentative effort to leave, but his companion would not 
hear of it. 

“you must have a cup of coffee with us,” he said firm as though he 
meant it, “and my colleague will be delight to see you. some of them 
will remember you, perhaps.” 

the sound of voice came pleasant through the door, men’s voice 
talk together. bruder kalkmann turn the handle and they enter a 
room ablaze with light and full of people. 

“ah,--but your name?” he whispered, bend down to catch the reply; 
“you have not told me your name yet.” 

“harris,” said the englishman quick as they went in. he felt nervous 
as he cross the threshold, but ascribe the momentary trepidation 
to the fact that he was break the strictest rule of the whole 
establishment, which forbade a boy under severest penalty to come 
near this holy of holy where the master took their brief leisure. 

“ah, yes, of course--harris,” repeated the other as though he 
remember it “come in, herr harris, come in, please. your visit will 
be immensely appreciated. it is really very fine, very wonderful of you 
to have come in this way.” 

the door closed behind them and, in the sudden light which made his 
sight swim for a moment, the exaggeration of the language escape his 
attention. he heard the voice of bruder kalkmann introduce him. he 
spoke very loud, indeed, unnecessarily,--absurdly loud, harris thought. 

“brothers,” he announced, “it is my pleasure and privilege to introduce 
to you herr harris from england. he has just arrive to make us a 
little visit, and i have already express to him on behalf of us all 
the satisfaction we feel that he is here. he was, as you remember, a 
pupil in the year ’70.” 

it was a very formal, a very germany introduction, but harris rather 
like it. it made him feel important and he appreciate the tact that 
made it almost seem as though he had been expected. 

the black form rose and bowed; harris bowed; kalkmann bowed. every one 
was very polite and very courtly. the room swam with moving figures; 
the light dazzle him after the gloom of the corridor; there was thick 
cigar smoke in the atmosphere. he took the chair that was offer to 
him between two of the brothers, and sat down, feeling vague that his 
perception were not quite as keen and accurate as usual. he felt a 
trifle daze perhaps, and the spell of the past came strong over him, 
confuse the immediate present and making everything dwindle oddly to 
the dimensions of long ago. he seem to pass under the mastery of a 
great mood that was a composite reproduction of all the mood of his 
forgotten boyhood. 

then he pull himself together with a sharp effort and enter into 
the conversation that had begun again to buzz round him. moreover, 
he enter into it with keen pleasure, for the brothers--there were 
perhaps a dozen of them in the little room--treated him with a charm 
of manner that speedy made him feel one of themselves. this, again, 
was a very subtle delight to him. he felt that he had step out 
of the greedy, vulgar, self-seeking world, the world of silk and 
market and profit-making--stepped into the cleaner atmosphere where 
spiritual ideal were paramount and life was simple and devoted. 
it all charm him inexpressibly, so that he realised--yes, in a 
sense--the degrade of his twenty years’ absorption in business. 
this keen atmosphere under the stars where men thought only of their 
souls, and of the soul of others, was too rarefied for the world he 
was now associate with. he found himself making comparison to his 
own disadvantage,--comparisons with the mystical little dreamer that 
had step thirty years before from the stern peace of this devout 
community, and the man of the world that he had since become,--and 
the contrast made him shiver with a keen regret and something like 
self-contempt. 

he glance round at the other face floating towards him through 
tobacco smoke--this acrid cigar smoke he remember so well: how keen 
they were, how strong, placid, touched with the nobility of great aim 
and unselfish purposes. at one or two he look particularly. he hardly 
knew why. they rather fascinate him. there was something so very stern 
and uncompromising about them, and something, too, oddly, subtly, 
familiar, that yet just elude him. but whenever their eyes met his own 
they held undeniable welcome in them; and some held more--a kind of 
perplexed admiration, he thought, something that was between esteem and 
deference. this note of respect in all the face was very flatter to 
his vanity. 

coffee was serve presently, made by a black-haired brother who sat 
in the corner by the piano and bore a marked resemblance to bruder 
schliemann, the musical director of thirty years ago. harris exchange 
bow with him when he took the cup from his white hands, which he 
notice were like the hand of a woman. he lit a cigar, offer to him 
by his neighbour, with whom he was chat delightfully, and who, in 
the glare of the light match, remind him sharp for a moment of 
bruder pagel, his former room-master. 

“_es ist wirklich merkwürdig_,” he said, “how many resemblance i see, 
or imagine. it is really _very_ curious!” 

“yes,” reply the other, peer at him over his coffee cup, “the 
spell of the place is wonderful strong. i can well understand that 
the old face rise before your mind’s eye--almost to the exclusion of 
ourselves perhaps.” 

they both laugh pleasantly. it was soothe to find his mood 
understood and appreciated. and they pass on to talk of the mountain 
village, its isolation, its remote from worldly life, its peculiar 
fitness for meditation and worship, and for spiritual development--of a 
certain kind. 

“and your coming back in this way, herr harris, has pleased us all so 
much,” join in the bruder on his left. “we esteem you for it most 
highly. we honour you for it.” 

harris made a deprecate gesture. “i fear, for my part, it is only a 
very selfish pleasure,” he said a trifle unctuously. 

“not all would have had the courage,” add the one who resemble 
bruder pagel. 

“you mean,” said harris, a little puzzled, “the disturb 
memories----?” 

bruder pagel look at him steadily, with unmistakable admiration and 
respect. “i mean that most men hold so strong to life, and can give 
up so little for their beliefs,” he said gravely. 

the englishman felt slightly uncomfortable. these worthy men really 
made too much of his sentimental journey. besides, the talk was get 
a little out of his depth. he hardly follow it. 

“the worldly life still has _some_ charm for me,” he reply 
smilingly, as though to indicate that sainthood was not yet quite 
within his grasp. 

“all the more, then, must we honour you for so freely coming,” said the 
brother on his left; “so unconditionally!” 

a pause followed, and the silk merchant felt relieved when the 
conversation took a more general turn, although he noted that it never 
travelled very far from the subject of his visit and the wonderful 
situation of the lonely village for men who wish to develop their 
spiritual powers and practise the rite of a high worship. other 
join in, compliment him on his knowledge of the language, 
making him feel utterly at his ease, yet at the same time a little 
uncomfortable by the excess of their admiration. after all, it was such 
a very small thing to do, this sentimental journey. 

the time pass along quickly; the coffee was excellent, the cigar 
soft and of the nutty flavour he loved. at length, fear to outstay 
his welcome, he rose reluctantly to take his leave. but the other 
would not hear of it. it was not often a former pupil return to visit 
them in this simple, unaffected way. the night was young. if necessary 
they could even find him a corner in the great _schlafzimmer_ upstairs. 
he was easily persuade to stay a little longer. somehow he had become 
the centre of the little party. he felt pleased, flattered, honoured. 

“and perhaps bruder schliemann will play something for us--now.” 

it was kalkmann speaking, and harris start visibly as he heard the 
name, and saw the black-haired man by the piano turn with a smile. for 
schliemann was the name of his old music director, who was dead. could 
this be his son? they were so exactly alike. 

“if bruder meyer has not put his amati to bed, i will accompany him,” 
said the musician suggestively, look across at a man whom harris had 
not yet noticed, and who, he now saw, was the very image of a former 
master of that name. 

meyer rose and excuse himself with a little bow, and the englishman 
quick observe that he had a peculiar gesture as though his neck had 
a false join on to the body just below the collar and fear it might 
break. meyer of old had this trick of movement. he remember how the 
boys use to copy it. 

he glance sharp from face to face, feeling as though some silent, 
unseen process were change everything about him. all the face seem 
oddly familiar. pagel, the brother he had been talk with, was of 
course the image of pagel, his former room-master; and kalkmann, he now 
realise for the first time, was the very twin of another master whose 
name he had quite forgotten, but whom he use to dislike intense in 
the old days. and, through the smoke, peer at him from the corner 
of the room, he saw that all the brother about him had the face he 
had known and live with long ago--röst, fluheim, meinert, rigel, gysin. 

he stare hard, sudden grown more alert, and everywhere saw, or 
fancy he saw, strange likenesses, ghostly resemblances,--more, the 
identical face of years ago. there was something queer about it all, 
something not quite right, something that made him feel uneasy. he 
shook himself, mental and actually, blow the smoke from before his 
eyes with a long breath, and as he did so he notice to his dismay that 
every one was fixedly staring. they were watch him. 

this brought him to his senses. as an englishman, and a foreigner, he 
did not wish to be rude, or to do anything to make himself foolish 
conspicuous and spoil the harmony of the evening. he was a guest, and a 
privileged guest at that. besides, the music had already begun. bruder 
schliemann’s long white finger were caress the key to some purpose. 

he subside into his chair and smoke with half-closed eyes that yet 
saw everything. 

but the shudder had establish itself in his being, and, whether he 
would or not, it kept repeating itself. as a town, far up some inland 
river, feel the pressure of the distant sea, so he became aware that 
mighty forces from somewhere beyond his ken were urge themselves 
up against his soul in this smoky little room. he began to feel 
exceedingly ill at ease. 

and as the music fill the air his mind began to clear. like a lift 
veil there rose up something that had hitherto obscure his vision. 
the words of the priest at the railway inn flash across his brain 
unbidden: “you will find it different.” and also, though why he 
could not tell, he saw mental the strong, rather wonderful eyes of 
that other guest at the supper-table, the man who had overhead his 
conversation, and had later got into earnest talk with the priest. he 
took out his watch and stole a glance at it. two hour had slip by. 
it was already eleven o’clock. 

schliemann, meanwhile, utterly absorb in his music, was play a 
solemn measure. the piano sang marvellously. the power of a great 
conviction, the simplicity of great art, the vital spiritual message 
of a soul that had found itself--all this, and more, were in the 
chords, and yet somehow the music was what can only be describe as 
impure--atrociously and diabolical impure. and the piece itself, 
although harris did not recognise it as anything familiar, was surely 
the music of a mass--huge, majestic, sombre? it stalk through the 
smoky room with slow power, like the passage of something that was 
mighty, yet profound intimate, and as it went there stir into each 
and every face about him the signature of the enormous forces of which 
it was the audible symbol. the countenance round him turn sinister, 
but not idly, negative sinister: they grew dark with purpose. he 
sudden recall the face of bruder kalkmann in the corridor early 
in the evening. the motive of their secret soul rose to the eyes, and 
mouths, and foreheads, and hung there for all to see like the black 
banner of an assembly of ill-starred and fallen creatures. demons--was 
the horrible word that flash through his brain like a sheet of fire. 

when this sudden discovery leap out upon him, for a moment he lost 
his self-control. without wait to think and weigh his extraordinary 
impression, he did a very foolish but a very natural thing. feeling 
himself irresistible driven by the sudden stress to some kind of 
action, he sprang to his feet--and screamed! to his own utter 
amaze he stood up and shriek aloud! 

but no one stirred. no one, apparently, took the slightest notice of 
his absurd wild behaviour. it was almost as if no one but himself 
had heard the scream at all--as though the music had drown it and 
swallow it up--as though after all perhaps he had not really scream 
as loud as he imagined, or had not scream at all. 

then, as he glance at the motionless, dark face before him, something 
of utter cold pass into his being, touching his very soul.... all 
emotion cool suddenly, leave him like a recede tide. he sat down 
again, ashamed, mortified, angry with himself for behave like a fool 
and a boy. and the music, meanwhile, continue to issue from the white 
and snake-like finger of bruder schliemann, as poison wine might 
issue from the weirdly-fashioned neck of antique phials. 

and, with the rest of them, harris drank it in. 

force himself to believe that he had been the victim of some kind of 
illusory perception, he vigorous restrained his feelings. then the 
music presently ceased, and every one applaud and began to talk at 
once, laughing, change seats, compliment the player, and behave 
naturally and easily as though nothing out of the way had happened. 
the face appear normal once more. the brother crowded round their 
visitor, and he join in their talk and even heard himself thank 
the gifted musician. 

but, at the same time, he found himself edging towards the door, near 
and nearer, change his chair when possible, and join the group 
that stood closest to the way of escape. 

“i must thank you all _tausendmal_ for my little reception and the 
great pleasure--the very great honour you have done me,” he began in 
decided tone at length, “but i fear i have trespass far too long 
already on your hospitality. moreover, i have some distance to walk to 
my inn.” 

a chorus of voice greet his words. they would not hear of his 
going,--at least not without first partake of refreshment. they 
produce pumpernickel from one cupboard, and rye-bread and sausage from 
another, and all began to talk again and eat. more coffee was made, 
fresh cigar lighted, and bruder meyer took out his violin and began to 
tune it softly. 

“there is always a bed upstairs if herr harris will accept it,” said 
one. 

“and it is difficult to find the way out now, for all the door are 
locked,” laugh another loudly. 

“let us take our simple pleasure as they come,” cry a third. “bruder 
harris will understand how we appreciate the honour of this last visit 
of his.” 

they made a dozen excuses. they all laughed, as though the polite 
of their words was but formal, and veiled thinly--more and more 
thinly--a very different meaning. 

“and the hour of midnight draw near,” add bruder kalkmann with a 
charming smile, but in a voice that sound to the englishman like the 
grating of iron hinges. 

their germany seem to him more and more difficult to understand. 
he noted that they call him “bruder” too, class him as one of 
themselves. 

and then sudden he had a flash of keen perception, and 
realise with a creep of his flesh that he had all along 
misinterpreted--grossly misinterpret all they had been saying. they 
had talk about the beauty of the place, its isolation and remote 
from the world, its peculiar fitness for certain kind of spiritual 
development and worship--yet hardly, he now grasped, in the sense in 
which he had taken the words. they had meant something different. 
their spiritual powers, their desire for loneliness, their passion 
for worship, were not the powers, the solitude, or the worship that 
_he_ meant and understood. he was play a part in some horrible 
masquerade; he was among men who cloak their lives with religion in 
order to follow their real purpose unseen of men. 

what did it all mean? how had he blunder into so equivocal a 
situation? had he blunder into it at all? had he not rather been led 
into it, deliberate led? his thought grew dreadfully confused, and 
his confidence in himself began to fade. and why, he sudden thought 
again, were they so impress by the mere fact of his coming to revisit 
his old school? what was it they so admire and wonder at in his 
simple act? why did they set such store upon his have the courage to 
come, to “give himself so freely,” “unconditionally” as one of them had 
express it with such a mockery of exaggeration? 

fear stir in his heart most horribly, and he found no answer to any 
of his questionings. only one thing he now understood quite clearly: 
it was their purpose to keep him here. they did not intend that he 
should go. and from this moment he realise that they were sinister, 
formidable and, in some way he had yet to discover, inimical to 
himself, inimical to his life. and the phrase one of them had use a 
moment ago--“this _last_ visit of his”--rose before his eyes in letters 
of flame. 

harris was not a man of action, and had never known in all the course 
of his career what it meant to be in a situation of real danger. he 
was not necessarily a coward, though, perhaps, a man of untry nerve. 
he realise at last plainly that he was in a very awkward predicament 
indeed, and that he had to deal with men who were utterly in earnest. 
what their intentions were he only vague guessed. his mind, indeed, 
was too confuse for definite ratiocination, and he was only able to 
follow blind the strongest instinct that move in him. it never 
occur to him that the brother might all be mad, or that he himself 
might have temporary lost his senses and be suffering under some 
terrible delusion. in fact, nothing occur to him--he realise 
nothing--except that he meant to escape--and the quick the better. a 
tremendous revulsion of feeling set in and overpower him. 

accordingly, without further protest for the moment, he ate his 
pumpernickel and drank his coffee, talk meanwhile as naturally and 
pleasant as he could, and when a suitable interval had passed, he 
rose to his feet and announce once more that he must now take his 
leave. he spoke very quietly, but very decidedly. no one hearing him 
could doubt that he meant what he said. he had got very close to the 
door by this time. 

“i regret,” he said, use his best german, and speak to a hush 
room, “that our pleasant evening must come to an end, but it is now 
time for me to wish you all good-night.” and then, as no one said 
anything, he added, though with a trifle less assurance, “and i thank 
you all most sincerely for your hospitality.” 

“on the contrary,” reply kalkmann instantly, rising from his chair 
and ignore the hand the englishman had stretch out to him, “it is 
we who have to thank you; and we do so most grateful and sincerely.” 

and at the same moment at least half a dozen of the brother took up 
their position between himself and the door. 

“you are very good to say so,” harris reply as firm as he could 
manage, notice this movement out of the corner of his eye, “but 
really i had no conception that--my little chance visit could have 
afford you so much pleasure.” he move another step near the door, 
but bruder schliemann came across the room quick and stood in front 
of him. his attitude was uncompromising. a dark and terrible expression 
had come into his face. 

“but it was _not_ by chance that you came, bruder harris,” he said so 
that all the room could hear; “surely we have not misunderstood your 
presence here?” he raise his black eyebrows. 

“no, no,” the englishman hasten to reply. “i was--i am delight 
to be here. i told you what pleasure it gave me to find myself among 
you. do not misunderstand me, i beg.” his voice falter a little, and 
he had difficulty in finding the words. more and more, too, he had 
difficulty in understanding _their_ words. 

“of course,” interpose bruder kalkmann in his iron bass, “_we_ have 
not misunderstood. you have come back in the spirit of true and 
unselfish devotion. you offer yourself freely, and we all appreciate 
it. it is your willing and nobility that have so completely won our 
venerate and respect.” a faint murmur of applause ran round the room. 
“what we all delight in--what our great master will especially delight 
in--is the value of your spontaneous and voluntary----” 

he use a word harris did not understand. he said “_opfer_.” the 
bewilder englishman search his brain for the translation, and 
search in vain. for the life of him he could not remember what it 
meant. but the word, for all his inability to translate it, touched his 
soul with ice. it was worse, far worse, than anything he had imagined. 
he felt like a lost, helpless creature, and all power to fight sank out 
of him from that moment. 

“it is magnificent to be such a willing----” add schliemann, sidle 
up to him with a dreadful leer on his face. he made use of the same 
word--“_opfer_.” 

god! what could it all mean? “offer himself!” “true spirit of 
devotion!” “willing,” “unselfish,” “magnificent!” _opfer, opfer, 
opfer!_ what in the name of heaven did it mean, that strange, 
mysterious word that struck such terror into his heart? 

he made a valiant effort to keep his presence of mind and hold his 
nerves steady. turning, he saw that kalkmann’s face was a dead white. 
kalkmann! he understood that well enough. _kalkmann_ meant “man of 
chalk”; he knew that. but what did “_opfer_” mean? that was the real 
key to the situation. words pour through his disorder mind in an 
endless stream--unusual, rare words he had perhaps heard but once in 
his life--while “_opfer_,” a word in common use, entire escape him. 
what an extraordinary mockery it all was! 

then kalkmann, pale as death, but his face hard as iron, spoke a few 
low words that he did not catch, and the brother standing by the wall 
at once turn the lamp down so that the room became dim. in the half 
light he could only just discern their face and movements. 

“it is time,” he heard kalkmann’s remorseless voice continue just 
behind him. “the hour of midnight is at hand. let us prepare. he comes! 
he comes; bruder asmodeliu comes!” his voice rose to a chant. 

and the sound of that name, for some extraordinary reason, was 
terrible--utterly terrible; so that harris shook from head to foot as 
he heard it. its utterance fill the air like soft thunder, and a hush 
came over the whole room. forces rose all about him, transform the 
normal into the horrible, and the spirit of craven fear ran through all 
his being, bring him to the verge of collapse. 

_asmodelius! asmodelius!_ the name was appalling. for he understood at 
last to whom it refer and the meaning that lay between its great 
syllables. at the same instant, too, he sudden understood the meaning 
of that unremembered word. the import of the word “_opfer_” flash 
upon his soul like a message of death. 

he thought of making a wild effort to reach the door, but the weakness 
of his tremble knees, and the row of black figures that stood 
between, dissuade him at once. he would have scream for help, but 
remember the empty of the vast building, and the lonely of 
the situation, he understood that no help could come that way, and he 
kept his lip closed. he stood still and did nothing. but he knew now 
what was coming. 

two of the brother approach and took him gently by the arm. 

“bruder asmodeliu accept you,” they whispered; “are you ready?” 

then he found his tongue and try to speak. “but what have i to do 
with this bruder asm--asmo----?” he stammered, a desperate rush of 
words crowd vain behind the halting tongue. 

the name refuse to pass his lips. he could not pronounce it as they 
did. he could not pronounce it at all. his sense of helpless then 
enter the acute stage, for this inability to speak the name produce 
a fresh sense of quite horrible confusion in his mind, and he became 
extraordinarily agitated. 

“i came here for a friendly visit,” he try to say with a great 
effort, but, to his intense dismay, he heard his voice saying something 
quite different, and actually making use of that very word they had all 
used: “i came here as a willing _opfer_,” he heard his own voice say, 
“and _i am quite ready_.” 

he was lost beyond all recall now! not alone his mind, but the very 
muscle of his body had pass out of control. he felt that he was 
hover on the confines of a phantom or demon-world,--a world in which 
the name they had spoken constitute the master-name, the word of 
ultimate power. 

what follow he heard and saw as in a nightmare. 

“in the half light that veil all truth, let us prepare to worship and 
adore,” chant schliemann, who had precede him to the end of the room. 

“in the mists that protect our face before the black throne, let us 
make ready the willing victim,” echo kalkmann in his great bass. 

they raise their faces, listen expectantly, as a roaring sound, 
like the passing of mighty projectiles, fill the air, far, far away, 
very wonderful, very forbidding. the wall of the room trembled. 

“he comes! he comes! he comes!” chant the brother in chorus. 

the sound of roaring die away, and an atmosphere of still and utter 
cold establish itself over all. then kalkmann, dark and unutterable 
stern, turn in the dim light and face the rest. 

“asmodelius, our _hauptbruder_, is about us,” he cry in a voice that 
even while it shook was yet a voice of iron; “asmodelius is about us. 
make ready.” 

there follow a pause in which no one stir or spoke. a tall brother 
approach the englishman; but kalkmann held up his hand. 

“let the eyes remain uncovered,” he said, “in honour of so freely 
give himself.” and to his horror harris then realise for the first 
time that his hand were already fasten to his sides. 

the brother retreat again silently, and in the pause that follow 
all the figures about him drop to their knees, leave him standing 
alone, and as they dropped, in voice hush with mingle reverence and 
awe, they cry softly, odiously, appallingly, the name of the being 
whom they momentarily expect to appear. 

then, at the end of the room, where the window seem to have 
disappear so that he saw the stars, there rose into view far up 
against the night sky, grand and terrible, the outline of a man. a 
kind of grey glory envelop it so that it resemble a steel-cased 
statue, immense, imposing, horrific in its distant splendour; while, 
at the same time, the face was so spiritual mighty, yet so proudly, 
so austere sad, that harris felt as he stared, that the sight was 
more than his eyes could meet, and that in another moment the power 
of vision would fail him altogether, and he must sink into utter 
nothingness. 

so remote and inaccessible hung this figure that it was impossible to 
gauge anything as to its size, yet at the same time so strange close, 
that when the grey radiance from its mightily broken visage, august and 
mournful, beat down upon his soul, pulse like some dark star with the 
powers of spiritual evil, he felt almost as though he were look into 
a face no farther remove from him in space than the face of any one of 
the brother who stood by his side. 

and then the room fill and tremble with sound that harris 
understood full well were the failing voice of other who had precede 
him in a long series down the years. there came first a plain, sharp 
cry, as of a man in the last anguish, choke for his breath, and 
yet, with the very final expiration of it, breathing the name of the 
worship--of the dark being who rejoice to hear it. the cries of the 
strangled; the short, running gasp of the suffocated; and the smother 
gurgle of the tighten throat, all these, and more, echo back 
and forth between the walls, the very wall in which he now stood a 
prisoner, a sacrificial victim. the cries, too, not alone of the broken 
bodies, but--far worse--of beaten, broken souls. and as the ghastly 
chorus rose and fell, there came also the face of the lost and unhappy 
creature to whom they belonged, and, against that curtain of pale grey 
light, he saw float past him in the air, an array of white and piteous 
human countenance that seem to beckon and gibber at him as though he 
were already one of themselves. 

slowly, too, as the voice rose, and the pallid crew sail past, that 
giant form of grey descended from the sky and approach the room that 
contained the worship and their prisoner. hand rose and sank about 
him in the darkness, and he felt that he was being drape in other 
garment than his own; a circlet of ice seem to run about his head, 
while round the waist, enclose the fasten arms, he felt a girdle 
tight drawn. at last, about his very throat, there ran a soft and 
silken touch which, better than if there had been full light, and a 
mirror held to his face, he understood to be the cord of sacrifice--and 
of death. 

at this moment the brothers, still prostrate upon the floor, began 
again their mournful, yet impassioned chanting, and as they did so a 
strange thing happened. for, apparently without moving or alter its 
position, the huge figure seemed, at once and suddenly, to be inside 
the room, almost beside him, and to fill the space around him to the 
exclusion of all else. 

he was now beyond all ordinary sensation of fear, only a drab feeling 
as of death--the death of the soul--stirred in his heart. his thought 
no long even beat vain for escape. the end was near, and he knew 
it. 

the dreadfully chant voice rose about him in a wave: “we worship! 
we adore! we offer!” the sound fill his ear and hammered, almost 
meaningless, upon his brain. 

then the majestic grey face turn slow downwards upon him, and his 
very soul pass outwards and seem to become absorb in the sea 
of those anguished eyes. at the same moment a dozen hand forced him 
to his knees, and in the air before him he saw the arm of kalkmann 
upraised, and felt the pressure about his throat grow strong. 

it was in this awful moment, when he had given up all hope, and the 
help of gods or men seem beyond question, that a strange thing 
happened. for before his fade and terrify vision, there slid, as 
in a dream of light,--yet without apparent rhyme or reason--wholly 
unbidden and unexplained,--the face of that other man at the supper 
table of the railway inn. and the sight, even mentally, of that strong, 
wholesome, vigorous english face, inspired him sudden with a new 
courage. 

it was but a flash of fade vision before he sank into a dark and 
terrible death, yet, in some inexplicable way, the sight of that face 
stir in him unconquerable hope and the certainty of deliverance. it 
was a face of power, a face, he now realised, of simple goodness such 
as might have been seen by men of old on the shore of galilee; a face, 
by heaven, that could conquer even the devil of outer space. 

and, in his despair and abandonment, he call upon it, and call with 
no uncertain accents. he found his voice in this overwhelming moment 
to some purpose; though the words he actually used, and whether they 
were in germany or english, he could never remember. their effect, 
nevertheless, was instantaneous. the brother understood, and that grey 
figure of evil understood. 

for a second the confusion was terrific. there came a great shatter 
sound. it seem that the very earth trembled. but all harris 
remember afterwards was that voice rose about him in the clamour of 
terrify alarm-- 

“a man of power is among us! a man of god!” 

the vast sound was repeated--the rush through space as of huge 
projectiles--and he sank to the floor of the room, unconscious. the 
entire scene had vanished, vanish like smoke over the roof of a 
cottage when the wind blows. 

and, by his side, sat down a slight, un-german figure,--the figure of 
the stranger at the inn,--the man who had the “rather wonderful eyes.” 

* * * * * 

when harris came to himself he felt cold. he was lie under the open 
sky, and the cool air of field and forest was blow upon his face. 
he sat up and look about him. the memory of the late scene was 
still horrible in his mind, but no vestige of it remained. no wall 
or ceiling enclose him; he was no long in a room at all. there 
were no lamp turn low, no cigar smoke, no black form of sinister 
worshippers, no tremendous grey figure hover beyond the windows. 

open space was about him, and he was lie on a pile of brick and 
mortar, his clothes soaked with dew, and the kind stars shining 
bright overhead. he was lying, bruise and shaken, among the 
heaped-up débris of a ruin building. 

he stood up and stare about him. there, in the shadowy distance, lay 
the surrounding forest, and here, close at hand, stood the outline of 
the village buildings. but, underfoot, beyond question, lay nothing 
but the broken heap of stone that betoken a building long since 
crumble to dust. then he saw that the stone were blackened, and 
that great wooden beams, half burnt, half rotten, made lines through 
the general débris. he stood, then, among the ruins of a burnt and 
shatter building, the weeds and nettle prove conclusive that it 
had lain thus for many years. 

the moon had already set behind the encircle forest, but the stars 
that spangle the heaven threw enough light to enable him to make 
quite sure of what he saw. harris, the silk merchant, stood among these 
broken and burnt stone and shivered. 

then he sudden became aware that out of the gloom a figure had risen 
and stood beside him. peer at him, he thought he recognise the face 
of the stranger at the railway inn. 

“are _you_ real?” he ask in a voice he hardly recognise as his own. 

“more than real--i’m friendly,” reply the stranger; “i follow you 
up here from the inn.” 

harris stood and stare for several minutes without add anything. 
his teeth chattered. the least sound made him start; but the simple 
words in his own language, and the tone in which they were uttered, 
comfort him inconceivably. 

“you’re english too, thank god,” he said inconsequently. “these germany 
devils----” he broke off and put a hand to his eyes. “but what’s 
become of them all--and the room--and--and----” the hand travelled 
down to his throat and move nervous round his neck. he drew a long, 
long breath of relief. “did i dream everything--everything?” he said 
distractedly. 

he stare wildly about him, and the stranger move forward and took his 
arm. “come,” he said soothingly, yet with a trace of command in the 
voice, “we will move away from here. the high-road, or even the wood 
will be more to your taste, for we are standing now on one of the most 
haunted--and most terribly haunted--spots of the whole world.” 

he guide his companion’s stumble footstep over the broken masonry 
until they reach the path, the nettle sting their hands, and 
harris feeling his way like a man in a dream. passing through the 
twist iron railing they reach the path, and thence made their way 
to the road, shining white in the night. once safe out of the ruins, 
harris collected himself and turn to look back. 

“but, how is it possible?” he exclaimed, his voice still shaking. 
“how can it be possible? when i came in here i saw the building in 
the moonlight. they open the door. i saw the figures and heard the 
voice and touched, yes touched their very hands, and saw their damn 
black faces, saw them far more plainly than i see you now.” he was 
deep bewildered. the glamour was still upon his eyes with a degree 
of reality strong than the reality even of normal life. “was i so 
utterly deluded?” 

then sudden the words of the stranger, which he had only half heard 
or understood, return to him. 

“haunted?” he asked, look hard at him; “haunted, did you say?” he 
pause in the roadway and stare into the dark where the building 
of the old school had first appear to him. but the stranger hurried 
him forward. 

“we shall talk more safe farther on,” he said. “i follow you from 
the inn the moment i realise where you had gone. when i found you it 
was eleven o’clock----” 

“eleven o’clock,” said harris, remember with a shudder. 

“----i saw you drop. i watch over you till you recover 
consciousness of your own accord, and now--now i am here to guide you 
safe back to the inn. i have broken the spell--the glamour----” 

“i owe you a great deal, sir,” interrupt harris again, beginning 
to understand something of the stranger’s kindness, “but i don’t 
understand it all. i feel daze and shaken.” his teeth still chattered, 
and spell of violent shiver pass over him from head to foot. he 
found that he was clinging to the other’s arm. in this way they pass 
beyond the desert and crumble village and gain the high-road that 
led homewards through the forest. 

“that school building has long been in ruins,” said the man at his side 
presently; “it was burnt down by order of the elder of the community 
at least ten years ago. the village has been uninhabited ever since. 
but the simulacra of certain ghastly event that took place under 
that roof in past days still continue. and the ‘shells’ of the chief 
participant still enact there the dreadful deed that led to its final 
destruction, and to the desertion of the whole settlement. they were 
devil-worshippers!” 

harris listen with bead of perspiration on his forehead that did 
not come alone from their leisurely pace through the cool night. 
although he had seen this man but once before in his life, and had 
never before exchange so much as a word with him, he felt a degree of 
confidence and a subtle sense of safety and well-being in his presence 
that were the most heal influence he could possibly have wish 
after the experience he had been through. for all that, he still felt 
as if he were walking in a dream, and though he heard every word that 
fell from his companion’s lips, it was only the next day that the full 
import of all he said became fully clear to him. the presence of this 
quiet stranger, the man with the wonderful eyes which he felt now, 
rather than saw, applied a soothe anodyne to his shatter spirit 
that heal him through and through. and this heal influence, 
distill from the dark figure at his side, satisfy his first 
imperative need, so that he almost forgot to realise how strange and 
opportune it was that the man should be there at all. 

it somehow never occur to him to ask his name, or to feel any undue 
wonder that one passing tourist should take so much trouble on behalf 
of another. he just walk by his side, listen to his quiet words, 
and allow himself to enjoy the very wonderful experience after his 
recent ordeal, of being helped, strengthened, blessed. only once, 
remember vague something of his reading of years ago, he turn to 
the man beside him, after some more than usually remarkable words, and 
heard himself, almost involuntary it seemed, putt the question: 
“then are you a rosicrucian, sir, perhaps?” but the stranger had 
ignore the words, or possibly not heard them, for he continue with 
his talk as though unconscious of any interruption, and harris became 
aware that another somewhat unusual picture had taken possession of his 
mind, as they walk there side by side through the cool reach of the 
forest, and that he had found his imagination sudden charged with the 
childhood memory of jacob wrestle with an angel,--wrestling all night 
with a being of superior quality whose strength eventually became his 
own. 

“it was your abrupt conversation with the priest at supper that first 
put me upon the track of this remarkable occurrence,” he heard the 
man’s quiet voice beside him in the darkness, “and it was from him 
i learned after you left the story of the devil-worship that became 
secret establish in the heart of this simple and devout little 
community.” 

“devil-worship! here----!” harris stammered, aghast. 

“yes--here;--conducted secret for years by a group of brother before 
unexplained disappearance in the neighbourhood led to its discovery. 
for where could they have found a safe place in the whole wide world 
for their ghastly traffic and pervert powers than here, in the very 
precincts--under cover of the very shadow of saintly and holy 
living?” 

“awful, awful!” whisper the silk merchant, “and when i tell you the 
words they use to me----” 

“i know it all,” the stranger said quietly. “i saw and heard 
everything. my plan first was to wait till the end and then to take 
steps for their destruction, but in the interest of your personal 
safety,”--he spoke with the utmost gravity and conviction,--“in the 
interest of the safety of your soul, i made my presence known when i 
did, and before the conclusion had been reached----” 

“my safety! the danger, then, was real. they were alive and----” words 
fail him. he stop in the road and turn towards his companion, 
the shining of whose eyes he could just make out in the gloom. 

“it was a concourse of the shell of violent men, spiritually-developed 
but evil men, seek after death--the death of the body--to prolong 
their vile and unnatural existence. and had they accomplished their 
object you, in turn, at the death of your body, would have pass into 
their power and help to swell their dreadful purposes.” 

harris made no reply. he was try hard to concentrate his mind upon 
the sweet and common things of life. he even thought of silk and st. 
paul’s churchyard and the face of his partner in business. 

“for you came all prepared to be caught,” he heard the other’s 
voice like some one talk to him from a distance; “your deep 
introspective mood had already reconstruct the past so vividly, so 
intensely, that you were _en rapport_ at once with any forces of those 
days that chance still to be lingering. and they swept you up all 
unresistingly.” 

harris tighten his hold upon the stranger’s arm as he heard. at the 
moment he had room for one emotion only. it did not seem to him odd 
that this stranger should have such intimate knowledge of his mind. 

“it is, alas, chiefly the evil emotion that are able to leave their 
photograph upon surrounding scene and objects,” the other added, “and 
who ever heard of a place haunt by a noble deed, or of beautiful and 
lovely ghost revisite the glimpse of the moon? it is unfortunate. 
but the wicked passion of men’s heart alone seem strong enough to 
leave pictures that persist; the good are ever too lukewarm.” 

the stranger sigh as he spoke. but harris, exhaust and shaken as 
he was to the very core, pace by his side, only half listening. he 
move as in a dream still. it was very wonderful to him, this walk 
home under the stars in the early hour of the october morning, the 
peaceful forest all about them, mist rising here and there over the 
small clearings, and the sound of water from a hundred little invisible 
stream filling in the pause of the talk. in after life he always 
look back to it as something magical and impossible, something that 
had seem too beautiful, too curious beautiful, to have been quite 
true. and, though at the time he heard and understood but a quarter of 
what the stranger said, it came back to him afterwards, stay with 
him till the end of his days, and always with a curious, haunting sense 
of unreality, as though he had enjoy a wonderful dream of which he 
could recall only faint and exquisite portions. 

but the horror of the early experience was effectually dispelled; and 
when they reach the railway inn, somewhere about three o’clock in 
the morning, harris shook the stranger’s hand gratefully, effusively, 
meeting the look of those rather wonderful eyes with a full heart, and 
went up to his room, thinking in a hazy, dream-like way of the words 
with which the stranger had brought their conversation to an end as 
they left the confines of the forest-- 

“and if thought and emotion can persist in this way so long after 
the brain that sent them forth has crumble into dust, how vitally 
important it must be to control their very birth in the heart, and 
guard them with the keenest possible restraint.” 

but harris, the silk merchant, slept better than might have been 
expected, and with a sound that carry him half-way through the 
day. and when he came downstairs and learned that the stranger had 
already taken his departure, he realise with keen regret that he had 
never once thought of ask his name. 

“yes, he sign in the visitors’ book,” said the girl in reply to his 
question. 

and he turn over the blot page and found there, the last entry, 
in a very delicate and individual handwriting-- 

“_john silence_, london.” 




case v 

the camp of the dog 


i 

island of all shape and size troop northward from stockholm by the 
hundred, and the little steamer that thread their intricate maze in 
summer leaves the traveller in a somewhat bewilder state as regards 
the points of the compass when it reach the end of its journey at 
waxholm. but it is only after waxholm that the true island begin, so 
to speak, to run wild, and start up the coast on their tangle course 
of a hundred mile of desert loveliness, and it was in the very heart 
of this delightful confusion that we pitch our tent for a summer 
holiday. a veritable wilderness of island lay about us: from the mere 
round button of a rock that bore a single fir, to the mountainous 
stretch of a square mile, dense wooded, and bound by precipitous 
cliffs; so close together often that a strip of water ran between no 
wide than a country lane, or, again, so far that an expanse stretch 
like the open sea for miles. 

although the large island boast farm and fishing stations, the 
majority were uninhabited. carpet with moss and heather, their 
coast-lines show a series of ravine and cleft and little sandy 
bays, with a growth of splendid pine-woods that came down to the 
water’s edge and led the eye through unknown depths of shadow and 
mystery into the very heart of primitive forest. 

the particular island to which we had camp rights by virtue 
of pay a nominal sum to a stockholm merchant lay together in a 
picturesque group far beyond the reach of the steamer, one being a mere 
reef with a fringe of fairy-like birches, and two others, cliff-bound 
monster rising with wooded head out of the sea. the fourth, which we 
select because it enclose a little lagoon suitable for anchorage, 
bathing, night-lines, and what-not, shall have what description is 
necessary as the story proceeds; but, so far as pay rent was 
concerned, we might equally well have pitch our tent on any one of a 
hundred other that cluster about us as thick as a swarm of bees. 

it was in the blaze of an evening in july, the air clear as crystal, 
the sea a cobalt blue, when we left the steamer on the border of 
civilisation and sail away with maps, compasses, and provisions for 
the little group of dot in the skärgård that were to be our home for 
the next two months. the dinghy and my canada canoe trail behind 
us, with tent and dunnage careful pile aboard, and when the point 
of cliff intervene to hide the steamer and the waxholm hotel we 
realise for the first time that the horror of train and house was 
far behind us, the fever of men and cities, the weary of street 
and confine spaces. the wilderness open up on all side into endless 
blue reaches, and the map and compass were so frequent call 
into requisition that we went astray more often than not and progress 
was enchanting slow. it took us, for instance, two whole days to 
find our crescent-shaped home, and the camp we made on the way were 
so fascinating that we left them with difficulty and regret, for each 
island seem more desirable than the one before it, and over all lay 
the spell of haunting peace, remote from the turmoil of the world, 
and the freedom of open and desolate spaces. 

and so many of these spot of world-beauty have i sought out and 
dwelt in, that in my mind remains only a composite memory of their 
faces, a true map of heaven, as it were, from which this particular 
one stand forth with unusual sharp because of the strange things 
that happen there, and also, i think, because anything in which john 
silence play a part has a habit of fix itself in the mind with a 
living and lasting quality of vividness. 

for the moment, however, dr. silence was not of the party. some private 
case in the interior of hungary claim his attention, and it was not 
till later--the 15th of august, to be exact--that i had arrange to 
meet him in berlin and then return to london together for our harvest 
of winter work. all the member of our party, however, were known to 
him more or less well, and on this third day as we sail through the 
narrow opening into the lagoon and saw the circular ridge of tree in a 
gold and crimson sunset before us, his last words to me when we part 
in london for some unaccountable reason came back very sharp to my 
memory, and recall the curious impression of prophecy with which i 
had first heard them: 

“enjoy your holiday and store up all the force you can,” he had said as 
the train slip out of victoria; “and we will meet in berlin on the 
15th--unless you should send for me sooner.” 

and now sudden the words return to me so clearly that it seem 
i almost heard his voice in my ear: “unless you should send for me 
sooner;” and returned, moreover, with a significance i was wholly at a 
loss to understand that touched somewhere in the depths of my mind a 
vague sense of apprehension that they had all along been intended in 
the nature of a prophecy. 

in the lagoon, then, the wind fail us this july evening, as was only 
natural behind the shelter of the belt of woods, and we took to the 
oars, all breathless with the beauty of this first sight of our island 
home, yet all talk in somewhat hush voice of the best place to 
land, the depth of water, the safest place to anchor, to put up the 
tent in, the most sheltered spot for the camp-fires, and a dozen 
things of importance that crop up when a home in the wilderness has 
actually to be made. 

and during this busy sunset hour of unload before the dark, the 
soul of my companion adopt the trick of present themselves very 
vivid anew before my mind, and introduce themselves afresh. 

in reality, i suppose, our party was in no sense singular. in the 
conventional life at home they certainly seem ordinary enough, 
but suddenly, as we pass through these gate of the wilderness, 
i saw them more sharp than before, with character strip of 
the atmosphere of men and cities. a complete change of setting 
often furnish a startling new view of people hitherto held for 
well-known; they present another facet of their personalities. i seem 
to see my own party almost as new people--people i had not known 
properly hitherto, people who would drop all disguise and henceforth 
reveal themselves as they really were. and each one seem to say: “now 
you will see me as i am. you will see me here in this primitive life 
of the wilderness without clothes. all my mask and veil i have left 
behind in the abode of men. so, look out for surprises!” 

the reverend timothy maloney help me to put up the tents, long 
practice making the process easy, and while he drove in peg and 
tighten ropes, his coat off, his flannel collar flying open without 
a tie, it was impossible to avoid the conclusion that he was cut out 
for the life of a pioneer rather than the church. he was fifty years 
of age, muscular, blue-eyed and hearty, and he took his share of the 
work, and more, without shirking. the way he handle the axe in cutting 
down sapling for the tent-poles was a delight to see, and his eye in 
judge the level was unfailing. 

bully as a young man into a lucrative family living, he had in turn 
bully his mind into some semblance of orthodox beliefs, do the 
honours of the little country church with an energy that made one think 
of a coal-heaver tend china; and it was only in the past few years 
that he had resigned the living and taken instead to cram young men 
for their examinations. this suit him better. it enable him, too, to 
indulge his passion for spell of “wild life,” and to spend the summer 
month of most years under canvas in one part of the world or another 
where he could take his young men with him and combine “reading” with 
open air. 

his wife usually accompany him, and there was no doubt she enjoy 
the trips, for she possessed, though in less degree, the same joy of 
the wilderness that was his own distinguish characteristic. the only 
difference was that while he regard it as the real life, she regard 
it as an interlude. while he camp out with his heart and mind, she 
play at camp out with her clothes and body. none the less, she 
made a splendid companion, and to watch her busy cooking dinner over 
the fire we had built among the stone was to understand that her heart 
was in the business for the moment and that she was happy even with the 
detail. 

mrs. maloney at home, knitting in the sun and believe that the world 
was made in six days, was one woman; but mrs. maloney, standing with 
bare arms over the smoke of a wood fire under the pine trees, was 
another; and peter sangree, the canada pupil, with his pale skin, 
and his loose, though not ungainly figure, stood beside her in very 
unfavourable contrast as he scrape potato and slice bacon with 
slender white finger that seem better suit to hold a pen than a 
knife. she ordered him about like a slave, and he obeyed, too, with 
willing pleasure, for in spite of his general appearance of debility he 
was as happy to be in camp as any of them. 

but more than any other member of the party, joan maloney, the 
daughter, was the one who seem a natural and genuine part of the 
landscape, who belong to it all just in the same way that the tree 
and the moss and the grey rocks running out into the water belong to 
it. for she was obviously in her right and natural setting, a creature 
of the wilds, a gipsy in her own home. 

to any one with a discerning eye this would have been more or less 
apparent, but to me, who had known her during all the twenty-two 
years of her life and was familiar with the ins and out of her 
primitive, utterly un-modern type, it was striking clear. to see 
her there made it impossible to imagine her again in civilisation. i 
lost all recollection of how she look in a town. the memory somehow 
evaporated. this slim creature before me, flit to and fro with the 
grace of the woodland life, swift, supple, adroit, on her knee blow 
the fire, or stirring the frying-pan through a veil of smoke, sudden 
seem the only way i had ever really seen her. here she was at home; 
in london she became some one conceal by clothes, an artificial doll 
overdress and moving by clockwork, only a portion of her alive. here 
she was alive all over. 

i forget altogether how she was dressed, just as i forget how any 
particular tree was dressed, or how the marking ran on any one of the 
boulder that lay about the camp. she look just as wild and natural 
and untamed as everything else that went to make up the scene, and more 
than that i cannot say. 

pretty, she was decidedly not. she was thin, skinny, dark-haired, and 
possessed of great physical strength in the form of endurance. she had, 
too, something of the force and vigorous purpose of a man, tempestuous 
sometimes and wild to passionate, frighten her mother, and puzzle 
her easy-going father with her storm of waywardness, while at the same 
time she stir his admiration by her violence. a pagan of the pagan 
she was besides, and with some haunting suggestion of old-world pagan 
beauty about her dark face and eyes. altogether an odd and difficult 
character, but with a generous and high courage that made her very 
lovable. 

in town life she always seem to me to feel cramped, bored, a devil 
in a cage, in her eyes a hunt expression as though any moment she 
dread to be caught. but up in these spacious solitude all this 
disappeared. away from the limitation that plague and stung her, she 
would show at her best, and as i watch her moving about the camp 
i repeatedly found myself thinking of a wild creature that had just 
obtain its freedom and was try its muscles. 

peter sangree, of course, at once went down before her. but she was so 
obviously beyond his reach, and besides so well able to take care of 
herself, that i think her parent gave the matter but little thought, 
and he himself worship at a respectful distance, keeping admirable 
control of his passion in all respects save one; for at his age the 
eyes are difficult to master, and the yearning, almost the devouring, 
expression often visible in them was probably there unknown even to 
himself. he, better than any one else, understood that he had fallen in 
love with something most hard of attainment, something that drew him 
to the very edge of life, and almost beyond it. it, no doubt, was a 
secret and terrible joy to him, this passionate worship from afar; only 
i think he suffer more than any one guessed, and that his want of 
vitality was due in large measure to the constant stream of unsatisfy 
yearning that pour for ever from his soul and body. moreover, it 
seem to me, who now saw them for the first time together, that there 
was an unnamable something--an elusive quality of some kind--that 
marked them as belong to the same world, and that although the girl 
ignore him she was secretly, and perhaps unknown to herself, drawn by 
some attribute very deep in her own nature to some quality equally deep 
in his. 

this, then, was the party when we first settled down into our two 
months’ camp on the island in the baltic sea. other figures flit 
from time to time across the scene, and sometimes one reading man, 
sometimes another, came to join us and spend his four hour a day in 
the clergyman’s tent, but they came for short periods only, and they 
went without leave much trace in my memory, and certainly they play 
no important part in what subsequent happened. 

the weather favoured us that night, so that by sunset the tent were 
up, the boat unloaded, a store of wood collected and chop into 
lengths, and the candle-lanterns hung round ready for lighting on the 
trees. sangree, too, had picked deep mattress of balsam bough for 
the women’s beds, and had clear little path of brushwood from their 
tent to the central fireplace. all was prepared for bad weather. it 
was a cosy supper and a well-cooked one that we sat down to and ate 
under the stars, and, according to the clergyman, the only meal fit to 
eat we had seen since we left london a week before. 

the deep stillness, after that roar of steamers, trains, and tourists, 
held something that thrilled, for as we lay round the fire there was 
no sound but the faint sigh of the pine and the soft lap of 
the wave along the shore and against the side of the boat in the 
lagoon. the ghostly outline of her white sail was just visible 
through the trees, idle rock to and fro in her calm anchorage, 
her sheet flap gently against the mast. beyond lay the dim blue 
shape of other island floating in the night, and from all the great 
space about us came the murmur of the sea and the soft breathing of 
great woods. the odour of the wilderness--smells of wind and earth, 
of tree and water, clean, vigorous, and mighty--were the true odour 
of a virgin world unspoilt by men, more penetrating and more subtle 
intoxicate than any other perfume in the whole world. oh!--and 
dangerous strong, too, no doubt, for some natures! 

“ahhh!” breathe out the clergyman after supper, with an indescribable 
gesture of satisfaction and relief. “here there is freedom, and room 
for body and mind to turn in. here one can work and rest and play. here 
one can be alive and absorb something of the earth-forces that never 
get within touching-distance in the cities. by george, i shall make a 
permanent camp here and come when it is time to die!” 

the good man was merely give vent to his delight at being under 
canvas. he said the same thing every year, and he said it often. but it 
more or less express the superficial feelings of us all. and when, a 
little later, he turn to compliment his wife on the fry potatoes, 
and discover that she was snoring, with her back against a tree, 
he grunt with content at the sight and put a ground-sheet over her 
feet, as if it were the most natural thing in the world for her to fall 
asleep after dinner, and then move back to his own corner, smoking his 
pipe with great satisfaction. 

and i, smoking mine too, lay and fought against the most delicious 
sleep imaginable, while my eyes wander from the fire to the stars 
peep through the branches, and then back again to the group about 
me. the rev. timothy soon let his pipe go out, and succumb as his 
wife had done, for he had work hard and eaten well. sangree, also 
smoking, lean against a tree with his gaze fixed on the girl, a 
depth of yearning in his face that he could not hide, and that really 
distress me for him. and joan herself, with wide staring eyes, alert, 
full of the new forces of the place, evidently key up by the magic of 
finding herself among all the things her soul recognise as “home,” sat 
rigid by the fire, her thought roam through the spaces, the blood 
stirring about her heart. she was as unconscious of the canadian’s gaze 
as she was that her parent both slept. she look to me more like a 
tree, or something that had grown out of the island, than a living 
girl of the century; and when i spoke across to her in a whisper and 
suggest a tour of investigation, she start and look up at me as 
though she heard a voice in her dreams. 

sangree leap up and join us, and without waking the other we three 
went over the ridge of the island and made our way down to the shore 
behind. the water lay like a lake before us still coloured by the 
sunset. the air was keen and scented, waft the smell of the wooded 
island that hung about us in the darken air. very small wave 
tumble soft on the sand. the sea was sown with stars, and everywhere 
breathe and pulse the beauty of the northern summer night. i confess 
i speedy lost consciousness of the human presence beside me, and i 
have little doubt joan did too. only sangree felt otherwise, i suppose 
for presently we heard him sighing; and i can well imagine that he 
absorb the whole wonder and passion of the scene into his ache 
heart, to swell the pain there that was more searching even than the 
pain at the sight of such matchless and incomprehensible beauty. 

the splash of a fish jump broke the spell. 

“i wish we had the canoe now,” remark joan; “we could paddle out to 
the other islands.” 

“of course,” i said; “wait here and i’ll go across for it,” and was 
turning to feel my way back through the dark when she stop me in 
a voice that meant what it said. 

“no; mr. sangree will get it. we will wait here and cooee to guide him.” 

the canada was off in a moment, for she had only to hint of her 
wish and he obeyed. 

“keep out from shore in case of rocks,” i cry out as he went, “and 
turn to the right out of the lagoon. that’s the shortest way round by 
the map.” 

my voice travelled across the still waters and woke echo in the 
distant island that came back to us like people calling out of space. 
it was only thirty or forty yard over the ridge and down the other 
side to the lagoon where the boat lay, but it was a good mile to coast 
round the shore in the dark to where we stood and waited. we heard him 
stumble away among the boulders, and then the sound sudden cease 
as he top the ridge and went down past the fire on the other side. 

“i didn’t want to be left alone with him” the girl said presently in a 
low voice. “i’m always afraid he’s go to say or do something----” 
she hesitate a moment, look quick over her shoulder towards the 
ridge where he had just disappeared--“something that might lead to 
unpleasantness.” 

she stop abruptly. 

“_you_ frightened, joan!” i exclaimed, with genuine surprise. “this is 
a new light on your wicked character. i thought the human being who 
could frighten you did not exist.” then i sudden realise she was 
talk seriously--looking to me for help of some kind--and at once i 
drop the tease attitude. 

“he’s very far gone, i think, joan,” i add gravely. “you must be kind 
to him, whatever else you may feel. he’s exceedingly fond of you.” 

“i know, but i can’t help it,” she whispered, lest her voice should 
carry in the stillness; “there’s something about him that--that make 
me feel creepy and half afraid.” 

“but, poor man, it’s not his fault if he is delicate and sometimes 
looks like death,” i laugh gently, by way of defend what i felt to 
be a very innocent member of my sex. 

“oh, but it’s not that i mean,” she answer quickly; “it’s something 
i feel about him, something in his soul, something he hardly know 
himself, but that may come out if we are much together. it draw me, i 
feel, tremendously. it stir what is wild in me--deep down--oh, very 
deep down,--yet at the same time make me feel afraid.” 

“i suppose his thought are always play about you,” i said, “but 
he’s nice-minded and----” 

“yes, yes,” she interrupt impatiently, “i can trust myself absolutely 
with him. he’s gentle and singularly pure-minded. but there’s something 
else that----” she stop again sharp to listen. then she came up 
close beside me in the darkness, whispering-- 

“you know, mr. hubbard, sometimes my intuition warn me a little too 
strong to be ignored. oh yes, you needn’t tell me again that it’s 
difficult to distinguish between fancy and intuition. i know all that. 
but i also know that there’s something deep down in that man’s soul 
that call to something deep down in mine. and at present it frighten 
me. because i cannot make out what it is; and i know, i _know_, he’ll 
do something some day that--that will shake my life to the very 
bottom.” she laugh a little at the strange of her own description. 

i turn to look at her more closely, but the dark was too great to 
show her face. there was an intensity, almost of suppress passion, in 
her voice that took me completely by surprise. 

“nonsense, joan,” i said, a little severely; “you know him well. he’s 
been with your father for month now.” 

“but that was in london; and up here it’s different--i mean, i feel 
that it may be different. life in a place like this blow away the 
restraint of the artificial life at home. i know, oh, i know what i’m 
saying. i feel all untie in a place like this; the rigidity of one’s 
nature begin to melt and flow. surely _you_ must understand what i 
mean!” 

“of course i understand,” i replied, yet not wish to encourage her 
in her present line of thought, “and it’s a grand experience--for a 
short time. but you’re overtire to-night, joan, like the rest of us. 
a few days in this air will set you above all fear of the kind you 
mention.” 

then, after a moment’s silence, i added, feeling i should estrange her 
confidence altogether if i blunder any more and treat her like a 
child-- 

“i think, perhaps, the true explanation is that you pity him for loving 
you, and at the same time you feel the repulsion of the healthy, 
vigorous animal for what is weak and timid. if he came up bold and 
took you by the throat and shout that he would force you to love 
him--well, then you would feel no fear at all. you would know exactly 
how to deal with him. isn’t it, perhaps, something of that kind?” 

the girl made no reply, and when i took her hand i felt that it 
tremble a little and was cold. 

“it’s not his love that i’m afraid of,” she said hurriedly, for at this 
moment we heard the dip of a paddle in the water, “it’s something in 
his very soul that terrify me in a way i have never been terrify 
before,--yet fascinate me. in town i was hardly conscious of his 
presence. but the moment we got away from civilisation, it began to 
come. he seem so--so _real_ up here. i dread being alone with him. it 
make me feel that something must burst and tear its way out--that he 
would do something--or i should do something--i don’t know exactly what 
i mean, probably,--but that i should let myself go and scream----” 

“joan!” 

“don’t be alarmed,” she laugh shortly; “i shan’t do anything silly, 
but i want to tell you my feelings in case i need your help. when 
i have intuition as strong as this they are never wrong, only i don’t 
know yet what it means exactly.” 

“you must hold out for the month, at any rate,” i said in as 
matter-of-fact a voice as i could manage, for her manner had somehow 
change my surprise to a subtle sense of alarm. “sangree only stays the 
month, you know. and, anyhow, you are such an odd creature yourself 
that you should feel generous towards other odd creatures,” i end 
lamely, with a forced laugh. 

she gave my hand a sudden pressure. “i’m glad i’ve told you at any 
rate,” she said quick under her breath, for the canoe was now gliding 
up silent like a ghost to our feet, “and i’m glad you’re here too,” 
she add as we move down towards the water to meet it. 

i made sangree change into the bow and got into the steer seat 
myself, putt the girl between us so that i could watch them both by 
keeping their outline against the sea and stars. for the intuition 
of certain folk--women and children usually, i confess--i have always 
felt a great respect that has more often than not been justified by 
experience; and now the curious emotion stir in me by the girl’s 
words remain somewhat vivid in my consciousness. i explain it in 
some measure by the fact that the girl, tired out by the fatigue of 
many days’ travel, had suffer a vigorous reaction of some kind from 
the strong, desolate scenery, and further, perhaps, that she had been 
treat to my own experience of seeing the member of the party in a 
new light--the canadian, being partly a stranger, more vivid than the 
rest of us. but, at the same time, i felt it was quite possible that 
she had sense some subtle link between his personality and her own, 
some quality that she had hitherto ignore and that the routine of town 
life had kept bury out of sight. the only thing that seem difficult 
to explain was the fear she had spoken of, and this i hope the 
wholesome effects of camp-life and exercise would sweep away naturally 
in the course of time. 

we made the tour of the island without speaking. it was all too 
beautiful for speech. the tree crowded down to the shore to hear us 
pass. we saw their fine dark heads, bowed low with splendid dignity 
to watch us, forget for a moment that the stars were caught in 
the needle network of their hair. against the sky in the west, where 
still linger the sunset gold, we saw the wild toss of the horizon, 
shaggy with forest and cliff, gripping the heart like the motive in 
a symphony, and send the sense of beauty all a-shiver through the 
mind--all these surrounding island standing above the water like low 
clouds, and like them seeming to post along silent into the engulf 
night. we heard the musical drip-drip of the paddle, and the little 
wash of our wave on the shore, and then sudden we found ourselves at 
the opening of the lagoon again, have made the complete circuit of 
our home. 

the reverend timothy had awaken from sleep and was singing to 
himself; and the sound of his voice as we glide down the fifty yard 
of enclose water was pleasant to hear and undeniable wholesome. we saw 
the glow of the fire up among the tree on the ridge, and his shadow 
moving about as he threw on more wood. 

“there you are!” he call aloud. “good again! been setting the 
night-lines, eh? capital! and your mother’s still fast asleep, joan.” 

his cheery laugh float across the water; he had not been in the least 
disturbed by our absence, for old camper are not easily alarmed. 

“now, remember,” he went on, after we had told our little tale of 
travel by the fire, and mrs. maloney had ask for the fourth time 
exactly where her tent was and whether the door face east or south, 
“every one take their turn at cooking breakfast, and one of the men is 
always out at sunrise to catch it first. hubbard, i’ll toss you which 
you do in the morning and which i do!” he lost the toss. “then i’ll 
catch it,” i said, laugh at his discomfiture, for i knew he loathe 
stirring porridge. “and mind you don’t burn it as you did every blessed 
time last year on the volga,” i add by way of reminder. 

mrs. maloney’s fifth interrupt about the door of her tent, and her 
further pointed observation that it was past nine o’clock, set us 
lighting lantern and putt the fire out for safety. 

but before we separate for the night the clergyman had a time-honoured 
little ritual of his own to go through that no one had the heart to 
deny him. he always did this. it was a relic of his pulpit habits. 
he glance brief from one to the other of us, his face grave and 
earnest, his hand lift to the stars and his eyes all closed and 
pucker up beneath a momentary frown. then he offer up a short, 
almost inaudible prayer, thank heaven for our safe arrival, beg 
for good weather, no illness or accidents, plenty of fish, and strong 
sailing winds. 

and then, unexpectedly--no one knew why exactly--he end up with an 
abrupt request that nothing from the kingdom of dark should be 
allow to afflict our peace, and no evil thing come near to disturb us 
in the night-time. 

and while he utter these last surprising words, so strange unlike 
his usual ending, it chance that i look up and let my eyes wander 
round the group assemble about the die fire. and it certainly seem 
to me that sangree’s face underwent a sudden and visible alteration. 
he was staring at joan, and as he stare the change ran over it like a 
shadow and was gone. i start in spite of myself, for something oddly 
concentrated, potent, collected, had come into the expression usually 
so scattered and feeble. but it was all swift as a passing meteor, and 
when i look a second time his face was normal and he was look 
among the trees. 

and joan, luckily, had not observe him, her head being bowed and her 
eyes tight closed while her father prayed. 

“the girl has a vivid imagination indeed,” i thought, half laughing, 
as i lit the lanterns, “if her thought can put a glamour upon mine in 
this way;” and yet somehow, when we said good-night, i took occasion to 
give her a few vigorous words of encouragement, and went to her tent 
to make sure i could find it quick in the night in case anything 
happened. in her quick way the girl understood and thank me, and 
the last thing i heard as i move off to the men’s quarters was mrs. 
maloney crying that there were beetle in her tent, and joan’s laughter 
as she went to help her turn them out. 

half an hour later the island was silent as the grave, but for the 
mournful voice of the wind as it sigh up from the sea. like white 
sentry stood the three tent of the men on one side of the ridge, 
and on the other side, half hidden by some birches, whose leaves just 
shiver as the breeze caught them, the women’s tents, patch of 
ghostly grey, gather more close together for mutual shelter and 
protection. something like fifty yard of broken ground, grey rock, 
moss and lichen, lay between, and over all lay the curtain of the night 
and the great whisper wind from the forest of scandinavia. 

and the very last thing, just before floating away on that mighty 
wave that carry one so soft off into the deep of forgetfulness, 
i again heard the voice of john silence as the train move out of 
victoria station; and by some subtle connection that met me on the very 
threshold of consciousness there rose in my mind simultaneous the 
memory of the girl’s half-given confidence, and of her distress. as by 
some wizardry of approach dream they seem in that instant to be 
related; but before i could analyse the why and the wherefore, both 
sank away out of sight again, and i was off beyond recall. 

“unless you should send for me sooner.” 


ii 

whether mrs. maloney’s tent door open south or east i think she 
never discovered, for it is quite certain she always slept with the 
flap tight fastened; i only know that my own little “five by seven, 
all silk” face due east, because next morning the sun, pour in as 
only the wilderness sun know how to pour, woke me early, and a moment 
later, with a short run over soft moss and a flying dive from the 
granite ledge, i was swimming in the most sparkle water imaginable. 

it was barely four o’clock, and the sun came down a long vista of blue 
island that led out to the open sea and finland. near by rose the 
wooded dome of our own property, still cap and wreathe with smoky 
trail of fast-melting mist, and look as fresh as though it was the 
morning of mrs. maloney’s sixth day and they had just issued, clean and 
brilliant, from the hand of the great architect. 

in the open space the ground was drench with dew, and from the sea a 
cool salt wind stole in among the tree and set the branch tremble 
in an atmosphere of shimmer silver. the tent shone white where the 
sun caught them in patches. below lay the lagoon, still dream of 
the summer night; in the open the fish were jump busily, send 
musical ripple towards the shore; and in the air hung the magic of 
dawn--silent, incommunicable. 

i lit the fire, so that an hour later the clergyman should find good 
ashes to stir his porridge over, and then set forth upon an examination 
of the island, but hardly had i gone a dozen yard when i saw a figure 
standing a little in front of me where the sunlight fell in a pool 
among the trees. 

it was joan. she had already been up an hour, she told me, and had 
bath before the last stars had left the sky. i saw at once that the 
new spirit of this solitary region had enter into her, banish the 
fear of the night, for her face was like the face of a happy denizen 
of the wilderness, and her eyes stainless and shining. her feet were 
bare, and drops of dew she had shaken from the branch hung in her 
loose-flying hair. obviously she had come into her own. 

“i’ve been all over the island,” she announce laughingly, “and there 
are two things wanting.” 

“you’re a good judge, joan. what are they?” 

“there’s no animal life, and there’s no--water.” 

“they go together,” i said. “animals don’t bother with a rock like this 
unless there’s a spring on it.” 

and as she led me from place to place, happy and excited, leap 
adroit from rock to rock, i was glad to note that my first 
impression were correct. she made no reference to our conversation of 
the night before. the new spirit had driven out the old. there was no 
room in her heart for fear or anxiety, and nature had everything her 
own way. 

the island, we found, was some three-quarters of a mile from point 
to point, built in a circle, or wide horseshoe, with an opening of 
twenty feet at the mouth of the lagoon. pine-trees grew thick all 
over, but here and there were patch of silver birch, scrub oak, and 
considerable colonies of wild raspberry and gooseberry bushes. the two 
end of the horseshoe form bare slab of smooth granite running into 
the sea and form dangerous reef just below the surface, but the 
rest of the island rose in a forty-foot ridge and slope down steeple 
to the sea on either side, being nowhere more than a hundred yard wide. 

the outer shore-line was much indent with numberless cove and bay 
and sandy beaches, with here and there cave and precipitous little 
cliff against which the sea broke in spray and thunder. but the inner 
shore, the shore of the lagoon, was low and regular, and so well 
protect by the wall of tree along the ridge that no storm could ever 
send more than a passing ripple along its sandy marges. eternal shelter 
reign there. 

on one of the other islands, a few hundred yard away--for the rest of 
the party slept late this first morning, and we took to the canoe--we 
discover a spring of fresh water untainted by the brackish flavour of 
the baltic, and have thus solve the most important problem of the 
camp, we next proceed to deal with the second--fish. and in half an 
hour we reel in and turn homewards, for we had no means of storage, 
and to clean more fish than may be store or eaten in a day is no wise 
occupation for experienced campers. 

and as we landed towards six o’clock we heard the clergyman singing as 
usual and saw his wife and sangree shake out their blanket in the 
sun, and dress in a fashion that finally dispel all memory of 
street and civilisation. 

“the little people lit the fire for me,” cry maloney, look natural 
and at home in his ancient flannel suit and break off in the middle 
of his singing, “so i’ve got the porridge going--and this time it’s 
_not_ burnt.” 

we report the discovery of water and held up the fish. 

“good! good again!” he cried. “we’ll have the first decent breakfast 
we’ve had this year. sangree’ll clean ’em in no time, and the bo’sun’s 
mate----” 

“will fry them to a turn,” laugh the voice of mrs. maloney, appear 
on the scene in a tight blue jersey and sandals, and catching up the 
frying-pan. her husband always call her the bo’sun’s mate in camp, 
because it was her duty, among others, to pipe all hand to meals. 

“and as for you, joan,” went on the happy man, “you look like the 
spirit of the island, with moss in your hair and wind in your eyes, 
and sun and stars mixed in your face.” he look at her with delight 
admiration. “here, sangree, take these twelve, there’s a good fellow, 
they’re the biggest; and we’ll have ’em in butter in less time than you 
can say baltic island!” 

i watch the canada as he slow move off to the clean pail. 
his eyes were drink in the girl’s beauty, and a wave of passionate, 
almost feverish, joy pass over his face, expressive of the ecstasy of 
true worship more than anything else. perhaps he was thinking that he 
still had three week to come with that vision always before his eyes; 
perhaps he was thinking of his dream in the night. i cannot say. but 
i notice the curious mingle of yearning and happiness in his eyes, 
and the strength of the impression touched my curiosity. something in 
his face held my gaze for a second, something to do with its intensity. 
that so timid, so gentle a personality should conceal so virile a 
passion almost seem to require explanation. 

but the impression was momentary, for that first breakfast in camp 
permit no divide attentions, and i dare swear that the porridge, 
the tea, the sweden “flatbread,” and the fry fish flavour with 
points of frizzle bacon, were better than any meal eaten elsewhere 
that day in the whole world. 

the first clear day in a new camp is always a furiously busy one, and 
we soon drop into the routine upon which in large measure the real 
comfort of every one depends. about the cooking-fire, greatly improve 
with stone from the shore, we built a high stockade consist of 
upright pole thick twin with branches, the roof line with moss 
and lichen and weighted with rocks, and round the interior we made low 
wooden seat so that we could lie round the fire even in rain and eat 
our meal in peace. paths, too, outline themselves from tent to tent, 
from the bathing place and the landing stage, and a fair division of 
the island was decided upon between the quarters of the men and the 
women. wood was stacked, awkward tree and boulder removed, hammock 
slung, and tent strengthened. in a word, camp was established, and 
duty were assign and accept as though we expect to live on 
this baltic island for years to come and the smallest detail of the 
community life was important. 

moreover, as the camp came into being, this sense of a community 
developed, prove that we were a definite whole, and not merely 
separate human being living for a while in tent upon a desert island. 
each fell willing into the routine. sangree, as by natural selection, 
took upon himself the clean of the fish and the cutting of the wood 
into length sufficient for a day’s use. and he did it well. the pan 
of water was never without a fish, clean and scaled, ready to fry 
for whoever was hungry; the nightly fire never die down for lack of 
material to throw on without go farther afield to search. 

and timothy, once reverend, caught the fish and chop down the 
trees. he also assume responsibility for the condition of the boat, 
and did it so thorough that nothing in the little cutter was ever 
found wanting. and when, for any reason, his presence was in demand, 
the first place to look for him was--in the boat, and there, too, he 
was usually found, tinker away with sheets, sails, or rudder and 
singing as he tinkered. 

nor was the “reading” neglected; for most mornings there came a sound 
of drone voice from the white tent by the raspberry bushes, which 
signify that sangree, the tutor, and whatever other man chance to be 
in the party at the time, were hard at it with history or the classics. 

and while mrs. maloney, also by natural selection, took charge of 
the larder and the kitchen, the mending and general supervise of 
the rough comforts, she also made herself peculiarly mistress of the 
megaphone which summon to meal and carry her voice easily from one 
end of the island to the other; and in her hour of leisure she daub 
the surrounding scenery on to a sketch block with all the honesty 
and devotion of her determined but unreceptive soul. 

joan, meanwhile, joan, elusive creature of the wilds, became i know 
not exactly what. she did plenty of work in the camp, yet seem to 
have no very precise duties. she was everywhere and anywhere. sometimes 
she slept in her tent, sometimes under the stars with a blanket. she 
knew every inch of the island and kept turning up in place where she 
was least expected--for ever wandering about, reading her books in 
sheltered corners, making little fire on sunless days to “worship by 
to the gods,” as she put it, ever finding new pools to dive and bathe 
in, and swimming day and night in the warm and waveless lagoon like a 
fish in a huge tank. she went bare-legged and bare-footed, with her 
hair down and her skirt caught up to the knees, and if ever a human 
being turn into a jolly savage within the compass of a single week, 
joan maloney was certainly that human being. she ran wild. 

so completely, too, was she possessed by the strong spirit of the 
place that the little human fear she had yield to so strange on 
our arrival seem to have been utterly dispossessed. as i hope and 
expected, she made no reference to our conversation of the first 
evening. sangree bother her with no special attentions, and after 
all they were very little together. his behaviour was perfect in that 
respect, and i, for my part, hardly gave the matter another thought. 
joan was ever a prey to vivid fancies of one kind or another, and this 
was one of them. merciful for the happiness of all concerned, it had 
melt away before the spirit of busy, active life and deep content 
that reign over the island. every one was intense alive, and peace 
was upon all. 

* * * * * 

meanwhile the effect of the camp-life began to tell. always a searching 
test of character, its results, soon or later, are infallible, for 
it acts upon the soul as swift and surely as the hypo bath upon the 
negative of a photograph. a readjust of the personal forces take 
place quickly; some parts of the personality go to sleep, other wake 
up: but the first sweeping change that the primitive life bring about 
is that the artificial portion of the character shed themselves one 
after another like dead skins. attitude and pose that seem genuine 
in the city, drop away. the mind, like the body, grow quick hard, 
simple, uncomplex. and in a camp as primitive and close to nature as 
ours was, these effects became speedy visible. 

some folk, of course, who talk glib about the simple life when it 
is safe out of reach, betray themselves in camp by for ever peer 
about for the artificial excitement of civilisation which they miss. 
some get bore at once; some grow slovenly; some reveal the animal in 
most unexpected fashion; and some, the select few, find themselves in 
very short order and are happy. 

and, in our little party, we could flatter ourselves that we all 
belong to the last category, so far as the general effect was 
concerned. only there were certain other change as well, vary with 
each individual, and all interesting to note. 

it was only after the first week or two that these change became 
marked, although this is the proper place, i think, to speak of them. 
for, have myself no other duty than to enjoy a well-earned holiday, 
i use to load my canoe with blanket and provisions and journey forth 
on exploration trip among the island of several days together; and 
it was on my return from the first of these--when i rediscovere the 
party, so to speak--that these change first present themselves 
vivid to me, and in one particular instance produce a rather curious 
impression. 

in a word, then, while every one had grown wilder, naturally wilder, 
sangree, it seem to me, had grown much wilder, and what i can only 
call unnatural wilder. he made me think of a savage. 

to begin with, he had change immensely in mere physical appearance, 
and the full brown cheeks, the bright eyes of absolute health, and 
the general air of vigour and robust that had come to replace his 
customary lassitude and timidity, had work such an improvement that i 
hardly knew him for the same man. his voice, too, was deep and his 
manner bespoke for the first time a greater measure of confidence in 
himself. he now had some claim to be call nice-looking, or at least 
to a certain air of virility that would not lessen his value in the 
eyes of the opposite sex. 

all this, of course, was natural enough, and most welcome. but, 
altogether apart from this physical change, which no doubt had also 
been go forward in the rest of us, there was a subtle note in his 
personality that came to me with a degree of surprise that almost 
amount to shock. 

and two things--as he came down to welcome me and pull up the 
canoe--leaped up in my mind unbidden, as though connected in some way 
i could not at the moment divine--first, the curious judgment form 
of him by joan; and secondly, that fugitive expression i had caught in 
his face while maloney was offering up his strange prayer for special 
protection from heaven. 

the delicacy of manner and feature--to call it by no mild term--which 
had always been a distinguish characteristic of the man, had been 
replace by something far more vigorous and decided, that yet utterly 
elude analysis. the change which impress me so oddly was not easy 
to name. the others--singing maloney, the bustle bo’sun’s mate, and 
joan, that fascinating half-breed of undine and salamander--all show 
the effects of a life so close to nature; but in their case the change 
was perfectly natural and what was to be expected, whereas with peter 
sangree, the canadian, it was something unusual and unexpected. 

it is impossible to explain how he manage gradual to convey to my 
mind the impression that something in him had turn savage, yet this, 
more or less, is the impression that he did convey. it was not that 
he seem really less civilised, or that his character had undergone 
any definite alteration, but rather that something in him, hitherto 
dormant, had awaken to life. some quality, latent till now--so 
far, at least, as we were concerned, who, after all, knew him but 
slightly--had stir into activity and risen to the surface of his 
being. 

and while, for the moment, this seem as far as i could get, it was 
but natural that my mind should continue the intuitive process and 
acknowledge that john silence, owe to his peculiar faculties, and the 
girl, owe to her singularly receptive temperament, might each in a 
different way have divine this latent quality in his soul, and fear 
its manifestation later. 

on look back to this painful adventure, too, it now seem equally 
natural that the same process, carry to its logical conclusion, 
should have waken some deep instinct in me that, wholly without 
direction from my will, set itself sharp and persistent upon the 
watch from that very moment. thenceforward the personality of sangree 
was never far from my thoughts, and i was for ever analyse and 
searching for the explanation that took so long in coming. 

“i declare, hubbard, you’re tan like an aboriginal, and you look 
like one, too,” laugh maloney. 

“and i can return the compliment,” was my reply, as we all gather 
round a brew of tea to exchange news and compare notes. 

and later, at supper, it amuse me to observe that the distinguished 
tutor, once clergyman, did not eat his food quite as “nicely” as he did 
at home--he devour it; that mrs. maloney ate more, and, to say the 
least, with less delay, than was her custom in the select atmosphere 
of her english dining-room; and that while joan attack her tin 
plateful with genuine avidity, sangree, the canadian, bit and gnaw 
at his, laugh and talk and compliment the cook all the while, 
and making me think with secret amusement of a starve animal at its 
first meal. while, from their remark about myself, i judge that i had 
change and grown wild as much as the rest of them. 

in this and in a hundred other little ways the change showed, ways 
difficult to define in detail, but all proving--not the coarsen 
effect of leading the primitive life, but, let us say, the more direct 
and unvarnished method that became prevalent. for all day long we 
were in the bath of the elements--wind, water, sun--and just as the 
body became insensible to cold and shed unnecessary clothing, the mind 
grew straightforward and shed many of the disguise require by the 
convention of civilisation. 

and in each, according to temperament and character, there stir the 
life-instincts that were natural, untamed, and, in a sense--savage. 


iii 

so it came about that i stay with our island party, putt off 
my second explore trip from day to day, and i think that this 
far-fetched instinct to watch sangree was really the cause of my 
postponement. 

for another ten days the life of the camp pursue its even and 
delightful way, blessed by perfect summer weather, a good harvest 
of fish, fine wind for sailing, and calm, starry nights. maloney’s 
selfish prayer had been favourable received. nothing came to disturb 
or perplex. there was not even the prowl of night animal to vex 
the rest of mrs. maloney; for in previous camp it had often been her 
peculiar affliction that she heard the porcupine scratch against 
the canvas, or the squirrel drop fir-cones in the early morning 
with a sound of miniature thunder upon the roof of her tent. but on 
this island there was not even a squirrel or a mouse. i think two toad 
and a small and harmless snake were the only living creature that had 
been discover during the whole of the first fortnight. and these two 
toad in all probability were not two toads, but one toad. 

then, suddenly, came the terror that change the whole aspect of the 
place--the devastating terror. 

it came, at first, gently, but from the very start it made me realise 
the unpleasant lonely of our situation, our remote isolation in 
this wilderness of sea and rock, and how the island in this tideless 
baltic ocean lay about us like the advance guard of a vast besiege 
army. its entry, as i say, was gentle, hardly noticeable, in fact, 
to most of us: singularly undramatic it certainly was. but, then, in 
actual life this is often the way the dreadful climax move upon us, 
leave the heart undisturbed almost to the last minute, and then 
overwhelming it with a sudden rush of horror. for it was the custom at 
breakfast to listen patient while each in turn related the trivial 
adventure of the night--how they slept, whether the wind shook their 
tent, whether the spider on the ridge pole had moved, whether they had 
heard the toad, and so forth--and on this particular morning joan, in 
the middle of a little pause, made a truly novel announcement: 

“in the night i heard the howling of a dog,” she said, and then flushed 
up to the roots of her hair when we burst out laughing. for the idea 
of there being a dog on this forsaken island that was only able to 
support a snake and two toad was distinct ludicrous, and i remember 
maloney, half-way through his burnt porridge, cap the announcement 
by declare that he had heard a “baltic turtle” in the lagoon, and his 
wife’s expression of frantic alarm before the laughter undeceive her. 

but the next morning joan repeated the story with additional and 
convincing detail. 

“sounds of whine and growl woke me,” she said, “and i distinct 
heard sniff under my tent, and the scratch of paws.” 

“oh, timothy! can it be a porcupine?” exclaim the bo’sun’s mate with 
distress, forget that sweden was not canada. 

but the girl’s voice had sound to me in quite another key, and 
look up i saw that her father and sangree were staring at her hard. 
they, too, understood that she was in earnest, and had been struck by 
the serious note in her voice. 

“rubbish, joan! you are always dream something or other wild,” her 
father said a little impatiently. 

“there’s not an animal of any size on the whole island,” add sangree 
with a puzzle expression. he never took his eyes from her face. 

“but there’s nothing to prevent one swimming over,” i put in briskly, 
for somehow a sense of uneasy that was not pleasant had woven 
itself into the talk and pauses. “a deer, for instance, might easily 
land in the night and take a look round----” 

“or a bear!” gasp the bo’sun’s mate, with a look so portentous that 
we all welcome the laugh. 

but joan did not laugh. instead, she sprang up and call to us to 
follow. 

“there,” she said, point to the ground by her tent on the side 
farthest from her mother’s; “there are the mark close to my head. you 
can see for yourselves.” 

we saw plainly. the moss and lichen--for earth there was hardly 
any--had been scratch up by paws. an animal about the size of a large 
dog it must have been, to judge by the marks. we stood and stare in a 
row. 

“close to my head,” repeated the girl, look round at us. her face, 
i noticed, was very pale, and her lip seem to quiver for an instant. 
then she gave a sudden gulp--and burst into a flood of tears. 

the whole thing had come about in the brief space of a few minutes, and 
with a curious sense of inevitableness, moreover, as though it had all 
been careful plan from all time and nothing could have stop it. 
it had all been rehearse before--had actually happen before, as the 
strange feeling sometimes has it; it seem like the opening movement 
in some ominous drama, and that i knew exactly what would happen next. 
something of great moment was impending. 

for this sinister sensation of coming disaster made itself felt from 
the very beginning, and an atmosphere of gloom and dismay pervade the 
entire camp from that moment forward. 

i drew sangree to one side and move away, while maloney took the 
distress girl into her tent, and his wife follow them, energetic 
and greatly flustered. 

for thus, in undramatic fashion, it was that the terror i have 
spoken of first attempt the invasion of our camp, and, trivial and 
unimportant though it seemed, every little detail of this opening scene 
is photograph upon my mind with merciless accuracy and precision. 
it happen exactly as described. this was exactly the language used. 
i see it written before me in black and white. i see, too, the face 
of all concerned with the sudden ugly signature of alarm where before 
had been peace. the terror had stretch out, so to speak, a first 
tentative feeler towards us and had touched the heart of each with a 
horrid directness. and from this moment the camp changed. 

sangree in particular was visibly upset. he could not bear to see the 
girl distressed, and to hear her actually cry was almost more than he 
could stand. the feeling that he had no right to protect her hurt him 
keenly, and i could see that he was itch to do something to help, 
and like him for it. his expression said plainly that he would tear in 
a thousand pieces anything that dare to injure a hair of her head. 

we lit our pipes and stroll over in silence to the men’s quarters, 
and it was his odd canada expression “gee whiz!” that drew my 
attention to a further discovery. 

“the brute’s been scratch round my tent too,” he cried, as he 
pointed to similar mark by the door and i stoop down to examine 
them. we both stare in amaze for several minutes without speaking. 

“only i sleep like the dead,” he added, straighten up again, “and so 
heard nothing, i suppose.” 

we trace the paw-marks from the mouth of his tent in a direct line 
across to the girl’s, but nowhere else about the camp was there a 
sign of the strange visitor. the deer, dog, or whatever it was that 
had twice favoured us with a visit in the night, had confine its 
attention to these two tents. and, after all, there was really 
nothing out of the way about these visit of an unknown animal, for 
although our own island was destitute of life, we were in the heart 
of a wilderness, and the mainland and large island must be swarm 
with all kind of four-footed creatures, and no very prolonged swimming 
was necessary to reach us. in any other country it would not have 
cause a moment’s interest--interest of the kind we felt, that is. 
in our canada camp the bear were for ever grunt about among 
the provision bags at night, porcupine scratch unceasingly, and 
chipmunk scuttle over everything. 

“my daughter is overtired, and that’s the truth of it,” explain 
maloney presently when he rejoin us and had examine in turn the 
other paw-marks. “she’s been overdo it lately, and camp-life, you 
know, always means a great excitement to her. it’s natural enough. if 
we take no notice she’ll be all right.” he pause to borrow my tobacco 
pouch and fill his pipe, and the blunder way he fill it and 
spill the precious weed on the ground visibly belie the calm of his 
easy language. “you might take her out for a bit of fishing, hubbard, 
like a good chap; she’s hardly up to the long day in the cutter. show 
her some of the other island in your canoe, perhaps. eh?” 

and by lunch-time the cloud had pass away as suddenly, and as 
suspiciously, as it had come. 

but in the canoe, on our way home, have till then purposely ignore 
the subject uppermost in our minds, she sudden spoke to me in a way 
that again touched the note of sinister alarm--the note that kept on 
sound and sound until finally john silence came with his great 
vibrate presence and relieved it; yes, and even after he came, too, 
for a while. 

“i’m ashamed to ask it,” she said abruptly, as she steer me home, 
her sleeve roll up, her hair blow in the wind, “and ashamed of 
my silly tear too, because i really can’t make out what cause them; 
but, mr. hubbard, i want you to promise me not to go off for your long 
expeditions--just yet. i beg it of you.” she was so in earnest that 
she forgot the canoe, and the wind caught it sideways and made us roll 
dangerously. “i have try hard not to ask this,” she added, bring 
the canoe round again, “but i simply can’t help myself.” 

it was a good deal to ask, and i suppose my hesitation was plain; for 
she went on before i could reply, and her beseech expression and 
intensity of manner impress me very forcibly. 

“for another two week only----” 

“mr. sangree leaves in a fortnight,” i said, seeing at once what she 
was driving at, but wonder if it was best to encourage her or not. 

“if i knew you were to be on the island till then,” she said, her face 
alternate pale and blushing, and her voice tremble a little, “i 
should feel so much happier.” 

i look at her steadily, wait for her to finish. 

“and safer,” she add almost in a whisper; “especially--at night, i 
mean.” 

“safer, joan?” i repeated, thinking i had never seen her eyes so soft 
and tender. she nod her head, keeping her gaze fixed on my face. 

it was really difficult to refuse, whatever my thought and judgment 
may have been, and somehow i understood that she spoke with good 
reason, though for the life of me i could not have put it into words. 

“happier--and safer,” she said gravely, the canoe give a dangerous 
lurch as she lean forward in her seat to catch my answer. perhaps, 
after all, the wisest way was to grant her request and make light of 
it, ease her anxiety without too much encourage its cause. 

“all right, joan, you queer creature; i promise,” and the instant look 
of relief in her face, and the smile that came back like sunlight to 
her eyes, made me feel that, unknown to myself and the world, i was 
capable of considerable sacrifice after all. 

“but, you know, there’s nothing to be afraid of,” i add sharply; and 
she look up in my face with the smile women use when they know we are 
talk idly, yet do not wish to tell us so. 

“_you_ don’t feel afraid, i know,” she observe quietly. 

“of course not; why should i?” 

“so, if you will just humour me this once i--i will never ask anything 
foolish of you again as long as i live,” she said gratefully. 

“you have my promise,” was all i could find to say. 

she head the nose of the canoe for the lagoon lie a quarter of a 
mile ahead, and paddle swiftly; but a minute or two later she pause 
again and stare hard at me with the dripping paddle across the thwarts. 

“you’ve not heard anything at night yourself, have you?” she asked. 

“i never hear anything at night,” i reply shortly, “from the moment i 
lie down till the moment i get up.” 

“that dismal howling, for instance,” she went on, determined to get 
it out, “far away at first and then get closer, and stopping just 
outside the camp?” 

“certainly not.” 

“because, sometimes i think i almost dream it.” 

“most likely you did,” was my unsympathetic response. 

“and you don’t think father has heard it either, then?” 

“no. he would have told me if he had.” 

this seem to relieve her mind a little. “i know mother hasn’t,” she 
added, as if speak to herself, “for she hear nothing--ever.” 

* * * * * 

it was two nights after this conversation that i woke out of deep 
sleep and heard sound of screaming. the voice was really horrible, 
break the peace and silence with its shrill clamour. in less than 
ten seconds i was half dress and out of my tent. the scream had 
stop abruptly, but i knew the general direction, and ran as fast as 
the dark would allow over to the women’s quarters, and on get 
close i heard sound of suppress weeping. it was joan’s voice. and 
just as i came up i saw mrs. maloney, marvellous attired, fumble 
with a lantern. other voice became audible in the same moment behind 
me, and timothy maloney arrived, breathless, less than half dressed, 
and carry another lantern that had gone out on the way from being 
bang against a tree. dawn was just breaking, and a chill wind blew in 
from the sea. heavy black cloud drove low overhead. 

the scene of confusion may be better imagine than described. question 
in frightened voice fill the air against this background of 
suppress weeping. briefly--joan’s silk tent had been torn, and the 
girl was in a state border upon hysterics. somewhat reassure by 
our noisy presence, however,--for she was plucky at heart,--she pull 
herself together and try to explain what had happened; and her broken 
words, told there on the edge of night and morning upon this wild 
island ridge, were oddly thrill and distressing convincing. 

“something touched me and i woke,” she said simply, but in a voice 
still hush and broken with the terror of it, “something push 
against the tent; i felt it through the canvas. there was the same 
sniff and scratch as before, and i felt the tent give a little 
as when wind shakes it. i heard breathing--very loud, very heavy 
breathing--and then came a sudden great tear blow, and the canvas 
rip open close to my face.” 

she had instantly dashed out through the open flap and scream at 
the top of her voice, thinking the creature had actually got into the 
tent. but nothing was visible, she declared, and she heard not the 
faintest sound of an animal making off under cover of the darkness. 
the brief account seem to exercise a paralyse effect upon us all 
as we listen to it. i can see the dishevelled group to this day, the 
wind blow the women’s hair, and maloney crane his head forward to 
listen, and his wife, open-mouthed and gasping, leaning against a pine 
tree. 

“come over to the stockade and we’ll get the fire going,” i said; 
“that’s the first thing,” for we were all shake with the cold in 
our scanty garments. and at that moment sangree arrive wrap in a 
blanket and carry his gun; he was still drunken with sleep. 

“the dog again,” maloney explain briefly, forestall his questions; 
“been at joan’s tent. torn it, by gad! this time. it’s time we did 
something.” he went on mumble confused to himself. 

sangree grip his gun and look about swift in the darkness. i 
saw his eyes flame in the glare of the flicker lanterns. he made a 
movement as though to start out and hunt--and kill. then his glance 
fell on the girl crouch on the ground, her face hidden in her 
hands, and there leap into his features an expression of savage 
anger that transform them. he could have face a dozen lion with a 
walking-stick at that moment, and again i like him for the strength of 
his anger, his self-control, and his hopeless devotion. 

but i stop him go off on a blind and useless chase. 

“come and help me start the fire, sangree,” i said, anxious also to 
relieve the girl of our presence; and a few minutes later the ashes, 
still glowing from the night’s fire, had kindle the fresh wood, 
and there was a blaze that warm us well while it also lit up the 
surrounding tree within a radius of twenty yards. 

“i heard nothing,” he whispered; “what in the world do you think it is? 
it surely can’t be only a dog!” 

“we’ll find that out later,” i said, as the other came up to the 
grateful warmth; “the first thing is to make as big a fire as we can.” 

joan was calm now, and her mother had put on some warmer, and less 
miraculous, garments. and while they stood talk in low voice 
maloney and i slip off to examine the tent. there was little enough 
to see, but that little was unmistakable. some animal had scratch up 
the ground at the head of the tent, and with a great blow of a powerful 
paw--a paw clearly provided with good claws--had struck the silk and 
torn it open. there was a hole large enough to pass a fist and arm 
through. 

“it can’t be far away,” maloney said excitedly. “we’ll organise a hunt 
at once; this very minute.” 

we hurried back to the fire, maloney talk boisterous about his 
propose hunt. “there’s nothing like prompt action to dispel alarm,” he 
whisper in my ear; and then turn to the rest of us. 

“we’ll hunt the island from end to end at once,” he said, with 
excitement; “that’s what we’ll do. the beast can’t be far away. and the 
bosun’s mate and joan must come too, because they can’t be left alone. 
hubbard, you take the right shore, and you, sangree, the left, and 
i’ll go in the middle with the women. in this way we can stretch clean 
across the ridge, and nothing big than a rabbit can possibly escape 
us.” he was extraordinarily excited, i thought. anything affecting 
joan, of course, stir him prodigiously. “get your gun and we’ll 
start the drive at once,” he cried. he lit another lantern and hand 
one each to his wife and joan, and while i ran to fetch my gun i heard 
him singing to himself with the excitement of it all. 

meanwhile the dawn had come on quickly. it made the flicker lantern 
look pale. the wind, too, was rising, and i heard the tree moan 
overhead and the wave break with increase clamour on the shore. 
in the lagoon the boat dip and splashed, and the sparks from the 
fire were carry aloft in a stream and scattered far and wide. 

we made our way to the extreme end of the island, measured our 
distance carefully, and then began to advance. none of us spoke. 
sangree and i, with cock guns, watch the shore lines, and all 
within easy touch and speak distance. it was a slow and blunder 
drive, and there were many false alarms, but after the best part of 
half an hour we stood on the farther end, have made the complete 
tour, and without putt up so much as a squirrel. certainly there was 
no living creature on that island but ourselves. 

“_i_ know what it is!” cry maloney, look out over the dim expanse 
of grey sea, and speak with the air of a man making a discovery; 
“it’s a dog from one of the farm on the large islands”--he pointed 
seawards where the archipelago thickened--“and it’s escape and turn 
wild. our fire and voice attract it, and it’s probably half starve 
as well as savage, poor brute!” 

no one said anything in reply, and he began to sing again very low to 
himself. 

the point where we stood--a huddled, shiver group--faced the wide 
channel that led to the open sea and finland. the grey dawn had broken 
in earnest at last, and we could see the racing wave with their angry 
crest of white. the surrounding island show up as dark masses 
in the distance, and in the east, almost as maloney spoke, the sun 
came up with a rush in a stormy and magnificent sky of red and gold. 
against this splash and gorgeous background black clouds, shaped 
like fantastic and legendary animals, file past swift in a tear 
stream, and to this day i have only to close my eyes to see again that 
vivid and hurry procession in the air. all about us the pine made 
black splash against the sky. it was an angry sunrise. rain, indeed, 
had already begun to fall in big drops. 

we turned, as by a common instinct, and, without speech, made our way 
back slow to the stockade, maloney hum snatch of his songs, 
sangree in front with his gun, prepared to shoot at a moment’s notice, 
and the women flounder in the rear with myself and the extinguish 
lanterns. 

yet it was only a dog! 

really, it was most singular when one came to reflect sober upon 
it all. events, say the occultists, have souls, or at least that 
agglomerate life due to the emotion and thought of all concerned 
in them, so that cities, and even whole countries, have great 
astral shape which may become visible to the eye of vision; and 
certainly here, the soul of this drive--this vain, blundering, futile 
drive--stood somewhere between ourselves and--laughed. 

all of us heard that laugh, and all of us try hard to smother the 
sound, or at least to ignore it. every one talk at once, loudly, and 
with exaggerate decision, obviously try to say something plausible 
against heavy odds, strive to explain naturally that an animal might 
so easily conceal itself from us, or swim away before we had time to 
light upon its trail. for we all spoke of that “trail” as though it 
really existed, and we had more to go upon than the mere mark of 
paw about the tent of joan and the canadian. indeed, but for these, 
and the torn tent, i think it would, of course, have been possible to 
ignore the existence of this beast intruder altogether. 

and it was here, under this angry dawn, as we stood in the shelter of 
the stockade from the pour rain, weary yet so strange excited--it 
was here, out of this confusion of voice and explanations, that--very 
stealthily--the ghost of something horrible slip in and stood among 
us. it made all our explanation seem childish and untrue; the false 
relation was instantly exposed. eyes exchange quick, anxious glances, 
questioning, expressive of dismay. there was a sense of wonder, of 
poignant distress, and of trepidation. alarm stood wait at our 
elbows. we shivered. 

then, suddenly, as we look into each other’s faces, came the long, 
unwelcome pause in which this new arrival establish itself in our 
hearts. 

and, without further speech, or attempt at explanation, maloney move 
off abrupt to mix the porridge for an early breakfast; sangree to 
clean the fish; myself to chop wood and tend the fire; joan and her 
mother to change their wet garments; and, most significant of all, to 
prepare her mother’s tent for its future complement of two. 

each went to his duty, but hurriedly, awkwardly, silently; and this new 
arrival, this shape of terror and distress stalked, viewless, by the 
side of each. 

“if only i could have trace that dog,” i think was the thought in the 
mind of all. 

* * * * * 

but in camp, where every one realise how important the individual 
contribution is to the comfort and well-being of all, the mind speedy 
recover tone and pull itself together. 

during the day, a day of heavy and ceaseless rain, we kept more or less 
to our tents, and though there were sign of mysterious conference 
between the three member of the maloney family, i think that most of 
us slept a good deal and stay alone with his thoughts. certainly, i 
did, because when maloney came to say that his wife invite us all to a 
special “tea” in her tent, he had to shake me awake before i realise 
that he was there at all. 

and by supper-time we were more or less even-minded again, and almost 
jolly. i only notice that there was an undercurrent of what is best 
describe as “jumpiness,” and that the merest snap of a twig, or 
plop of a fish in the lagoon, was sufficient to make us start and look 
over our shoulders. pause were rare in our talk, and the fire was 
never for one instant allow to get low. the wind and rain had ceased, 
but the dripping of the branch still kept up an excellent imitation 
of a downpour. in particular, maloney was vigilant and alert, telling 
us a series of tale in which the wholesome humorous element was 
especially strong. he lingered, too, behind with me after sangree had 
gone to bed, and while i mixed myself a glass of hot sweden punch, he 
did a thing i had never known him do before--he mixed one for himself, 
and then ask me to light him over to his tent. we said nothing on 
the way, but i felt that he was glad of my companionship. 

i return alone to the stockade, and for a long time after that kept 
the fire blazing, and sat up smoking and thinking. i hardly knew why; 
but sleep was far from me for one thing, and for another, an idea 
was taking form in my mind that require the comfort of tobacco and 
a bright fire for its growth. i lay against a corner of the stockade 
seat, listen to the wind whisper and to the ceaseless drip-drip 
of the trees. the night, otherwise, was very still, and the sea quiet 
as a lake. i remember that i was conscious, peculiarly conscious, of 
this host of desolate island crowd about us in the darkness, and 
that we were the one little spot of humanity in a rather wonderful kind 
of wilderness. 

but this, i think, was the only symptom that came to warn me of 
highly strung nerves, and it certainly was not sufficient alarm 
to destroy my peace of mind. one thing, however, did come to disturb 
my peace, for just as i finally made ready to go, and had kick the 
ember of the fire into a last effort, i fancy i saw, peer at me 
round the farther end of the stockade wall, a dark and shadowy mass 
that might have been--that strong resembled, in fact--the body of a 
large animal. two glowing eyes shone for an instant in the middle of 
it. but the next second i saw that it was merely a project mass of 
moss and lichen in the wall of our stockade, and the eyes were a couple 
of wandering sparks from the die ashes i had kicked. it was easy 
enough, too, to imagine i saw an animal moving here and there between 
the trees, as i picked my way stealthy to my tent. of course, the 
shadow trick me. 

and though it was after one o’clock, maloney’s light was still burning, 
for i saw his tent shining white among the pines. 

it was, however, in the short space between consciousness and 
sleep--that time when the body is low and the voice of the submerge 
region tell sometimes true--that the idea which had been all this 
while mature reach the point of an actual decision, and i sudden 
realise that i had resolve to send word to dr. silence. for, with 
a sudden wonder that i had hitherto been so blind, the unwelcome 
conviction dawn upon me all at once that some dreadful thing was 
lurk about us on this island, and that the safety of at least one 
of us was threaten by something monstrous and unclean that was too 
horrible to contemplate. and, again remember those last words of his 
as the train move out of the platform, i understood that dr. silence 
would hold himself in readiness to come. 

“unless you should send for me sooner,” he had said. 

* * * * * 

i found myself sudden wide awake. it is impossible to say what woke 
me, but it was no gradual process, seeing that i jump from deep sleep 
to absolute alert in a single instant. i had evidently slept for an 
hour and more, for the night had cleared, stars crowded the sky, and 
a pallid half-moon just sink into the sea threw a spectral light 
between the trees. 

i went outside to sniff the air, and stood upright. a curious 
impression that something was astir in the camp came over me, and when 
i glance across at sangree’s tent, some twenty feet away, i saw that 
it was moving. he too, then, was awake and restless, for i saw the 
canvas side bulge this way and that as he move within. 

then the flap pushed forward. he was coming out, like myself, to sniff 
the air; and i was not surprised, for its sweet after the rain was 
intoxicating. and he came on all fours, just as i had done. i saw a 
head thrust round the edge of the tent. 

and then i saw that it was not sangree at all. it was an animal. and 
the same instant i realise something else too--it was _the_ animal; 
and its whole present for some unaccountable reason was unutterable 
malefic. 

a cry i was quite unable to suppress escape me, and the creature 
turn on the instant and stare at me with baleful eyes. i could 
have drop on the spot, for the strength all ran out of my body 
with a rush. something about it touched in me the living terror that 
grip and paralyses. if the mind require but the tenth of a second 
to form an impression, i must have stood there stockstill for several 
seconds while i seize the ropes for support and stared. many and vivid 
impression flash through my mind, but not one of them result in 
action, because i was in instant dread that the beast any moment would 
leap in my direction and be upon me. instead, however, after what 
seem a vast period, it slow turn its eyes from my face, utter a 
low whine sound, and came out altogether into the open. 

then, for the first time, i saw it in its entirety and noted two 
things: it was about the size of a large dog, but at the same time it 
was utterly unlike any animal that i had ever seen. also, that the 
quality that had impress me first as being malefic, was really only 
its singular and original strangeness. foolish as it may sound, and 
impossible as it is for me to adduce proof, i can only say that the 
animal seem to me then to be--not real. 

but all this pass through my mind in a flash, almost subconsciously, 
and before i had time to check my impressions, or even properly verify 
them; i made an involuntary movement, catching the tight rope in my 
hand so that it twang like a banjo string, and in that instant the 
creature turn the corner of sangree’s tent and was gone into the 
darkness. 

then, of course, my senses in some measure return to me, and i 
realise only one thing: it had been inside his tent! 

i dashed out, reach the door in half a dozen strides, and look in. 
the canadian, thank god! lay upon his bed of branches. his arm was 
stretch outside, across the blankets, the fist tight clenched, and 
the body had an appearance of unusual rigidity that was alarming. on 
his face there was an expression of effort, almost of painful effort, 
so far as the uncertain light permit me to see, and his sleep seem 
to be very profound. he looked, i thought, so stiff, so unnatural 
stiff, and in some indefinable way, too, he look smaller--shrunken. 

i call to him to wake, but call many times in vain. then i decided 
to shake him, and had already move forward to do so vigorous when 
there came a sound of footstep padding soft behind me, and i felt a 
stream of hot breath burn my neck as i stooped. i turn sharply. the 
tent door was darken and something silent swept in. i felt a rough 
and shaggy body push past me, and knew that the animal had returned. it 
seem to leap forward between me and sangree--in fact, to leap upon 
sangree, for its dark body hid him momentarily from view, and in that 
moment my soul turn sick and coward with a horror that rose from the 
very dregs and depth of life, and grip my existence at its central 
source. 

the creature seem somehow to melt away into him, almost as though 
it belong to him and were a part of himself, but in the same 
instant--that instant of extraordinary confusion and terror in my 
mind--it seem to pass over and behind him, and, in some utterly 
unaccountable fashion, it was gone! and the canada woke and sat up 
with a start. 

“quick! you fool!” i cried, in my excitement, “the beast has been in 
your tent, here at your very throat while you sleep like the dead. up, 
man! get your gun! only this second it disappear over there behind 
your head. quick! or joan----!” 

and somehow the fact that he was there, wide-awake now, to corroborate 
me, brought the additional conviction to my own mind that this was no 
animal, but some perplex and dreadful form of life that drew upon my 
deep knowledge, that much reading had perhaps assent to, but that 
had never yet come within actual range of my senses. 

he was up in a flash, and out. he was trembling, and very white. we 
search hurriedly, feverishly, but found only the trace of paw-marks 
passing from the door of his own tent across the moss to the women’s. 
and the sight of the track about mrs. maloney’s tent, where joan now 
slept, set him in a perfect fury. 

“do you know what it is, hubbard, this beast?” he hiss under his 
breath at me; “it’s a damn wolf, that’s what it is--a wolf lost among 
the islands, and starve to death--desperate. so help me god, i 
believe it’s that!” 

he talk a lot of rubbish in his excitement. he declared he would 
sleep by day and sit up every night until he kill it. again his rage 
touched my admiration; but i got him away before he made enough noise 
to wake the whole camp. 

“i have a better plan than that,” i said, watch his face closely. “i 
don’t think this is anything we can deal with. i’m go to send for 
the only man i know who can help. we’ll go to waxholm this very morning 
and get a telegram through.” 

sangree stare at me with a curious expression as the fury die out of 
his face and a new look of alarm took its place. 

“john silence,” i said, “will know----” 

“you think it’s something--of that sort?” he stammered. 

“i am sure of it.” 

there was a moment’s pause. “that’s worse, far worse than anything 
material,” he said, turning visibly paler. he look from my face to 
the sky, and then add with sudden resolution, “come; the wind’s 
rising. let’s get off at once. from there you can telephone to 
stockholm and get a telegram sent without delay.” 

i sent him down to get the boat ready, and seize the opportunity 
myself to run and wake maloney. he was sleep very lightly, and 
sprang up the moment i put my head inside his tent. i told him brief 
what i had seen, and he show so little surprise that i caught myself 
wonder for the first time whether he himself had seen more go on 
than he had deem wise to communicate to the rest of us. 

he agree to my plan without a moment’s hesitation, and my last 
words to him were to let his wife and daughter think that the great 
psychic doctor was coming merely as a chance visitor, and not with any 
professional interest. 

so, with frying-pan, provisions, and blanket aboard, sangree and i 
sail out of the lagoon fifteen minutes later, and head with a good 
breeze for the direction of waxholm and the border of civilisation. 


iv 

although nothing john silence did ever took me, properly speaking, by 
surprise, it was certainly unexpected to find a letter from stockholm 
wait for me. “i have finished my hungary business,” he wrote, “and 
am here for ten days. do not hesitate to send if you need me. if you 
telephone any morning from waxholm i can catch the afternoon steamer.” 

my years of intercourse with him were full of “coincidences” of this 
description, and although he never sought to explain them by claim 
any magical system of communication with my mind, i have never doubt 
that there actually exist some secret telepathic method by which he 
knew my circumstances and gauge the degree of my need. and that this 
power was independent of time in the sense that it saw into the future, 
always seem to me equally apparent. 

sangree was as much relieved as i was, and within an hour of sunset 
that very evening we met him on the arrival of the little coast 
steamer, and carry him off in the dinghy to the camp we had prepared 
on a neighbouring island, meaning to start for home early next morning. 

“now,” he said, when supper was over and we were smoking round the 
fire, “let me hear your story.” he glance from one to the other, 
smiling. 

“you tell it, mr. hubbard,” sangree interrupt abruptly, and went 
off a little way to wash the dishes, yet not so far as to be out of 
earshot. and while he splash with the hot water, and scrape the tin 
plate with sand and moss, my voice, unbroken by a single question from 
dr. silence, ran on for the next half-hour with the best account i 
could give of what had happened. 

my listener lay on the other side of the fire, his face half hidden 
by a big sombrero; sometimes he glance up questioning when a 
point need elaboration, but he utter no single word till i had 
reach the end, and his manner all through the recital was grave and 
attentive. overhead, the wash of the wind in the pine branch fill 
in the pauses; the dark settled down over the sea, and the stars 
came out in thousands, and by the time i finished the moon had risen to 
flood the scene with silver. yet, by his face and eyes, i knew quite 
well that the doctor was listen to something he had expect to 
hear, even if he had not actually anticipate all the details. 

“you did well to send for me,” he said very low, with a significant 
glance at me when i finished; “very well,”--and for one swift second 
his eye took in sangree,--“for what we have to deal with here is 
nothing more than a werewolf--rare enough, i am glad to say, but often 
very sad, and sometimes very terrible.” 

i jump as though i had been shot, but the next second was heartily 
ashamed of my want of control; for this brief remark, confirm as 
it did my own worst suspicions, did more to convince me of the gravity 
of the adventure than any number of question or explanations. it 
seem to draw close the circle about us, shut a door somewhere 
that lock us in with the animal and the horror, and turning the key. 
whatever it was had now to be face and dealt with. 

“no one has been actually injure so far?” he ask aloud, but in a 
matter-of-fact tone that lent reality to grim possibilities. 

“good heavens, no!” cry the canadian, throw down his dish-cloths 
and coming forward into the circle of firelight. “surely there can be 
no question of this poor starve beast injure anybody, can there?” 

his hair straggle untidi over his forehead, and there was a gleam in 
his eyes that was not all reflection from the fire. his words made me 
turn sharply. we all laugh a little, short, forced laugh. 

“i trust not, indeed,” dr. silence said quietly. “but what make you 
think the creature is starved?” he ask the question with his eyes 
straight on the other’s face. the prompt question explain to me why 
i had started, and i wait with just a tremor of excitement for the 
reply. 

sangree hesitate a moment, as though the question took him by 
surprise. but he met the doctor’s gaze unflinching across the fire, 
and with complete honesty. 

“really,” he faltered, with a little shrug of the shoulders, “i can 
hardly tell you. the phrase seem to come out of its own accord. i 
have felt from the beginning that it was in pain and--starved, though 
why i felt this never occur to me till you asked.” 

“you really know very little about it, then?” said the other, with a 
sudden gentle in his voice. 

“no more than that,” sangree replied, look at him with a puzzle 
expression that was unmistakable genuine. “in fact, nothing at all, 
really,” he added, by way of further explanation. 

“i am glad of that,” i heard the doctor murmur under his breath, but 
so low that i only just caught the words, and sangree miss them 
altogether, as evidently he was meant to do. 

“and now,” he cried, get on his feet and shake himself with a 
characteristic gesture, as though to shake out the horror and the 
mystery, “let us leave the problem till to-morrow and enjoy this wind 
and sea and stars. i’ve been living lately in the atmosphere of many 
people, and feel that i want to wash and be clean. i propose a swim and 
then bed. who’ll second me?” and two minutes later we were all dive 
from the boat into cool, deep water, that reflect a thousand moon as 
the wave broke away from us in countless ripples. 

we slept in blanket under the open sky, sangree and i taking the 
outside places, and were up before sunrise to catch the dawn wind. 
help by this early start we were half-way home by noon, and then the 
wind shift to a few points behind us so that we fairly ran. in and 
out among a thousand islands, down narrow channel where we lost the 
wind, out into open space where we had to take in a reef, racing along 
under a hot and cloudless sky, we flew through the very heart of the 
bewilder and lonely scenery. 

“a real wilderness,” cry dr. silence from his seat in the bow where 
he held the jib sheet. his hat was off, his hair tumble in the wind, 
and his lean brown face gave him the touch of an oriental. presently 
he change place with sangree, and came down to talk with me by the 
tiller. 

“a wonderful region, all this world of islands,” he said, wave his 
hand to the scenery rush past us, “but doesn’t it strike you there’s 
something lacking?” 

“it’s--hard,” i answered, after a moment’s reflection. “it has a 
superficial, glittering prettiness, without----” i hesitate to find 
the word i wanted. 

john silence nod his head with approval. 

“exactly,” he said. “the picturesque of stage scenery that is not 
real, not alive. it’s like a landscape by a clever painter, yet without 
true imagination. soulless--that’s the word you wanted.” 

“something like that,” i answered, watch the gust of wind on the 
sails. “not dead so much, as without soul. that’s it.” 

“of course,” he went on, in a voice calculated, it seem to me, not 
to reach our companion in the bows, “to live long in a place like 
this--long and alone--might bring about a strange result in some men.” 

i sudden realise he was talk with a purpose and prick up my 
ears. 

“there’s no life here. these island are mere dead rocks pushed up from 
below the sea--not living land; and there’s nothing really alive on 
them. even the sea, this tideless, brackish sea, neither salt water nor 
fresh, is dead. it’s all a pretty image of life without the real heart 
and soul of life. to a man with too strong desire who came here and 
live close to nature, strange things might happen.” 

“let her out a bit,” i shout to sangree, who was coming aft. “the 
wind’s gusty and we’ve got hardly any ballast.” 

he went back to the bows, and dr. silence continued-- 

“here, i mean, a long sojourn would lead to deterioration, to 
degeneration. the place is utterly unsoftened by human influences, by 
any humanise association of history, good or bad. this landscape has 
never awaken into life; it’s still dream in its primitive sleep.” 

“in time,” i put in, “you mean a man living here might become brutal?” 

“the passion would run wild, selfish become supreme, the instinct 
coarsen and turn savage probably.” 

“but----” 

“in other place just as wild, parts of italy for instance, where there 
are other moderate influences, it could not happen. the character 
might grow wild, savage too in a sense, but with a human wild one 
could understand and deal with. but here, in a hard place like this, it 
might be otherwise.” he spoke slowly, weigh his words carefully. 

i look at him with many question in my eyes, and a precautionary cry 
to sangree to stay in the fore part of the boat, out of earshot. 

“first of all there would come callous to pain, and indifference 
to the rights of others. then the soul would turn savage, not from 
passionate human causes, or with enthusiasm, but by deaden down into 
a kind of cold, primitive, emotionless savagery--by turning, like the 
landscape, soulless.” 

“and a man with strong desires, you say, might change?” 

“without being aware of it, yes; he might turn savage, his instinct 
and desire turn animal. and if”--he lower his voice and turn for 
a moment towards the bows, and then continue in his most weighty 
manner--“owing to delicate health or other predispose causes, his 
double--you know what i mean, of course--his ether body of desire, or 
astral body, as some term it--that part in which the emotions, passion 
and desire reside--if this, i say, were for some constitutional reason 
loose join to his physical organism, there might well take place an 
occasional projection----” 

sangree came aft with a sudden rush, his face aflame, but whether with 
wind or sun, or with what he had heard, i cannot say. in my surprise 
i let the tiller slip and the cutter gave a great plunge as she came 
sharp into the wind and flung us all together in a heap on the 
bottom. sangree said nothing, but while he scramble up and made the 
jib sheet fast my companion found a moment to add to his unfinished 
sentence the words, too low for any ear but mine-- 

“entirely unknown to himself, however.” 

we right the boat and laughed, and then sangree produce the map 
and explain exactly where we were. far away on the horizon, across 
an open stretch of water, lay a blue cluster of island with our 
crescent-shaped home among them and the safe anchorage of the lagoon. 
an hour with this wind would get us there comfortably, and while dr. 
silence and sangree fell into conversation, i sat and ponder over the 
strange suggestion that had just been put into my mind concerning 
the “double,” and the possible form it might assume when dissociate 
temporary from the physical body. 

the whole way home these two chatted, and john silence was as gentle 
and sympathetic as a woman. i did not hear much of their talk, for the 
wind grew occasional to the force of a hurricane and the sail and 
tiller absorb my attention; but i could see that sangree was pleased 
and happy, and was pour out intimate revelation to his companion in 
the way that most people did--when john silence wish them to do so. 

but it was quite suddenly, while i sat all intent upon wind and sails, 
that the true meaning of sangree’s remark about the animal flared up in 
me with its full import. for his admission that he knew it was in pain 
and starve was in reality nothing more or less than a revelation of 
his deep self. it was in the nature of a confession. he was speak 
of something that he knew positively, something that was beyond 
question or argument, something that had to do directly with himself. 
“poor starve beast” he had call it in words that had “come out of 
their own accord,” and there had not been the slightest evidence of any 
desire to conceal or explain away. he had spoken instinctively--from 
his heart, and as though about his own self. 

and half an hour before sunset we race through the narrow opening of 
the lagoon and saw the smoke of the dinner-fire blow here and there 
among the trees, and the figures of joan and the bo’sun’s mate running 
down to meet us at the landing-stage. 


v 

everything change from the moment john silence set foot on that 
island; it was like the effect produce by calling in some big doctor, 
some great arbiter of life and death, for consultation. the sense of 
gravity increase a hundredfold. even inanimate object took upon 
themselves a subtle alteration, for the setting of the adventure--this 
desert bit of sea with its hundred of uninhabited islands--somehow 
turn sombre. an element that was mysterious, and in a sense 
disheartening, crept unbidden into the severity of grey rock and dark 
pine forest and took the sparkle from the sunshine and the sea. 

i, at least, was keen aware of the change, for my whole being 
shifted, as it were, a degree higher, becoming key up and alert. 
the figures from the background of the stage move forward a little 
into the light--nearer to the inevitable action. in a word this man’s 
arrival intensify the whole affair. 

and, look back down the years to the time when all this happened, 
it is clear to me that he had a pretty sharp idea of the meaning of it 
from the very beginning. how much he knew beforehand by his strange 
divine powers, it is impossible to say, but from the moment he came 
upon the scene and caught within himself the note of what was go on 
amongst us, he undoubted held the true solution of the puzzle and had 
no need to ask questions. and this certitude it was that set him in 
such an atmosphere of power and made us all look to him instinctively; 
for he took no tentative steps, made no false moves, and while the rest 
of us flounder he move straight to the climax. he was indeed a true 
diviner of souls. 

i can now read into his behaviour a good deal that puzzle me at the 
time, for though i had dim guess the solution, i had no idea how 
he would deal with it. and the conversation i can reproduce almost 
verbatim, for, according to my invariable habit, i kept full note of 
all he said. 

to mrs. maloney, foolish and dazed; to joan, alarmed, yet plucky; 
and to the clergyman, move by his daughter’s distress below his 
usual shallow emotions, he gave the best possible treatment in the 
best possible way, yet all so easily and simply as to make it appear 
naturally spontaneous. for he dominate the bo’sun’s mate, taking the 
measure of her ignorance with infinite patience; he key up joan, 
stirring her courage and interest to the highest point for her own 
safety; and the reverend timothy he soothe and comforted, while 
obtain his implicit obedience, by taking him into his confidence, 
and leading him gradual to a comprehension of the issue that was 
bound to follow. 

and sangree--here his wisdom was most wise calculated--he neglect 
outwardly because inward he was the object of his uncease and most 
concentrated attention. under the guise of apparent indifference his 
mind kept the canada under constant observation. 

there was a restless feeling in the camp that evening and none of us 
linger round the fire after supper as usual. sangree and i busy 
ourselves with patch up the torn tent for our guest and with finding 
heavy stone to hold the ropes, for dr. silence insist on have it 
pitch on the highest point of the island ridge, just where it was 
most rocky and there was no earth for pegs. the place, moreover, was 
midway between the men’s and women’s tents, and, of course, command 
the most comprehensive view of the camp. 

“so that if your dog comes,” he said simply, “i may be able to catch 
him as he pass across.” 

the wind had gone down with the sun and an unusual warmth lay over the 
island that made sleep heavy, and in the morning we assemble at a 
late breakfast, rubbing our eyes and yawning. the cool north wind had 
given way to the warm southern air that sometimes came up with haze and 
moisture across the baltic, bring with it the relaxing sensation 
that produce enervate and listlessness. 

and this may have been the reason why at first i fail to notice that 
anything unusual was about, and why i was less alert than normally; for 
it was not till after breakfast that the silence of our little party 
struck me and i discover that joan had not yet put in an appearance. 
and then, in a flash, the last heavy of sleep vanish and i saw 
that maloney was white and trouble and his wife could not hold a plate 
without trembling. 

a desire to ask question was stop in me by a swift glance from 
dr. silence, and i sudden understood in some vague way that they 
were wait till sangree should have gone. how this idea came to me i 
cannot determine, but the sound of the intuition was soon proved, 
for the moment he move off to his tent, maloney look up at me and 
began to speak in a low voice. 

“you slept through it all,” he half whispered. 

“through what?” i asked, sudden thrill with the knowledge that 
something dreadful had happened. 

“we didn’t wake you for fear of get the whole camp up,” he went on, 
meaning, by the camp, i supposed, sangree. “it was just before dawn 
when the scream woke me.” 

“the dog again?” i asked, with a curious sink of the heart. 

“got right into the tent,” he went on, speak passionately but very 
low, “and woke my wife by scramble all over her. then she realise 
that joan was struggle beside her. and, by god! the beast had torn 
her arm; scratch all down the arm she was, and bleeding.” 

“joan injured?” i gasped. 

“merely scratched--this time,” put in john silence, speak for the 
first time; “suffering more from shock and fright than actual wounds.” 

“isn’t it a mercy the doctor was here,” said mrs. maloney, look as 
if she would never know calm again. “i think we should both have 
been killed.” 

“it has been a most merciful escape,” maloney said, his pulpit 
voice struggle with his emotion. “but, of course, we cannot risk 
another--we must strike camp and get away at once----” 

“only poor mr. sangree must not know what has happened. he is so 
attach to joan and would be so terribly upset,” add the bo’sun’s 
mate distractedly, look all about in her terror. 

“it is perhaps advisable that mr. sangree should not know what has 
occurred,” dr. silence said with quiet authority, “but i think, for the 
safety of all concerned, it will be better not to leave the island just 
now.” he spoke with great decision and maloney look up and follow 
his words closely. 

“if you will agree to stay here a few days longer, i have no doubt 
we can put an end to the attention of your strange visitor, and 
incidentally have the opportunity of observing a most singular and 
interesting phenomenon----” 

“what!” gasp mrs. maloney, “a phenomenon?--you mean that you know 
what it is?” 

“i am quite certain i know what it is,” he reply very low, for we 
heard the footstep of sangree approaching, “though i am not so certain 
yet as to the best means of dealing with it. but in any case it is not 
wise to leave precipitately----” 

“oh, timothy, do he think it’s a devil----?” cry the bo’sun’s mate 
in a voice that even the canada must have heard. 

“in my opinion,” continue john silence, look across at me and the 
clergyman, “it is a case of modern lycanthropy with other complication 
that may----” he left the sentence unfinished, for mrs. maloney got up 
with a jump and flee to her tent fearful she might hear a worse thing, 
and at that moment sangree turn the corner of the stockade and came 
into view. 

“there are footmark all round the mouth of my tent,” he said with 
excitement. “the animal has been here again in the night. dr. silence, 
you really must come and see them for yourself. they’re as plain on the 
moss as track in snow.” 

but later in the day, while sangree went off in the canoe to fish 
the pools near the large islands, and joan still lay, bandage and 
resting, in her tent, dr. silence call me and the tutor and propose 
a walk to the granite slab at the far end. mrs. maloney sat on 
a stump near her daughter, and busy herself energetic with 
alternate nursing and painting. 

“we’ll leave you in charge,” the doctor said with a smile that was 
meant to be encouraging, “and when you want us for lunch, or anything, 
the megaphone will always bring us back in time.” 

for, though the very air was charged with strange emotions, every one 
talk quiet and naturally as with a definite desire to counteract 
unnecessary excitement. 

“i’ll keep watch,” said the plucky bo’sun’s mate, “and meanwhile i find 
comfort in my work.” she was busy with the sketch she had begun on the 
day after our arrival. “for even a tree,” she add proudly, point 
to her little easel, “is a symbol of the divine, and the thought make 
me feel safer.” we glance for a moment at a daub which was more like 
the symptom of a disease than a symbol of the divine--and then took the 
path round the lagoon. 

at the far end we made a little fire and lay round it in the shadow of 
a big boulder. maloney stop his hum sudden and turn to his 
companion. 

“and what do you make of it all?” he ask abruptly. 

“in the first place,” reply john silence, making himself comfortable 
against the rock, “it is of human origin, this animal; it is undoubted 
lycanthropy.” 

his words had the effect precisely of a bombshell. maloney listen as 
though he had been struck. 

“you puzzle me utterly,” he said, sitting up close and staring at him. 

“perhaps,” reply the other, “but if you’ll listen to me for a few 
moments you may be less puzzle at the end--or more. it depend how 
much you know. let me go further and say that you have underestimated, 
or miscalculated, the effect of this primitive wild life upon all of 
you.” 

“in what way?” ask the clergyman, bristle a trifle. 

“it is strong medicine for any town-dweller, and for some of you it has 
been too strong. one of you has gone wild.” he utter these last words 
with great emphasis. 

“gone savage,” he added, look from one to the other. 

neither of us found anything to reply. 

“to say that the brute has awaken in a man is not a mere metaphor 
always,” he went on presently. 

“of course not!” 

“but, in the sense i mean, may have a very literal and terrible 
significance,” pursue dr. silence. “ancient instinct that no one 
dream of, least of all their possessor, may leap forth----” 

“atavism can hardly explain a roam animal with teeth and claw and 
sanguinary instincts,” interrupt maloney with impatience. 

“the term is of your own choice,” continue the doctor equably, “not 
mine, and it is a good example of a word that indicate a result while 
it conceal the process; but the explanation of this beast that haunt 
your island and attack your daughter is of far deep significance 
than mere atavistic tendencies, or throw back to animal origin, 
which i suppose is the thought in your mind.” 

“you spoke just now of lycanthropy,” said maloney, look bewilder 
and anxious to keep to plain fact evidently, “i think i have come 
across the word, but really--really--it can have no actual significance 
to-day, can it? these superstition of mediæval times can hardly----” 

he look round at me with his jolly red face, and the expression of 
astonishment and dismay on it would have made me shout with laughter at 
any other time. laughter, however, was never farther from my mind than 
at this moment when i listen to dr. silence as he careful suggest 
to the clergyman the very explanation that had gradual been force 
itself upon my own mind. 

“however mediæval idea may have exaggerate the idea is not of much 
importance to us now,” he said quietly, “when we are face to face with 
a modern example of what, i take it, has always been a profound fact. 
for the moment let us leave the name of any one in particular out of 
the matter and consider certain possibilities.” 

we all agree with that at any rate. there was no need to speak of 
sangree, or of any one else, until we knew a little more. 

“the fundamental fact in this most curious case,” he went on, “is that 
the ‘double’ of a man----” 

“you mean the astral body? i’ve heard of that, of course,” broke in 
maloney with a snort of triumph. 

“no doubt,” said the other, smiling, “no doubt you have;--that this 
double, or fluid body of a man, as i was saying, has the power under 
certain conditions of project itself and becoming visible to others. 
certain training will accomplish this, and certain drug likewise; 
illnesses, too, that ravage the body may produce temporary the result 
that death produce permanently, and let loose this counterpart of a 
human being and render it visible to the sight of others. 

“every one, of course, know this more or less to-day; but it is not so 
generally known, and probably believe by none who have not witness 
it, that this fluid body can, under certain conditions, assume other 
form than human, and that such other form may be determined by the 
dominate thought and wish of the owner. for this double, or astral 
body as you call it, is really the seat of the passions, emotion and 
desire in the psychic economy. it is the passion body; and, in 
project itself, it can often assume a form that give expression to 
the overmaster desire that mould it; for it is compose of such 
tenuous matter that it lend itself readily to the moulding by thought 
and wish.” 

“i follow you perfectly,” said maloney, look as if he would much 
rather be chop firewood elsewhere and singing. 

“and there are some person so constituted,” the doctor went on with 
increase seriousness, “that the fluid body in them is but loose 
associate with the physical, person of poor health as a rule, yet 
often of strong desire and passions; and in these person it is easy 
for the double to dissociate itself during deep sleep from their 
system, and, driven forth by some consume desire, to assume an animal 
form and seek the fulfilment of that desire.” 

there, in broad daylight, i saw maloney deliberate creep close to 
the fire and heap the wood on. we gather in to the heat, and to each 
other, and listen to dr. silence’s voice as it mingle with the swish 
and whirr of the wind about us, and the fall of the little waves. 

“for instance, to take a concrete example,” he resumed; “suppose some 
young man, with the delicate constitution i have spoken of, form an 
overpowering attachment to a young woman, yet perceive that it is not 
welcomed, and is man enough to repress its outward manifestations. 
in such a case, supposing his double be easily projected, the very 
repression of his love in the daytime would add to the intense force of 
his desire when release in deep sleep from the control of his will, 
and his fluid body might issue forth in monstrous or animal shape and 
become actually visible to others. and, if his devotion were dog-like 
in its fidelity, yet conceal the fire of a fierce passion beneath, 
it might well assume the form of a creature that seem to be half dog, 
half wolf----” 

“a werewolf, you mean?” cry maloney, pale to the lip as he listened. 

john silence held up a restrain hand. “a werewolf,” he said, “is a 
true psychic fact of profound significance, however absurd it may 
have been exaggerate by the imagination of a superstitious peasantry 
in the days of unenlightenment, for a werewolf is nothing but the 
savage, and possibly sanguinary, instinct of a passionate man scour 
the world in his fluid body, his passion body, his body of desire. as 
in the case at hand, he may not know it----” 

“it is not necessarily deliberate, then?” maloney put in quickly, with 
relief. 

“----it is hardly ever deliberate. it is the desire release in sleep 
from the control of the will finding a vent. in all savage races it has 
been recognise and dreaded, this phenomenon style ‘wehr wolf,’ but 
to-day it is rare. and it is becoming rare still, for the world grow 
tame and civilised, emotion have become refined, desire lukewarm, and 
few men have savagery enough left in them to generate impulse of such 
intense force, and certainly not to project them in animal form.” 

“by gad!” exclaim the clergyman breathlessly, and with increase 
excitement, “then i feel i must tell you--what has been given to me in 
confidence--that sangree has in him an admixture of savage blood--of 
red indian ancestry----” 

“let us stick to our supposition of a man as described,” the doctor 
stop him calmly, “and let us imagine that he has in him this 
admixture of savage blood; and further, that he is wholly unaware of 
his dreadful physical and psychic infirmity; and that he sudden 
find himself leading the primitive life together with the object of 
his desires; with the result that the strain of the untamed wild-man in 
his blood----” 

“red indian, for instance,” from maloney. 

“red indian, perfectly,” agree the doctor; “the result, i say, that 
this savage strain in him is awaken and leap into passionate life. 
what then?” 

he look hard at timothy maloney, and the clergyman look hard at him. 

“the wild life such as you lead it here on this island, for instance, 
might quick awaken his savage instincts--his bury instincts--and 
with profound disquiet results.” 

“you mean his subtle body, as you call it, might issue forth 
automatic in deep sleep and seek the object of its desire?” i said, 
coming to maloney’s aid, who was finding it more and more difficult to 
get words. 

“precisely;--yet the desire of the man remain utterly 
unmalefic--pure and wholesome in every sense----” 

“ah!” i heard the clergyman gasp. 

“the lover’s desire for union run wild, run savage, tear its way out 
in primitive, untamed fashion, i mean,” continue the doctor, strive 
to make himself clear to a mind bound by conventional thought and 
knowledge; “for the desire to possess, remember, may easily become 
importunate, and, embody in this animal form of the subtle body which 
acts as its vehicle, may go forth to tear in pieces all that obstructs, 
to reach to the very heart of the love object and seize it. _au fond_, 
it is nothing more than the aspiration for union, as i said--the 
splendid and perfectly clean desire to absorb utterly into itself----” 

he pause a moment and look into maloney’s eyes. 

“to bathe in the very heart’s blood of the one desired,” he add with 
grave emphasis. 

the fire spurt and crackle and made me start, but maloney found 
relief in a genuine shudder, and i saw him turn his head and look about 
him from the sea to the trees. the wind drop just at that moment and 
the doctor’s words rang sharp through the stillness. 

“then it might even kill?” stammer the clergyman presently in a 
hush voice, and with a little forced laugh by way of protest that 
sound quite ghastly. 

“in the last resort it might kill,” repeated dr. silence. then, after 
another pause, during which he was clearly debate how much or how 
little it was wise to give to his audience, he continued: “and if the 
double do not succeed in get back to its physical body, that 
physical body would wake an imbecile--an idiot--or perhaps never wake 
at all.” 

maloney sat up and found his tongue. 

“you mean that if this fluid animal thing, or whatever it is, should be 
prevent get back, the man might never wake again?” he asked, with 
shake voice. 

“he might be dead,” reply the other calmly. the tremor of a positive 
sensation shiver in the air about us. 

“then isn’t that the best way to cure the fool--the brute----?” 
thunder the clergyman, half rising to his feet. 

“certainly it would be an easy and undiscoverable form of murder,” was 
the stern reply, spoken as calm as though it were a remark about the 
weather. 

maloney collapse visibly, and i gather the wood over the fire and 
coax up a blaze. 

“the greater part of the man’s life--of his vital forces--goes out with 
this double,” dr. silence resumed, after a moment’s consideration, “and 
a considerable portion of the actual material of his physical body. so 
the physical body that remains behind is depleted, not only of force, 
but of matter. you would see it small, shrunken, drop together, just 
like the body of a materialise medium at a séance. moreover, any mark 
or injury inflict upon this double will be found exactly reproduce 
by the phenomenon of repercussion upon the shrunken physical body lie 
in its trance----” 

“an injury inflict upon the one you say would be reproduce also on 
the other?” repeated maloney, his excitement grow again. 

“undoubtedly,” reply the other quietly; “for there exist all 
the time a continuous connection between the physical body and the 
double--a connection of matter, though of exceedingly attenuated, 
possibly of etheric, matter. the wound _travels_, so to speak, from one 
to the other, and if this connection were broken the result would be 
death.” 

“death,” repeated maloney to himself, “death!” he look anxious at 
our faces, his thought evidently beginning to clear. 

“and this solidity?” he ask presently, after a general pause; “this 
tear of tent and flesh; this howling, and the mark of paws? you 
mean that the double----?” 

“has sufficient material drawn from the deplete body to produce 
physical results? certainly!” the doctor took him up. “although to 
explain at this moment such problem as the passage of matter through 
matter would be as difficult as to explain how the thought of a mother 
can actually break the bone of the child unborn.” 

dr. silence pointed out to sea, and maloney, look wildly about 
him, turn with a violent start. i saw a canoe, with sangree in the 
stern-seat, slow coming into view round the farther point. his hat 
was off, and his tan face for the first time appear to me--to us 
all, i think--as though it were the face of some one else. he look 
like a wild man. then he stood up in the canoe to make a cast with the 
rod, and he look for all the world like an indian. i recall the 
expression of his face as i had seen it once or twice, notably on that 
occasion of the evening prayer, and an involuntary shudder ran down my 
spine. 

at that very instant he turn and saw us where we lay, and his face 
broke into a smile, so that his teeth show white in the sun. he 
look in his element, and exceedingly attractive. he call out 
something about his fish, and soon after pass out of sight into the 
lagoon. 

for a time none of us said a word. 

“and the cure?” venture maloney at length. 

“is not to quench this savage force,” reply dr. silence, “but to 
steer it better, and to provide other outlets. this is the solution 
of all these problem of accumulate force, for this force is the raw 
material of usefulness, and should be increase and cherished, not 
by separate it from the body by death, but by raise it to higher 
channels. the best and quickest cure of all,” he went on, speak very 
gently and with a hand upon the clergyman’s arm, “is to lead it towards 
its object, provided that object is not unalterable hostile--to let it 
find rest where----” 

he stop abruptly, and the eyes of the two men met in a single glance 
of comprehension. 

“joan?” maloney exclaimed, under his breath. 

“joan!” reply john silence. 

* * * * * 

we all went to bed early. the day had been unusually warm, and after 
sunset a curious hush descended on the island. nothing was audible but 
that faint, ghostly singing which is inseparable from a pine-wood even 
on the stillest day--a low, searching sound, as though the wind had 
hair and trail it o’er the world. 

with the sudden cool of the atmosphere a sea fog began to form. it 
appear in isolated patch over the water, and then these patch 
slid together and a white wall advanced upon us. not a breath of air 
stirred; the fir stood like flat metal outlines; the sea became as 
oil. the whole scene lay as though held motionless by some huge weight 
in the air; and the flame from our fire--the largest we had ever 
made--rose upwards, straight as a church steeple. 

as i follow the rest of our party tent-wards, have kick the 
ember of the fire into safety, the advance guard of the fog was 
creep slow among the trees, like white arms feeling their way. 
mingle with the smoke was the odour of moss and soil and bark, and 
the peculiar flavour of the baltic, half salt, half brackish, like the 
smell of an estuary at low water. 

it is difficult to say why it seem to me that this deep still 
masked an intense activity; perhaps in every mood lie the suggestion 
of its opposite, so that i became aware of the contrast of furious 
energy, for it was like moving through the deep pause before a 
thunderstorm, and i trod gently lest by break a twig or moving 
a stone i might set the whole scene into some sort of tumultuous 
movement. actually, no doubt, it was nothing more than a result of 
overstrung nerves. 

there was no more question of undress and go to bed than there 
was of undress and go to bathe. some sense in me was alert and 
expectant. i sat in my tent and waited. and at the end of half an hour 
or so my wait was justified, for the canvas sudden shivered, 
and some one trip over the ropes that held it to the earth. john 
silence came in. 

the effect of his quiet entry was singular and prophetic: it was just 
as though the energy lie behind all this still had pressed 
forward to the edge of action. this, no doubt, was merely the 
quicken of my own mind, and had no other justification; for the 
presence of john silence always suggest the near possibility of 
vigorous action, and, as a matter of fact, he came in with nothing more 
than a nod and a significant gesture. 

he sat down on a corner of my ground-sheet, and i pushed the blanket 
over so that he could cover his legs. he drew the flap of the tent 
after him and settled down, but hardly had he done so when the canvas 
shook a second time, and in blunder maloney. 

“sitting in the dark?” he said self-consciously, push his head 
inside, and hanging up his lantern on the ridge-pole nail. “i just 
look in for a smoke. i suppose----” 

he glance round, caught the eye of dr. silence, and stopped. he 
put his pipe back into his pocket and began to hum softly--that 
under-breath hum of a nondescript melody i knew so well and had 
come to hate. 

dr. silence lean forward, open the lantern and blew the light out. 
“speak low,” he said, “and don’t strike matches. listen for sound 
and movements about the camp, and be ready to follow me at a moment’s 
notice.” there was light enough to distinguish our face easily, and i 
saw maloney glance again hurried at both of us. 

“is the camp asleep?” the doctor ask presently, whispering. 

“sangree is,” reply the clergyman, in a voice equally low. “i can’t 
answer for the women; i think they’re sitting up.” 

“that’s for the best.” and then he added: “i wish the fog would thin a 
bit and let the moon through; later--we may want it.” 

“it is lift now, i think,” maloney whisper back. “it’s over the 
tops of the tree already.” 

i cannot say what it was in this commonplace exchange of remark 
that thrilled. probably maloney’s swift acquiesce in the doctor’s 
mood had something to do with it; for his quick obedience certainly 
impress me a good deal. but, even without that slight evidence, 
it was clear that each recognise the gravity of the occasion, and 
understood that sleep was impossible and sentry duty was the order of 
the night. 

“report to me,” repeated john silence once again, “the least sound, and 
do nothing precipitately.” 

he shift across to the mouth of the tent and raise the flap, 
fastening it against the pole so that he could see out. maloney stop 
hum and began to force the breath through his teeth with a kind 
of faint hissing, treat us to a medley of church hymn and popular 
song of the day. 

then the tent tremble as though some one had touched it. 

“that’s the wind rising,” whisper the clergyman, and pull the flap 
open as far as it would go. a waft of cold damp air enter and made us 
shiver, and with it came a sound of the sea as the first wave wash 
its way soft along the shores. 

“it’s got round to the north,” he added, and following his voice came 
a long-drawn whisper that rose from the whole island as the tree sent 
forth a sigh response. “the fog’ll move a bit now. i can make out a 
lane across the sea already.” 

“hush!” said dr. silence, for maloney’s voice had risen above a 
whisper, and we settled down again to another long period of watch 
and waiting, broken only by the occasional rubbing of shoulder against 
the canvas as we shift our positions, and the increase noise of 
wave on the outer coast-line of the island. and over all whirr the 
murmur of wind sweeping the tops of the tree like a great harp, and 
the faint tap on the tent as drops fell from the branch with a 
sharp ping sound. 

we had sat for something over an hour in this way, and maloney and i 
were finding it increasingly hard to keep awake, when sudden dr. 
silence rose to his feet and peer out. the next minute he was gone. 

relieved of the dominate presence, the clergyman thrust his face 
close into mine. “i don’t much care for this wait game,” he 
whispered, “but silence wouldn’t hear of my sitting up with the others; 
he said it would prevent anything happening if i did.” 

“he knows,” i answer shortly. 

“no doubt in the world about that,” he whisper back; “it’s this 
‘double’ business, as he call it, or else it’s obsession as the bible 
describe it. but it’s bad, whichever it is, and i’ve got my winchester 
outside ready cocked, and i brought this too.” he shove a pocket bible 
under my nose. at one time in his life it had been his inseparable 
companion. 

“one’s useless and the other’s dangerous,” i reply under my breath, 
conscious of a keen desire to laugh, and leave him to choose. “safety 
lie in following our leader----” 

“i’m not thinking of myself,” he interrupt sharply; “only, if 
anything happen to joan to-night i’m go to shoot first--and pray 
afterwards!” 

maloney put the book back into his hip-pocket, and peer out of the 
doorway. “what is he up to now, in the devil’s name, i wonder!” he 
added; “going round sangree’s tent and making gestures. how weird he 
looks disappear in and out of the fog.” 

“just trust him and wait,” i said quickly, for the doctor was already 
on his way back. “remember, he has the knowledge, and know what he’s 
about. i’ve been with him through worse case than this.” 

maloney move back as dr. silence darken the doorway and stoop to 
enter. 

“his sleep is very deep,” he whispered, seating himself by the door 
again. “he’s in a cataleptic condition, and the double may be release 
any minute now. but i’ve taken steps to imprison it in the tent, and it 
can’t get out till i permit it. be on the watch for sign of movement.” 
then he look hard at maloney. “but no violence, or shooting, 
remember, mr. maloney, unless you want a murder on your hands. anything 
done to the double acts by repercussion upon the physical body. you had 
better take out the cartridge at once.” 

his voice was stern. the clergyman went out, and i heard him empty 
the magazine of his rifle. when he return he sat near the door than 
before, and from that moment until we left the tent he never once took 
his eyes from the figure of dr. silence, silhouette there against sky 
and canvas. 

and, meanwhile, the wind came steady over the sea and open the mist 
into lane and clearings, driving it about like a living thing. 

it must have been well after midnight when a low boom sound drew my 
attention; but at first the sense of hearing was so strained that it 
was impossible exactly to locate it, and i imagine it was the thunder 
of big gun far out at sea carry to us by the rising wind. then 
maloney, catching hold of my arm and leaning forward, somehow brought 
the true relation, and i realise the next second that it was only a 
few feet away. 

“sangree’s tent,” he exclaim in a loud and startle whisper. 

i crane my head round the corner, but at first the effect of the 
fog was so confuse that every patch of white driving about before 
the wind look like a moving tent and it was some seconds before i 
discover the one patch that held steady. then i saw that it was 
shake all over, and the sides, flap as much as the tight of 
the ropes allowed, were the cause of the boom sound we had heard. 
something alive was tear frantic about inside, bang against 
the stretch canvas in a way that made me think of a great moth 
dashing against the wall and ceiling of a room. the tent bulge and 
rocked. 

“it’s try to get out, by jupiter!” mutter the clergyman, rising to 
his feet and turning to the side where the unload rifle lay. i sprang 
up too, hardly knowing what purpose was in my mind, but anxious to be 
prepared for anything. john silence, however, was before us both, and 
his figure slip past and block the doorway of the tent. and there 
was some quality in his voice next minute when he began to speak that 
brought our mind instantly to a state of calm obedience. 

“first--the women’s tent,” he said low, look sharp at maloney, 
“and if i need your help, i’ll call.” 

the clergyman need no second bidding. he dive past me and was out 
in a moment. he was labour evidently under intense excitement. i 
watch him pick his way silent over the slippery ground, give 
the moving tent a wide berth, and presently disappear among the 
floating shape of fog. 

dr. silence turn to me. “you heard those footstep about half an hour 
ago?” he ask significantly. 

“i heard nothing.” 

“they were extraordinarily soft--almost the soundless tread of a wild 
creature. but now, follow me closely,” he added, “for we must waste 
no time if i am to save this poor man from his affliction and lead 
his werewolf double to its rest. and, unless i am much mistaken”--he 
peer at me through the darkness, whisper with the utmost 
distinctness--“joan and sangree are absolutely made for one another. 
and i think she know it too--just as well as he does.” 

my head swam a little as i listened, but at the same time something 
clear in my brain and i saw that he was right. yet it was all so 
weird and incredible, so remote from the commonplace fact of life 
as commonplace people know them; and more than once it flash upon 
me that the whole scene--people, words, tents, and all the rest of 
it--were delusion create by the intense excitement of my own mind 
somehow, and that sudden the sea-fog would clear off and the world 
become normal again. 

the cold air from the sea stung our cheek sharp as we left the close 
atmosphere of the little crowded tent. the sigh of the trees, the 
wave break below on the rocks, and the lines and patch of mist 
driving about us seem to create the momentary illusion that the whole 
island had broken loose and was floating out to sea like a mighty raft. 

the doctor move just ahead of me, quick and silently; he was making 
straight for the canadian’s tent where the side still boom and shook 
as the creature of sinister life race and tore about impatient 
within. a little distance from the door he pause and held up a hand to 
stop me. we were, perhaps, a dozen feet away. 

“before i release it, you shall see for yourself,” he said, “that the 
reality of the werewolf is beyond all question. the matter of which 
it is compose is, of course, exceedingly attenuated, but you are 
partially clairvoyant--and even if it is not dense enough for normal 
sight you will see something.” 

he add a little more i could not catch. the fact was that the 
curious strong vibrate atmosphere surrounding his person somewhat 
confuse my senses. it was the result, of course, of his intense 
concentration of mind and forces, and pervade the entire camp and all 
the person in it. and as i watch the canvas shake and heard it boom 
and flap i heartily welcome it. for it was also protective. 

at the back of sangree’s tent stood a thin group of pine trees, but 
in front and at the side the ground was comparatively clear. the 
flap was wide open and any ordinary animal would have been out and 
away without the least trouble. dr. silence led me up to within a few 
feet, evidently careful not to advance beyond a certain limit, and then 
stoop down and signal to me to do the same. and look over his 
shoulder i saw the interior lit faint by the spectral light reflect 
from the fog, and the dim blot upon the balsam bough and blanket 
signify sangree; while over him, and round him, and up and down him, 
flew the dark mass of “something” on four legs, with pointed muzzle and 
sharp ear plainly visible against the tent sides, and the occasional 
gleam of fiery eyes and white fangs. 

i held my breath and kept utterly still, inward and outwardly, 
for fear, i suppose, that the creature would become conscious of my 
presence; but the distress i felt went far deep than the mere sense 
of personal safety, or the fact of watch something so incredible 
active and real. i became keen aware of the dreadful psychic calamity 
it involved. the realisation that sangree lay confine in that narrow 
space with this species of monstrous projection of himself--that he was 
wrap there in the cataleptic sleep, all unconscious that this thing 
was masquerade with his own life and energies--added a distressing 
touch of horror to the scene. in all the case of john silence--and 
they were many and often terrible--no other psychic affliction has 
ever, before or since, impress me so convincing with the pathetic 
impermanence of the human personality, with its fluid nature, and with 
the alarm possibility of its transformations. 

“come,” he whispered, after we had watch for some minutes the frantic 
effort to escape from the circle of thought and will that held it 
prisoner, “come a little farther away while i release it.” 

we move back a dozen yard or so. it was like a scene in some 
impossible play, or in some ghastly and oppressive nightmare from which 
i should presently awake to find the blanket all heap up upon my 
chest. 

by some method undoubted mental, but which, in my confusion and 
excitement, i fail to understand, the doctor accomplished his 
purpose, and the next minute i heard him say sharp under his breath, 
“it’s out! now, watch!” 

at this very moment a sudden gust from the sea blew aside the mist, so 
that a lane open to the sky, and the moon, ghastly and unnatural as 
the effect of stage limelight, drop down in a momentary gleam upon 
the door of sangree’s tent, and i perceive that something had move 
forward from the interior dark and stood clearly define upon the 
threshold. and, at the same moment, the tent cease its shudder and 
held still. 

there, in the doorway, stood an animal, with neck and muzzle thrust 
forward, its head poke into the night, its whole body poised in that 
attitude of intense rigidity that precede the spring into freedom, 
the running leap of attack. it seem to be about the size of a calf, 
lean than a mastiff, yet more squat than a wolf, and i can swear that 
i saw the fur ridge sharp upon its back. then its upper lip slow 
lifted, and i saw the white of its teeth. 

surely no human being ever stare as hard as i did in those next few 
minutes. yet, the hard i stare the clear appear the amazing and 
monstrous apparition. for, after all, it was sangree--and yet it was 
not sangree. it was the head and face of an animal, and yet it was the 
face of sangree: the face of a wild dog, a wolf, and yet his face. the 
eyes were sharper, narrower, more fiery, yet they were his eyes--his 
eyes run wild; the teeth were longer, whiter, more pointed--yet they 
were his teeth, his teeth grown cruel; the expression was flaming, 
terrible, exultant--yet it was his expression carry to the border of 
savagery--his expression as i had already surprise it more than once, 
only dominant now, fully release from human constraint, with the mad 
yearning of a hungry and importunate soul. it was the soul of sangree, 
the long suppressed, deep loving sangree, express in its single and 
intense desire--pure utterly and utterly wonderful. 

yet, at the same time, came the feeling that it was all an illusion. 
i sudden remember the extraordinary change the human face can 
undergo in circular insanity, when it change from melancholia to 
elation; and i recall the effect of hascheesh, which show the human 
countenance in the form of the bird or animal to which in character 
it most approximates; and for a moment i attribute this mingle of 
sangree’s face with a wolf to some kind of similar delusion of the 
senses. i was mad, deluded, dreaming! the excitement of the day, and 
this dim light of stars and bewilder mist combine to trick me. i 
had been amazing impose upon by some false wizardry of the senses. 
it was all absurd and fantastic; it would pass. 

and then, sound across this sea of mental confusion like a bell 
through a fog, came the voice of john silence bring me back to a 
consciousness of the reality of it all-- 

“sangree--in his double!” 

and when i look again more calmly, i plainly saw that it was indeed 
the face of the canadian, but his face turn animal, yet mingle with 
the brute expression a curious pathetic look like the soul seen 
sometimes in the yearning eyes of a dog,--the face of an animal shot 
with vivid streak of the human. 

the doctor call to him soft under his breath-- 

“sangree! sangree, you poor afflict creature! do you know me? can you 
understand what it is you’re do in your ‘body of desire’?” 

for the first time since its appearance the creature moved. its ear 
twitch and it shift the weight of its body on to the hind legs. 
then, lift its head and muzzle to the sky, it open its long jaws 
and gave vent to a dismal and prolonged howling. 

but, when i heard that howling rise to heaven, the breath caught and 
strangle in my throat and it seem that my heart miss a beat; for, 
though the sound was entire animal, it was at the same time entire 
human. but, more than that, it was the cry i had so often heard in the 
western states of america where the indian still fight and hunt and 
struggle--it was the cry of the redskin! 

“the indian blood!” whisper john silence, when i caught his arm for 
support; “the ancestral cry.” 

and that poignant, beseech cry, that broken human voice, mingle 
with the savage howl of the brute beast, pierce straight to my 
very heart and touched there something that no music, no voice, 
passionate or tender, of man, woman or child has ever stir before 
or since for one second into life. it echo away among the fog and 
the tree and lost itself somewhere out over the hidden sea. and some 
part of myself--something that was far more than the mere act of 
intense listening--went out with it, and for several minutes i lost 
consciousness of my surroundings and felt utterly absorb in the pain 
of another stricken fellow-creature. 

again the voice of john silence recall me to myself. 

“hark!” he said aloud. “hark!” 

his tone galvanise me afresh. we stood listen side by side. 

far across the island, faint sound through the tree and 
brushwood, came a similar, answer cry. shrill, yet wonderful 
musical, shake the heart with a singular wild sweet that defy 
description, we heard it rise and fall upon the night air. 

“it’s across the lagoon,” dr. silence cried, but this time in full 
tone that paid no tribute to caution. “it’s joan! she’s answer him!” 

again the wonderful cry rose and fell, and that same instant the animal 
lower its head, and, muzzle to earth, set off on a swift easy canter 
that took it off into the mist and out of our sight like a thing of 
wind and vision. 

the doctor made a quick dash to the door of sangree’s tent, and, 
following close at his heels, i peer in and caught a momentary 
glimpse of the small, shrunken body lie upon the branch but half 
cover by the blankets--the cage from which most of the life, and not 
a little of the actual corporeal substance, had escape into that other 
form of life and energy, the body of passion and desire. 

by another of those swift, incalculable process which at this stage 
of my apprenticeship i fail often to grasp, dr. silence reclose the 
circle about the tent and body. 

“now it cannot return till i permit it,” he said, and the next second 
was off at full speed into the woods, with myself close behind him. 
i had already had some experience of my companion’s ability to run 
swift through a dense wood, and i now had the further proof of his 
power almost to see in the dark. for, once we left the open space 
about the tents, the tree seem to absorb all the remain vestige 
of light, and i understood that special sensibility that is said to 
develop in the blind--the sense of obstacles. 

and twice as we ran we heard the sound of that dismal howling drawing 
near and near to the answer faint cry from the point of the 
island whither we were going. 

then, suddenly, the tree fell away, and we emerged, hot and 
breathless, upon the rocky point where the granite slab ran bare into 
the sea. it was like passing into the clear of open day. and there, 
sharp define against sea and sky, stood the figure of a human being. 
it was joan. 

i at once saw that there was something about her appearance that was 
singular and unusual, but it was only when we had move quite close 
that i recognise what cause it. for while the lip wore a smile that 
lit the whole face with a happiness i had never seen there before, the 
eyes themselves were fixed in a steady, sightless stare as though they 
were lifeless and made of glass. 

i made an impulsive forward movement, but dr. silence instantly drag 
me back. 

“no,” he cried, “don’t wake her!” 

“what do you mean?” i reply aloud, struggle in his grasp. 

“she’s asleep. it’s somnambulistic. the shock might injure her 
permanently.” 

i turn and peer close into his face. he was absolutely calm. i 
began to understand a little more, catching, i suppose, something of 
his strong thinking. 

“walking in her sleep, you mean?” 

he nodded. “she’s on her way to meet him. from the very beginning he 
must have drawn her--irresistibly.” 

“but the torn tent and the wound flesh?” 

“when she did not sleep deep enough to enter the somnambulistic trance 
he miss her--he went instinctive and in all innocence to seek her 
out--with the result, of course, that she woke and was terrified----” 

“then in their heart of heart they love?” i ask finally. 

john silence smile his inscrutable smile: “profoundly,” he answered, 
“and as simply as only primitive soul can love. if only they both come 
to realise it in their normal waking states his double will cease these 
nocturnal excursions. he will be cured, and at rest.” 

the words had hardly left his lip when there was a sound of rustling 
branch on our left, and the very next instant the dense brushwood 
part where it was darkest and out rush the swift form of an animal 
at full gallop. the noise of feet was scarcely audible, but in that 
utter still i heard the heavy pant breath and caught the swish 
of the low bush against its sides. it went straight towards joan--and 
as it went the girl lift her head and turn to meet it. and the same 
instant a canoe that had been creep silent and unobserved round 
the inner shore of the lagoon, emerge from the shadow and define 
itself upon the water with a figure at the middle thwart. it was 
maloney. 

it was only afterwards i realise that we were invisible to him where 
we stood against the dark background of trees; the figures of joan and 
the animal he saw plainly, but not dr. silence and myself standing just 
beyond them. he stood up in the canoe and pointed with his right arm. i 
saw something gleam in his hand. 

“stand aside, joan girl, or you’ll get hit,” he shouted, his voice 
ring horrible through the deep stillness, and the same instant a 
pistol-shot cracked out with a burst of flame and smoke, and the figure 
of the animal, with one tremendous leap into the air, fell back in the 
shadow and disappear like a shape of night and fog. instantly, then, 
joan open her eyes, look in a daze fashion about her, and pressing 
both hand against her heart, fell with a sharp cry into my arms that 
were just in time to catch her. 

and an answer cry sound across the lagoon--thin, wailing, piteous. 
it came from sangree’s tent. 

“fool!” cry dr. silence, “you’ve wound him!” and before we could 
move or realise quite what it meant, he was in the canoe and half-way 
across the lagoon. 

some kind of similar abuse came in a torrent from my lip too--though 
i cannot remember the actual words--as i cursed the man for his 
disobedience and try to make the girl comfortable on the ground. but 
the clergyman was more practical. he was spread his coat over her 
and dashing water on her face. 

“it’s not joan i’ve kill at any rate,” i heard him mutter as she 
turn and open her eyes and smile faint up in his face. “i swear 
the bullet went straight.” 

joan stare at him; she was still daze and bewildered, and still 
imagine herself with the companion of her trance. the strange lucid 
of the somnambulist still hung over her brain and mind, though 
outwardly she appear trouble and confused. 

“where has he gone to? he disappear so suddenly, crying that he was 
hurt,” she asked, look at her father as though she did not recognise 
him. “and if they’ve done anything to him--they have done it to me 
too--for he is more to me than----” 

her words grew vague and vague as she return slow to her normal 
waking state, and now she stop altogether, as though sudden aware 
that she had been surprise into telling secrets. but all the way back, 
as we carry her careful through the trees, the girl smile and 
murmur sangree’s name and ask if he was injured, until it finally 
became clear to me that the wild soul of the one had call to the 
wild soul of the other and in the secret depths of their being the 
call had been heard and understood. john silence was right. in the 
abyss of her heart, too deep at first for recognition, the girl love 
him, and had love him from the very beginning. once her normal waking 
consciousness recognise the fact they would leap together like twin 
flames, and his affliction would be at an end; his intense desire would 
be satisfied; he would be cured. 

and in sangree’s tent dr. silence and i sat up for the remainder of the 
night--this wonderful and haunt night that had shown us such strange 
glimpse of a new heaven and a new hell--for the canada toss upon 
his balsam bough with high fever in his blood, and upon each cheek a 
dark and curious contusion showed, throb with severe pain although 
the skin was not broken and there was no outward and visible sign of 
blood. 

“maloney shot straight, you see,” whisper dr. silence to me after the 
clergyman had gone to his tent, and had put joan to sleep beside her 
mother, who, by the way, had never once awakened. “the bullet must have 
pass clean through the face, for both cheek are stained. he’ll wear 
these mark all his life--smaller, but always there. they’re the most 
curious scar in the world, these scar transfer by repercussion 
from an injure double. they’ll remain visible until just before his 
death, and then with the withdrawal of the subtle body they will 
disappear finally.” 

his words mingle in my daze mind with the sigh of the trouble 
sleeper and the crying of the wind about the tent. nothing seem to 
paralyse my powers of realisation so much as these twin stain of 
mysterious significance upon the face before me. 

it was odd, too, how speedy and easily the camp resigned itself 
again to sleep and quietness, as though a stage curtain had sudden 
drop down upon the action and conceal it; and nothing contribute 
so vivid to the feeling that i had been a spectator of some kind of 
visionary drama as the dramatic nature of the change in the girl’s 
attitude. 

yet, as a matter of fact, the change had not been so sudden and 
revolutionary as appeared. underneath, in those remote regions 
of consciousness where the emotions, unknown to their owners, do 
secret mature, and owe thence their abrupt revelation to some abrupt 
psychological climax, there can be no doubt that joan’s love for the 
canada had been grow steady and irresistible all the time. it 
had now rush to the surface so that she recognise it; that was all. 

and it has always seem to me that the presence of john silence, 
so potent, so quiet efficacious, produce an effect, if one may 
say so, of a psychic forcing-house, and hasten incalculable the 
bring together of these two “wild” lovers. in that sudden awakening 
had occur the very psychological climax require to reveal the 
passionate emotion accumulate below. the deep knowledge had leap 
across and transfer itself to her ordinary consciousness, and in 
that shock the collision of the personalities had shaken them to the 
depths and shown her the truth beyond all possibility of doubt. 

“he’s sleep quiet now,” the doctor said, interrupt my 
reflections. “if you will watch alone for a bit i’ll go to maloney’s 
tent and help him to arrange his thoughts.” he smile in anticipation 
of that “arrangement.” “he’ll never quite understand how a wound on the 
double can transfer itself to the physical body, but at least i can 
persuade him that the less he talks and ‘explains’ tomorrow, the soon 
the forces will run their natural course now to peace and quietness.” 

he went away softly, and with the removal of his presence sangree, 
sleep heavily, turn over and groan with the pain of his broken 
head. 

and it was in the still hour just before the dawn, when all the island 
were hushed, the wind and sea still dreaming, and the stars visible 
through clearing mists, that a figure crept silent over the ridge and 
reach the door of the tent where i doze beside the sufferer, before 
i was aware of its presence. the flap was cautious lift a few 
inch and in looked--joan. 

that same instant sangree woke and sat up on his bed of branches. he 
recognise her before i could say a word, and utter a low cry. it was 
pain and joy mingled, and this time all human. and the girl too was no 
long walking in her sleep, but fully aware of what she was doing. i 
was only just able to prevent him spring from his blankets. 

“joan, joan!” he cried, and in a flash she answer him, “i’m here--i’m 
with you always now,” and had pushed past me into the tent and flung 
herself upon his breast. 

“i knew you would come to me in the end,” i heard him whisper. 

“it was all too big for me to understand at first,” she murmured, “and 
for a long time i was frightened----” 

“but not now!” he cry louder; “you don’t feel afraid now of--of 
anything that’s in me----” 

“i fear nothing,” she cried, “nothing, nothing!” 

i led her outside again. she look steady into my face with eyes 
shining and her whole being transformed. in some intuitive way, 
survive probably from the somnambulism, she knew or guess as much 
as i knew. 

“you must talk tomorrow with john silence,” i said gently, leading her 
towards her own tent. “he understand everything.” 

i left her at the door, and as i went back soft to take up my place 
of sentry again with the canadian, i saw the first streak of dawn 
lighting up the far rim of the sea behind the distant islands. 

and, as though to emphasise the eternal close of comedy to tragedy, 
two small detail rose out of the scene and impress me so vivid 
that i remember them to this very day. for in the tent where i had 
just left joan, all aquiver with her new happiness, there rose plainly 
to my ear the grotesque sound of the bo’sun’s mate heavy snoring, 
oblivious of all things in heaven or hell; and from maloney’s tent, so 
still was the night, where i look across and saw the lantern’s glow, 
there came to me, through the trees, the monotonous rising and fall 
of a human voice that was beyond question the sound of a man pray to 
his god. 


_printed by_ morrison & gibb limited _edinburgh_ 




transcriber’s note: 

punctuation has been standardised. hyphenate and spelling have been 
retain as appear in the original publication except as follows: 

page 51 
available chink and crannie _changed to_ 
available chink and cranny 

page 56 
look persuasiv from one _changed to_ 
look persuasive from one 

page 280 
yet at the same time so strangle _changed to_ 
yet at the same time so strange 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of john silence, physician extraordinary, by 
algernon blackwood 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook john silence, physician *** 

***** this file should be name 49222-0.txt or 49222-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/2/2/49222/ 

produce by the online distribute proofread team at 
http://www.pgdp.net (this file was produce from image 
generous made available by the internet archive/american 
libraries.) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. information about the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

