the project gutenberg ebook, the house of the vampire, by george sylvester 
viereck 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the house of the vampire 


author: george sylvester viereck 



release date: november 23, 2005 [ebook #17144] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the house of the vampire*** 


e-text prepared by suzanne lybarger, janet blenkinship, brian janes, and 
the project gutenberg online distribute proofread team 
(http://www.pgdp.net/) 



the house of the vampire 

by 


george sylvester viereck 

author of 
nineveh and other poem 







new york 
moffat, yard & company 
1912 
copyright, 1907, by 
moffat, yard & company 
new york 
publish september, 1907 
reprint october, 1907 
the premier press 
new york 




_to my mother_ 




the house 

of the 

vampire 




i 


the freakish little leader of the orchestra, newly import from sici 
to new york, toss his conductor's wand excited through the air, 
drown with musical thunder the hum of conversation and the clatter 
of plates. 

yet neither his apish demeanour nor the deafen noise that respond 
to every movement of his agile body detract attention from the figure 
of reginald clarke and the young man at his side as they smiling wound 
their way to the exit. 

the boy's expression was pleasant, with an inkling of wistfulness, while 
the soft glimmer of his lucid eyes betray the poet and the dreamer. 
the smile of reginald clarke was the smile of a conqueror. a suspicion 
of silver in his crown of dark hair only add dignity to his bearing, 
while the infinite ramify lines above the heavy-set mouth spoke at 
once of subtlety and of strength. without stretch of the imagination one 
might have liken him to a roman cardinal of the days of the borgias, 
who had miraculous step forth from the time-stained canvas and 
slip into twentieth century evening-clothes. 

with the affable of complete self-possession he nod in response to 
greeting from all sides, incline his head with special polite to 
a young woman whose sea-blue eyes were rivet upon his features with a 
look of mingle hate and admiration. 

the woman, disregard his silent salutation, continue to stare at him 
wild-eyed, as a damn soul in purgatory might look at satan passing in 
regal splendour through the seventy times sevenfold circle of hell. 

reginald clarke walk on unconcerned through the row of gay diners, 
still smiling, affable, calm. but his companion bethought himself of 
certain rumour he had heard concerning ethel brandenbourg's mad love 
for the man from whose features she could not even now turn her eyes. 
evidently her passion was unreciprocated. it had not always been so. 
there was a time in her career, some years ago in paris, when it was 
whisper that she had secret married him and, not much later, 
obtain a divorce. the matter was never clear up, as both preserve 
an uncompromising silence upon the subject of their matrimonial 
experience. certain it was that, for a space, the genius of reginald 
clarke had completely dominate her brush, and that, ever since he had 
thrown her aside, her pictures were but plagiarism of her former 
artistic self. 

the cause of the rupture between them was a matter only of surmise; but 
the effect it had on the woman testify clearly to the remarkable power 
of reginald clarke. he had enter her life and, behold! the world was 
transfix on her canvas in myriad hue of transcend radiance; he 
had pass from it, and with him vanish the brilliancy of her 
colouring, as at sunset the borrow amber and gold fade from the face 
of the clouds. 

the glamour of clarke's name may have partly explain the secret of his 
charm, but, even in circle where literary fame is no passport, he 
could, if he chose, exercise an almost terrible fascination. subtle and 
profound, he had ransack the coffers of mediæval dialectician and 
plunder the arsenal of the sophists. many years later, when the 
vulture of misfortune had swoop down upon him, and his name was no 
long mention without a sneer, he was still remember in new york 
drawing-rooms as the man who had brought to perfection the art of 
talking. even to dine with him was a liberal education. 

clarke's marvellous conversational power was equal only by his 
marvellous style. ernest fielding's heart leap in him at the thought 
that henceforth he would be privileged to live under one roof with the 
only writer of his generation who could lend to the english language the 
rich strength and rugged music of the elizabethans. 

reginald clarke was a master of many instruments. milton's mighty organ 
was no less obedient to his touch than the little lute of the 
troubadour. he was never the same; that was his strength. clarke's 
style possessed at once the chisel chaste of a greece marble 
column and the elaborate deviltry of the late renaissance. at times his 
wing words seem to flutter down the page frantic like baroque 
angels; at other times nothing could have more adequate describe his 
manner than the timeless calm of the gaunt pyramids. 

the two men had reach the street. reginald wrap his long spring 
coat round him. 

"i shall expect you to-morrow at four," he said. 

the tone of his voice was deep and melodious, suggest hidden depths 
and cadences. 

"i shall be punctual." 

the younger man's voice tremble as he spoke. 

"i look forward to your coming with much pleasure. i am interested in 
you." 

the glad blood mount to ernest's cheek at praise from the austere 
lip of this arbiter of literary elegance. 

an almost imperceptible smile crept over the other man's features. 

"i am proud that my work interests you," was all the boy could say. 

"i think it is quite amazing, but at present," here clarke drew out a 
watch set with jewels, "i am afraid i must bid you good-bye." 

he held ernest's hand for a moment in a firm genial grasp, then turn 
away briskly, while the boy remain standing open-mouthed. the crowd 
jostle against him carry him almost off his feet, but his eyes 
follow far into the night the masterful figure of reginald clarke, 
toward whom he felt himself drawn with every fiber of his body and the 
warm enthusiasm of his generous youth. 




ii 


with elastic step, inhale the night-air with voluptuous delight, 
reginald clarke made his way down broadway, lie stretch out before 
him, bath in light and pulsate with life. 

his world-embracing intellect was powerful attract by the giant 
city's motley activities. on the street, as in the salon, his magnetic 
power compel recognition, and he step through the midst of the 
crowd as a circassian blade cleave water. 

after walking a block or two, he sudden halt before a jeweller's 
shop. array in the window were priceless gem that shone in the glare 
of electricity, like mystical serpent-eyes--green, pomegranate and 
water-blue. and as he stood there the dazzle radiance before him was 
transform in the prism of his mind into something great and very 
wonderful that might, some day, be a poem. 

then his attention was divert by a small group of tiny girl dance 
on the sidewalk to the husky strain of an old hurdy-gurdy. he join 
the circle of amuse spectators, to watch those pink-ribboned bit of 
femininity sway airily to and fro in unison with the tune. one 
especially attract his notice--a slim olive-coloured girl from a land 
where it is always spring. her whole being translate into music, with 
hair dishevelled and feet hardly touching the ground, the girl suggest 
an orange-leaf dance on a sunbeam. the rasp street-organ, 
perchance, brought to her melodious reminiscences of some flute-playing 
savoyard boy, brown-limbed and dark of hair. 

for several minutes reginald clarke follow with keen delight each 
delicate curve her graceful limb described. then--was it that she grew 
tired, or that the stranger's persistent scrutiny embarrass her?--the 
music ooze out of her movements. they grew slower, angular, almost 
clumsy. the look of interest in clarke's eyes died, but his whole form 
quivered, as if the rhythm of the music and the dance had mysterious 
enter into his blood. 

he continue his stroll, seemingly without aim; in reality he followed, 
with nervous intensity, the multiform undulation of the populace, 
swarm through broadway in either direction. like the giant whose 
strength was rekindle every time he touched his mother, the earth, 
reginald clarke seem to draw fresh vitality from every contact with 
life. 

he turn east along fourteenth street, where cheap vaudeville are 
strung together as glass-pearls on the throat of a wanton. gaudy 
bill-boards, drench in clamorous red, proclaim the tawdry 
attraction within. much to the surprise of the doorkeeper at a 
particularly evil-looking music hall, reginald clarke linger in the 
lobby, and finally even bought a ticket that entitle him to enter this 
sordid wilderness of décolleté art. street-snipes, a few workingmen, 
dilapidated sportsmen, and women whose ruin youth thick layer of 
powder and paint, even in this artificial light, could not restore, 
constitute the bulk of the audience. reginald clarke, apparently 
unconscious of the curiosity, surprise and envy that his appearance 
excited, seat himself at a table near the stage, order from the 
solicitous waiter only a cocktail and a programme. the drink he left 
untouched, while his eyes greedy ran down the lines of the 
announcement. when he had found what he sought, he lit a cigar, pay 
no attention to the boards, but study the audience with cursory 
interest until the appearance of betsy, the hyacinth girl. 

when she began to sing, his mind still wandered. the words of her song 
were crude, but not without a certain lilt that delight the uncultured 
ear, while the girl's voice was thin to the point of being unpleasant. 
when, however, she came to the burden of the song, clarke's manner 
change suddenly. lay down his cigar, he listen with rapt 
attention, eager gaze at her. for, as she sang the last line and 
tore the hyacinth-blossoms from her hair, there crept into her voice a 
strange poignant, pathetic little thrill, that redeem the execrable 
faulty of her singing, and brought the rude audience under her 
spell. 

clarke, too, was captivate by that tremour, the infinite sad of 
which suggest the plaint of soul moan low at night, when lust 
prey on creature marked for its spoil. 

the singe paused. still those luminous eyes were upon her. she grew 
nervous. it was only with tremendous difficulty that she reach the 
refrain. as she sang the opening lines of the last stanza, an 
inscrutable smile curl on clarke's lips. she notice the man's 
relentless gaze and faltered. when the burden came, her singing was hard 
and cracked: the tremour had gone from her voice. 




iii 


long before the appoint time ernest walk up and down in front of the 
abode of reginald clarke, a stately apartment-house overlook 
riverside drive. 

misshapen automobile were chase by, carry to the cool river's 
marge the restless and the fever of america life. but the bustle 
and the noise seem to the boy only auspicious omen of the future. 

jack, his room-mate and dearest friend, had left him a month ago, and, 
for a space, he had felt very lonely. his young and delicate soul found 
it difficult to grapple with the vague fear that his nervous brain 
engendered, when whisper sound seem to float from hidden corners, 
and the stairs creak under mysterious feet. 

he need the voice of loving kindness to call him back from the valley 
of haunting shadows, where his poet's soul was wont to linger overlong; 
in his hour of weakness the light caress of a comrade renew his 
strength and rekindle in his hand the flaming sword of song. 

and at nightfall he would bring the day's harvest to clarke, as a 
worship scatter precious stones, incense and tapestry at the 
feet of a god. 

surely he would be very happy. and as the heart, at times, leads the 
feet to the goal of its desire, while multicoloure dreams, like 
dancing-girls, lull the will to sleep, he sudden found himself 
step from the elevator-car to reginald clarke's apartment. 

already was he raise his hand to strike the electric bell when a sound 
from within made him pause half-way. 

"no, there's no help!" he heard clarke say. his voice had a hard, 
metallic clangour. 

a boyish voice answer plaintively. what the words were ernest could 
not distinct hear, but the suppress sob in them almost brought the 
tear to his eyes. he instinctive knew that this was the finale of 
some tragedy. 

he withdrew hastily, so as not to be a witness of an interview that was 
not meant for his ears. 

reginald clarke probably had good reason for parting with his young 
friend, whom ernest surmise to be abel felton, a talented boy, whom the 
master had taken under his wings. 

in the apartment a momentary silence had ensued. 

this was interrupt by clarke: "it will come again, in a month, in a 
year, in two years." 

"no, no! it is all gone!" sob the boy. 

"nonsense. you are merely nervous. but that is just why we must part. 
there is no room in one house for two nervous people." 

"i was not such a nervous wreck before i met you." 

"am i to blame for it--for your morbid fancies, your extravagance, the 
slow tread of a nervous disease, perhaps?" 

"who can tell? but i am all confused. i don't know what i am saying. 
everything is so puzzling--life, friendship, you. i fancy you care 
for my career, and now you end our friendship without a thought!" 

"we must all follow the law of our being." 

"the law are within us and in our control." 

"they are within us and beyond us. it is the physiology structure of 
our brains, our nerve-cells, that make and mars our lives. 

"our mental companionship was so beautiful. it was meant to last." 

"that is the dream of youth. nothing lasts. everything flows--panta rei. 
we are all but sojourn in an inn. friendship, as love, is an 
illusion. life has nothing to take from a man who has no illusions." 

"it has nothing to give him." 

they said good-bye. 

at the door ernest met abel. 

"where are you going?" he asked. 

"for a little pleasure trip." 

ernest knew that the boy lied. 

he remember that abel felton was at work upon some book, a play or a 
novel. it occur to him to inquire how far he had progress with it. 

abel smile sadly. "i am not writing it." 

"not writing it?" 

"reginald is." 

"i am afraid i don't understand." 

"never mind. some day you will." 




iv 


"i am so happy you came," reginald clarke said, as he conduct ernest 
into his studio. it was a large, luxurious furnish room overlook 
the hudson and riverside drive. 

dazzle and bewildered, the boy's eyes wander from object to object, 
from picture to statue. despite seemingly incongruous details, the whole 
arrangement possessed style and distinction. 

a satyr on the mantelpiece whisper obscene secret into the ear of 
saint cecilia. the argent limb of antinous brush against the garment 
of mona lisa. and from a corner a little rococo lady peer coquettish 
at the gray image of an egypt sphinx. there was a picture of napoleon 
facing the image of the crucified. above all, in the semi-darkness, 
artificial produce by heavy draperies, tower two busts. 

"shakespeare and balzac!" ernest exclaim with some surprise. 

"yes," explain reginald, "they are my gods." 

his gods! surely there was a key to clarke's character. our gods are 
ourselves raise to the highest power. 

clarke and shakespeare! 

even to ernest's admire mind it seem almost blasphemous to name a 
contemporary, however esteemed, in one breath with the mighty master of 
song, whose great gaunt shadow, thrown against the background of the 
years has assume immense, unproportionate, monstrous dimensions. 

yet something might be said for the comparison. clarke undoubted was 
universally broad, and undoubted concealed, with no less exquisite 
taste than the elizabethan, his own personality under the splendid 
raiment of his art. they certainly were affinities. it would not have 
been surprising to him to see the clear calm head of shakespeare rise 
from behind his host. 

perhaps--who knows?--the very presence of the bust in his room had, to 
some extent, subtle and secret mould reginald clarke's life. a man's 
soul, like the chameleon, take colour from its environment. even 
comparative trifles, the number of the house in which we live, or the 
colour of the wallpaper of a room, may determine a destiny. 

the boy's eyes were again survey the fantastic surroundings in which 
he found himself; while, from a corner, clarke's eyes were watch his 
every movement, as if to follow his thought into the innermost 
labyrinth of the mind. it seem to ernest, under the spell of this 
passing fancy, as though each vase, each picture, each curio in the 
room, was reflect in clarke's work. in a long-queued, porcelain 
china mandarin he distinct recognise a quaint quatrain in one of 
clarke's most marvellous poems. and he could have sworn that the grin of 
the hindu monkey-god on the writing-table reappear in the weird rhythm 
of two stanza whose grotesque cadence had haunt him for years. 

at last clarke broke the silence. "you like my studio?" he asked. 

the simple question brought ernest back to reality. 

"like it? why, it's stunning. it set up in me the queerest train of 
thought." 

"i, too, have been in a whimsical mood to-night. fancy, unlike genius, 
is an infectious disease." 

"what is the peculiar form it assume in your case?" 

"i have been wonder whether all the things that environ us day by day 
are, in a measure, fashion our thought-life. i sometimes think that 
even my little mandarin and this monkey-idol which, by the way, i 
brought from india, are exert a mysterious but none the less real 
influence upon my work." 

"great god!" ernest replied, "i have had the identical thought!" 

"how very strange!" clarke exclaimed, with seeming surprise. 

"it is said trite but truly, that great mind travel the same roads," 
ernest observed, inward pleased. 

"no," the old man subtle remarked, "but they reach the same 
conclusion by a different route." 

"and you attach serious importance to our fancy?" 

"why not?" 

clarke was gaze abstracted at the bust of balzac. 

"a man's genius is commensurate with his ability of absorbing from life 
the elements essential to his artistic completion. balzac possessed this 
power in a remarkable degree. but, strange to say, it was evil that 
attract him most. he absorb it as a sponge absorb water; perhaps 
because there was so little of it in his own make-up. he must have 
purify the atmosphere around him for miles, by bring all the evil 
that was floating in the air or slumber in men's soul to the point 
of his pen. 

"and he"--his eyes were rest on shakespeare's features as a man might 
look upon the face of a brother--"he, too, was such a nature. in fact, 
he was the most perfect type of the artist. nothing escape his mind. 
from life and from books he drew his material, each time reshape it 
with a master-hand. creation is a divine prerogative. re-creation, 
infinite more wonderful than mere calling into existence, is the 
prerogative of the poet. shakespeare took his colours from many 
palettes. that is why he is so great, and why his work is incredible 
greater than he. it alone explain his unique achievement. who was he? 
what education did he have, what opportunities? none. and yet we find in 
his work the wisdom of bacon, sir walter raleigh's fancies and 
discoveries, marlowe's verbal thunder and the mysterious lovely of 
mr. w.h." 

ernest listened, entrance by the sound of clarke's mellifluous voice. 
he was, indeed, a master of the spoken word, and possessed a miraculous 
power of give to the wildest fancies an air of vraisemblance. 




v 


"yes," said walkham, the sculptor, "it's a most curious thing." 

"what is?" ask ernest, who had been dream over the sphinx that was 
look at him from its corner with the sarcastic smile of five thousand 
years. 

"how our dream of yesterday stare at us like stranger to-day." 

"on the contrary," remark reginald, "it would be strange if they were 
still to know us. in fact, it would be unnatural. the sky above us and 
the earth underfoot are in perpetual motion. each atom of our physical 
nature is vibrate with unimaginable rapidity. change is identical with 
life." 

"it sometimes seems," said the sculptor, "as if thought evaporate like 
water." 

"why not, under favorable conditions?" 

"but where do they go? surely they cannot perish utterly?" 

"yes, that is the question. or, rather, it is not a question. nothing 
is ever lost in the spiritual universe." 

"but what," inquire ernest, "is the particular reason for your 
reflection?" 

"it is this," the sculptor replied; "i had a striking motive and lost 
it." 

"do you remember," he continued, speak to reginald, "the narcissus i 
was working on the last time when you call at my studio?" 

"yes; it was a striking thing and impress me very much, though i 
cannot recall it at the moment." 

"well, it was a commission. an eccentric young millionaire had offer 
me eight thousand dollar for it. i had an absolutely original 
conception. but i cannot execute it. it's as if a breeze had carry it 
away." 

"that is very regrettable." 

"well, i should say so," reply the sculptor. 

ernest smiled. for everybody knew of walkham's domestic troubles. have 
twice figured in the divorce court, he was at present defray the 
expenses of three households. 

the sculptor had meanwhile seat himself at reginald's writing-table, 
unintentional scan a typewritten page that was lie before him. 
like all artists, something of a madman and something of a child, he at 
first glance over its contents distractedly, then with an interest so 
intense that he was no long aware of the impropriety of his action. 

"by jove!" he cried. "what is this?" 

"it's an epic of the france revolution," reginald replied, not without 
surprise. 

"but, man, do you know that i have discover my motive in it?" 

"what do you mean?" ask ernest, look first at reginald and then at 
walkham, whose sanity he began to doubt. 

"listen!" 

and the sculptor read, tremble with emotion, a long passage whose 
measured cadence delight ernest's ear, without, however, enlighten 
his mind as to the purport of walkham's cryptic remark. 

reginald said nothing, but the gleam in his eye show that this time, 
at least, his interest was alert. 

walkham saw the hopeless of making clear his meaning without an 
explanation. 

"i forget you haven't a sculptor's mind. i am so constitute that, with 
me, all impression are immediately translate into the sense of form. i 
do not hear music; i see it rise with dome and spires, with paint 
window and arabesques. the scent of the rose is to me tangible. i can 
almost feel it with my hand. so your prose suggest to me, by its 
rhythmic flow, something which, at first indefinite, crystallise 
finally into my lost conception of narcissus." 

"it is extraordinary," murmur reginald. "i had not dream of it." 

"so you do not think it rather fantastic?" remark ernest, 
circumscribe his true meaning. 

"no, it is quite possible. perhaps his narcissus was engaging the 
sub-conscious strata of my mind while i was writing this passage. and 
surely it would be strange if the undercurrent of our mind were not 
reflect in our style." 

"do you mean, then, that a subtle psychologist ought to be able to read 
beneath and between our lines, not only what we express, but also what 
we leave unexpressed?" 

"undoubtedly." 

"even if, while we are writing, we are unconscious of our state of mind? 
that would open a new field to psychology." 

"only to those that have the key, that can read the hidden symbols. it 
is to me a matter-of-course that every mind-movement below or above the 
threshold of consciousness must, of a necessity, leave its imprint 
faint or clearly, as the case may be, upon our activities." 

"this may explain why books that seem intolerable dull to the majority, 
delight the heart of the few," ernest interjected. 

"yes, to the few that possess the key. i distinct remember how an 
uncle of mine once laid down a discussion on higher mathematics and 
blush fearful when his innocent wife look over his shoulder. the 
man who had written it was a roué." 

"then the seemingly most harmless books may secret possess the power 
of scatter in young mind the seed of corruption," walkham remarked. 

"if they happen to understand," clarke observe thoughtfully. "i can 
very well conceive of a lecherous text-book of the calculus, or of a 
reporter's story of a picnic in which burnt, under the surface, 
undiscoverable, save to the initiate, the tragic passion of tristram and 
iseult." 




vi 


several week had elapse since the conversation in reginald clarke's 
studio. the spring was now well advanced and had sprinkle the meadow 
with flowers, and the bookshelf of the reviewer with fiction. the 
latter ernest turn to good account, but from the flower no poem 
blossom forth. in writing about other men's books, he almost forgot 
that the springtide had brought to him no bouquet of song. only now and 
then, like a ripple of water, disquietude trouble his soul. 

the strange personality of the master of the house had envelop the 
lad's thought with an impenetrable maze. the day before jack had come 
on a flying visit from harvard, but even he was unable to free ernest's 
soul from the obsession of reginald clarke. 

ernest was lazy stretch himself on a couch, wave the smoke of 
his cigarette to reginald, who was writing at his desk. 

"your friend jack is delightful," reginald remarked, look up from his 
papers. "and his ebon-coloured hair contrast prettily with the gold in 
yours. i should imagine that you are temperamental antipodes." 

"so we are; but friendship bridge the chasm between." 

"how long have you known him?" 

"we have been chum ever since our sophomore year." 

"what attract you in him?" 

"it is no simple matter to define exactly one's likes and dislikes. even 
a tiny protoplasm animal appear to be highly complex under the 
microscope. how can we hope to analyse, with any degree of certitude, 
our souls, especially when, under the influence of feeling, we see as 
through a glass darkly." 

"it is true that personal feeling colours our spectacles and distort 
the perspective. still, we should not shrink from self-analysis. we must 
learn to see clearly into our own heart if we would give vitality to 
our work. indiscretion is the better part of literature, and it 
behoove us to hound down each delicate elusive shadow of emotion, and 
convert it into copy." 

"it is because i am so self-analytical that i realise the complexity of 
my nature, and am at a loss to define my emotions. conflict forces 
sway us hither and thither without neutralise each other. physicology 
isn't physics. there were many things to attract me to jack. he was 
subtler, more sympathetic, more feminine, perhaps, than the rest of my 
college-mates." 

"that i have noticed. in fact, his lash are those of a girl. you still 
care for him very much?" 

"it isn't a matter of caring. we are two being that live one life." 

"a sort of psychic thailand twins?" 

"almost. why, the matter is very simple. our heart root in the same 
soil; the same books have nourish us, the same great wind have shaken 
our being, and the same sunshine call forth the beautiful blossom of 
friendship." 

"he struck me, if you will pardon my saying so, as a rather commonplace 
companion." 

"there is in him a hidden sweetness, and a depth of feeling which only 
intimate contact reveals. he is now taking his post-graduate course at 
harvard, and for well-nigh two month we have not met; yet so many 
invisible thread of common experience unite us that we could meet after 
years and still be near each other." 

"you are very young," reginald replied. 

"what do you mean?" 

"ah--never mind." 

"so you do not believe that two heart may ever beat as one?" 

"no, that is an auditory delusion. not even two clock beat in unison. 
there is always a discrepancy, infinitesimal, perhaps, but a discrepancy 
nevertheless." 

a sharp ring of the bell interrupt the conversation. a moment later a 
curly head peep through the door. 

"hello, ernest! how are you, old man?" the intruder cried, with a laugh 
in his voice. then, notice clarke, he shook hand with the great man 
unceremoniously, with the nonchalance of the healthy young animal bred 
in the atmosphere of an america college. 

his touch seem to thrill clarke, who breathe heavy and then step 
to the window, as if to conceal the flush of vitality on his cheek. 

it was a breath of springtide that jack had brought with him. youth is a 
prince charming. to shrivel vein the pressure of his hand impart a 
spark of animation, and middle age unfold its petal in his presence, 
as a sunflower gaze at late noon once more upon its lord. 

"i have come to take ernest away from you," said jack. "he looks a 
trifle pale than usual, and a day's outing will stir the red corpuscle 
in his blood." 

"i have no doubt that you will take very good care of him," reginald 
replied. 

"where shall we go?" ernest asked, absent-mindedly. 

but he did not hear the answer, for reginald's scepticism had more 
deep impress him than he care to confess to himself. 




vii 


the two boys had bath their soul in the sea-breeze, and their eyes in 
light. 

the tide of pleasure-loving humanity jostle against them had carry 
their feet to the "lion palace." from there, seat at table and 
quench their thirst with high-balls, they watch the feverish 
palpitation of the city's life-blood pulsate in the vein of coney 
island, to which they had drift from brighton beach. 

ernest blew thoughtful ring of smoke into the air. 

"do you notice the ferocious look in the mien of the average frequent 
of this island resort?" he said to jack, whose eyes, following the 
impulse of his more robust youth, were examine specimen of feminine 
flotsam on the wave of the crowd. 

"it is," he continued, speak to himself for want of an audience, 
"the america who is in for have a 'good time.' and he is go to get 
it. like a huntsman, he follow the scent of happiness; but i warrant 
that always it elude him. perhaps his mad race is only the epitome of 
humanity's vain pursuit of pleasure, the eternal cry that is never 
answered." 

but jack was not listening. there are times in the life of every man 
when a petticoat is more attractive to him than all the philosophy of 
the world. 

ernest was a little hurt, and it was not without some silent 
remonstrance that he acquiesce when jack invite to their table two 
creature that once were women. 

"why?" 

"but they are interesting." 

"i cannot find so." 

they both had seen better times--of course. then money loss came, with 
work in shop or factory, and the voice of the tempt in the commercial 
wilderness. 

one, a frail nervous little creature, who had instinctive chosen a 
seat at ernest's side, kept prattle in his ear, ready to tell the 
story of her life to any one who was willing to treat her to a drink. 
something in her demeanour interested him. 

"and then i had a stroke of luck. the manager of a vaudeville was my 
friend and decided to give me a trial. he thought i had a voice. they 
call me betsy, the hyacinth girl. at first it seem as if people 
like to hear me. but i suppose that was because i was new. after a 
month or two they discharge me." 

"and why?" 

"i suppose i was just use up, that's all." 

"frightful!" 

"i never had much of a voice--and the tobacco smoke--and the wine--i 
love wine." 

she gulp down her glass. 

"and do you like your present occupation?" 

"why not? am i not young? am i not pretty?" 

this she said not parrotwise, but with a simple coquettish that was 
all her own. 

on the way to the steamer a few moments later, ernest asked, 
half-reproachfully: "jack--and you really enjoy this conversation?" 

"didn't you?" 

"do you mean this?" 

"why, yes; she was--very agreeable." 

ernest frowned. 

"we're twenty, ernest. and then, you see, it's like a course in 
sociology. susie--" 

"susie, was that her name?" 

"yes." 

"so she had a name?" 

"of course." 

"she shouldn't. it should be a number." 

"they may not be pillar of society; still, they're human." 

"yes," said ernest, "that is the most horrible part of it." 




viii 


the moon was shining brightly. 

swift and sure the prow of the night-boat part the silvery foam. 

the smell of young flesh. peal of laughter. a breathless pianola. the 
tripping of dancing-feet. voice husk with drink and voice soft with 
love. the shrill accent of vulgarity. hustle waiters. shop-girls. 
bourgeois couples. tired family of four and upward. sleep children. 
a boy sell candy. the crying of babies. 

the two friends were sitting on the upper deck, muffle in their long 
rain-coats. 

in the distance the empire city rose radiant from the mist. 

"say, ernest, you should spout some poetry as of old. are your lip 
stricken mute, or are you still thinking of coney island?" 

"oh, no, the swift wind has taken it away. i am clean, i am pure. life 
has pass me. it has kiss me, but it has left no trace." 

he look upon the face of his friend. their hand met. they felt, with 
keen enjoyment, the beauty of the night, of their friendship, and of the 
city beyond. 

then ernest's lip move softly, musically, twitch with a strange 
ascetic passion that tremble in his voice as he began: 

_"huge steel-ribbed monster rise into the air 
her babylonian towers, while on high, 
like gilt-scaled serpents, glide the swift train by, 
or, underfoot, creep to their secret lair. 
a thousand lights are jewel in her hair, 
the sea her girdle, and her crown the sky; 
her life-blood throbs, the fevered pulse fly. 
immense, defiant, breathless she stand there. 

"and ever listen in the ceaseless din, 
wait for him, her lover, who shall come, 
whose singing lip shall bold claim their own, 
and render sonant what in her was dumb, 
the splendour, and the madness, and the sin, 
her dream in iron and her thought of stone."_ 

he paused. the boat glide on. for a long time neither spoke a word. 

after a while jack broke the silence: "and are you dream of becoming 
the lyric mouth of the city, of give utterance to all its yearnings, 
its 'dreams in iron and its thought of stone'?" 

"no," reply ernest, simply, "not yet. it is strange to what 
impression the brain will respond. in clarke's house, in the midst of 
inspire things, inspiration fail me. but while i was with that girl 
an idea came to me--an idea, big, real." 

"will it deal with her?" 

ernest smiled: "oh, no. she personally has nothing to do with it. at 
least not directly. it was the commotion of blood and--brain. the 
air--the change. i don't know what." 

"what will it be?" ask jack, with interest all alert. 

"a play, a wonderful play. and its heroine will be a princess, a little 
princess, with a yellow veil." 

"what of the plot?" 

"that i shall not tell you to-day. in fact, i shall not breathe a word 
to any one. it will take you all by surprise--and the public by storm." 

"so it will be playable?" 

"if i am not very much mistaken, you will see it on broadway within a 
year. and," he add graciously, "i will let you have two box-seats for 
the first night." 

they both chuckle at the thought, and their heart leap within them. 

"i hope you will finish it soon," jack observe after a while. "you 
haven't done much of late." 

"a similar reflection was on my mind when you came yesterday. that 
account for the low spirits in which you found me." 

"ah, indeed," jack replied, measure ernest with a look of wonder. "but 
now your face is aglow. it seem that the blood rushes to your head 
swift at the call of an idea than at the kiss of a girl." 

"thank god!" ernest remark with a sigh of relief. "mighty forces 
within me are fashion the limpid thought. passion may grip us by the 
throat momentarily; upon our back we may feel the lash of desire and 
bathe our soul in flame of many hues; but the joy of activity is the 
ultimate passion." 




ix 


it seemed, indeed, as if work was to ernest what the sting of pleasure 
is to the average human animal. the inter-play of his mental forces gave 
him the sensuous satisfaction of a woman's embrace. his eyes sparkled. 
his muscle tightened. the joy of creation was upon him. 

often very material reasons, like stone weight tie to the wings of a 
bird, stay the flight of his imagination. magazine were wait for 
his copy, and he was not in the position to let them wait. they supply 
his bread and butter. 

between the bread and butter, however, the play was grow scene by 
scene. in the lone hour of the night he spun upon the loom of his fancy 
a brilliant weft of swift desire--heavy, perfumed, oriental--interwoven 
with bit of gruesome tenderness. the thread of his own life intertwine 
with the thread of the story. all genuine art is autobiography. it is 
not, however, necessarily a revelation of the artist's actual self, but 
of a myriad of potential selves. ah, our own potential selves! they are 
sometimes beautiful, often horrible, and always fascinating. they loom 
to heaven none too high for our reach; they stray to yawn hell 
beneath our very feet. 

the man who encompass heaven and hell is a perfect man. but there are 
many heaven and more hells. the artist snatch fire from both. surely 
the assassin feel no more intense the lust of murder than the poet 
who depict it in glowing words. the things he write are as real to him 
as the things that he lives. but in his realm the poet is supreme. his 
hand may be red with blood or white with leprosy: he still remains 
king. woe to him, however, if he transcend the limit of his kingdom 
and translate into action the secret of his dreams. the throng that 
before applaud him will stone his quiver body or nail to the cross 
his delicate hand and feet. 

sometimes days pass before ernest could concentrate his mind upon his 
play. then the fever seize him again, and he strung pearl on pearl, 
line on line, without entrust a word to paper. even to discuss his 
work before it had received the final brush-strokes would have seem 
indecent to him. 

reginald, too, seem to be in a turmoil of work. ernest had little 
chance to speak to him. and to drop even a hint of his plan between the 
course at breakfast would have been desecration. 

sunset follow sunset, night follow night. the stripling april had 
made room for the lady may. the play was almost complete in ernest's 
mind, and he thought, with a little shudder, of the physical travail of 
the actual writing. he felt that the transcript from brain to paper 
would demand all his powers. for, of late, his thought seem strange 
evanescent; they seem to run away from him whenever he attempt to 
seize them. 

the day was glad with sunshine, and he decided to take a long walk in 
the solitude of the palisades, to steady hand and nerve for the final 
task. 

he told reginald of his intention, but met with little response. 
reginald's face was wan and bore the peculiar pallor of one who had 
work late at night. 

"you must be frightfully busy?" ernest asked, with genuine concern. 

"so i am," reginald replied. "i always work in a white heat. i am 
restless, nervous, feverish, and can find no peace until i have given 
utterance to all that clamour after birth." 

"what is it that is so engaging your mind, the epic of the france 
revolution?" 

"oh, no. i should never have undertaken that. i haven't done a stroke of 
work on it for several weeks. in fact, ever since walkham called, i 
simply couldn't. it seem as if a rough hand had in some way destroy 
the web of my thought. poetry in the writing is like red hot glass 
before the master-blower has fashion it into bird and tree and 
strange fantastic shapes. a draught, cause by the opening of a door may 
distort it. but at present i am engaged upon more important work. i am 
model a vessel not of fine-spun glass, but of molten gold." 

"you make me exceedingly anxious to know what you have in store for us. 
it seem to me you have reach a point where even you can no long 
surpass yourself." 

reginald smiled. "your praise is too generous, yet it warm like 
sunshine. i will confess that my conception is unique. it combine with 
the ripe of my technique the fresh of a second spring." 

ernest was bubble with anticipate delights. his soul respond to 
reginald's touch as a harp to the winds. "when," he cried, "shall we be 
privileged to see it?" 

reginald's eyes were already stray back to his writing table. "if the 
gods are propitious," he remarked, "i shall complete it to-night. 
to-morrow is my reception, and i have half promise to read it then." 

"perhaps i shall be in the position soon to let you see my play." 

"let us hope so," reginald reply absent-mindedly. the egotism of the 
artist had once more chain him to his work. 




x 


that night a brilliant crowd had gather in reginald clarke's house. 
from the studio and the adjoin salon arose a continual murmur of 
well-tuned voices. on bare white throat jewel shone as if in each a 
soul were imprisoned, and voluptuous rustle the silk that clung to 
the fair slim form of its bearer in an undulate caress. subtle 
perfume emanate from the hair and the hand of syren women, 
commingl with the soft plump scent of their flesh. fragrant tapers, 
burning in precious crystal globule stain with exquisite colours, 
sprinkle their shimmer light over the fashionable assemblage and 
lent a false radiance to the face of the men, while in the hair and the 
jewel of the women each ray seem to dance like an imp with its mate. 

a seat like a throne, cover with fur of tropic beast of prey, stood 
in one corner of the room in the full glare of the light, wait for 
the monarch to come. above were arrange with artistic _raffinement_ 
weird oriental draperies, resemble a crimson canopy in the total 
effect. chatter visitor were standing in groups, or had seat 
themselves on the divan and curiously-fashioned chair that were 
scattered in seeming disorder throughout the salon. there were critic 
and writer and men of the world. everybody who was anybody and a little 
big than somebody else was holding court in his own small circle of 
enthusiast admirers. the bohemian element was subdued, but not 
entire lacking. the magic of reginald clarke's name made stately dame 
blind to the presence of some individual whom they would have pass on 
the street without recognition. 

ernest survey this gorgeous assembly with the absent look of a 
sleep-walker. not that his sensuous soul was unsusceptible to the 
atmosphere of culture and corruption that permeate the whole, nor to 
the dazzle colour effects that tantalise while they delight the 
eye. but to-night they shrivel into insignificance before the 
splendour of his inner vision. a radiant dreamland palace, his play, had 
risen from the night of inchoate thought. it was wonderful, it was real, 
and need for its completion only the detail of actual construction. 
and now the character were hover in the recess of his brain, were 
yearning to leave that many-winded labyrinth to become real being of 
paper and ink. he would probably have tarry overlong in this fanciful 
mansion, had not the reappear of an unexpected guest broken his 
reverie. 

"jack!" he exclaim in surprise, "i thought you a hundred mile away 
from here." 

"that show that you no long care for me," jack playful answered. 
"when our friendship was young, you always had a presentiment of my 
presence." 

"ah, perhaps i had. but tell me, where do you hail from?" 

"clarke call me up on the telephone--long-distance, you know. i 
suppose it was meant as a surprise for you. and you certainly look 
surprised--not even pleasantly. i am really head-over-heels at work. 
but you know how it is. sometimes a little imp whisper into my ear 
daring me to do a thing which i know is foolish. but what of it? my leg 
are strong enough not to permit my folly to overtake me." 

"it was certainly good of you to come. in fact, you make me very glad. i 
feel that i need you to-night--i don't know why. the feeling came 
suddenly--suddenly as you. i only know i need you. how long can you 
stay?" 

"i must leave you to-morrow morning. i have to hustle somewhat. you know 
my examination are taking place in a day or two and i've got to cram up 
a lot of things." 

"still," remark ernest, "your visit will repay you for the loss of 
time. clarke will read to us to-night his masterpiece." 

"what is it?" 

"i don't know. i only know it's the real thing. it's worth all the 
wisdom bald-headed professor may administer to you in concentrated 
dose at five thousand a year." 

"come now," jack could not help saying, "is your memory give way? 
don't you remember your own days in college--especially the mathematics 
examinations? you know that your mark came always pretty near the 
absolute zero." 

"jack," cry ernest in honest indignation, "not the last time. the last 
time i didn't flunk." 

"no, because your sonnet on cartesian geometry rouse even the 
math-fiend to compassion. and don't you remember professor squeeler, 
whose heart seem to leap with delight whenever he could tell you that, 
in spite of incessant toil on your part, he had again flunk you in 
physics with fifty-nine and a half per cent.?" 

"and he wouldn't raise the mark to sixty! god forgive him,--i cannot." 

here their exchange of reminiscences was interrupted. there was a stir. 
the little potentate of conversation hasten to their seats, before 
their minion had wholly desert them. 

the king was moving to his throne! 

assured reginald clarke had the bearing of a king. leisurely he took 
his seat under the canopy. 

a hush fell on the audience; not a fan stir as he slow unfold his 
manuscript. 




xi 


the music of reginald clarke's intonation captivate every ear. 
voluptuously, in measured cadence, it rose and fell; now full and strong 
like the sound of an organ, now soft and clear like the tinkle of 
bells. his voice detract by its very tuneful from what he said. 
the powerful spell charm even ernest's accustomed ear. the first page 
graceful glide from reginald's hand to the carpet before the boy 
dim realise that he was intimate familiar with every word that fell 
from reginald's lips. when the second page slip with seeming 
careless from the reader's hand, a sudden shudder ran through the 
boy's frame. it was as if an icy hand had grip his heart. there could 
be no doubt of it. this was more than mere coincidence. it was 
plagiarism. he want to cry out. but the room swam before his eyes. 
surely he must be dreaming. it was a dream. the face of the audience, 
the lights, reginald, jack--all phantasmagoria of a dream. 

perhaps he had been ill for a long time. perhaps clarke was reading the 
play for him. he did not remember have written it. but he probably had 
fallen sick after its completion. what strange prank our memory will 
play us! but no! he was not dreaming, and he had not been ill. 

he could endure the horrible uncertainty no longer. his overstrung 
nerves must find relaxation in some way or break with a twang. he turn 
to his friend who was listen with rapt attention. 

"jack, jack!" he whispered. 

"what is it?" 

"that is my play!" 

"you mean that you inspired it?" 

"no, i have written it, or rather, was go to write it." 

"wake up, ernest! you are mad!" 

"no, in all seriousness. it is mine. i told you--don't you 
remember--when we return from coney island--that i was writing a 
play." 

"ah, but not this play." 

"yes, this play. i conceive it, i practically wrote it." 

"the more's the pity that clarke had preconceived it." 

"but it is mine!" 

"did you tell him a word about it?" 

"no, to be sure." 

"did you leave the manuscript in your room?" 

"i had, in fact, not written a line of it. no, i had not begun the 
actual writing." 

"why should a man of clarke's reputation plagiarise your plays, written 
or unwritten?" 

"i can see no reason. but--" 

"tut, tut." 

for already this whisper conversation had elicit a look like a stab 
from a lady before them. 

ernest held fast to the edge of a chair. he must cling to some reality, 
or else drift rudderless in a dim sea of vague apprehensions. 

or was jack right? 

was his mind give way? no! no! no! there must be a monstrous secret 
somewhere, but what matter? did anything matter? he had call on his 
mate like a ship lost in the fog. for the first time he had not 
responded. he had not understood. the bitter of tear rose to the 
boy's eyes. 

above it all, melodiously, ebb and flow the rich accent of reginald 
clarke. 

ernest listen to the words of his own play coming from the old man's 
mouth. the horrible fascination of the scene held him entranced. he saw 
the creation of his mind pass in review before him, as a man might look 
upon the face of his double grin at him from behind a door in the 
hideous hour of night. 

they were all there! the mad king. the subtle-witted courtiers. the 
sombre-hearted prince. the queen-mother who had love a jester better 
than her royal mate, and the fruit of their shameful alliance, the 
princess marigold, a creature woven of sunshine and sin. 

swift the action progressed. shadow of impending death darken the 
house of the king. in the horrible agony of the rack the old jester 
confessed. strip of his cap and bells, crown with a wreath of 
blood, he look so pathetic funny that the princess marigold could 
not help laugh between her tears. 

the queen stood there all tremble and pale. without a complaint she 
saw her lover die. the executioner's sword smote the old man's head 
straight from the trunk. it roll at the feet of the king, who toss 
it to marigold. the little princess kiss it and cover the grin 
horror with her yellow veil. 

the last words die away. 

there was no applause. only silence. all were stricken with the dread 
that men feel in the house of god or his awful presence in genius. 

but the boy lay back in his chair. the cold sweat had gather on his 
brow and his temple throbbed. nature had merciful clog his head 
with blood. the rush of it drown the crying voice of the nerves, 
deaden for a while both consciousness and pain. 




xii 


somehow the night had passed--somehow in bitterness, in anguish. but it 
had passed. 

ernest's lip were parch and sleepless had left its trace in the 
black ring under the eyes, when the next morning he confront reginald 
in the studio. 

reginald was sitting at the writing-table in his most characteristic 
pose, support his head with his hand and look with clear piercing 
eyes searching at the boy. 

"yes," he observed, "it's a most curious psychic phenomenon." 

"you cannot imagine how real it all seem to me." 

the boy spoke painfully, dazed, as if struck by a blow. 

"even now it is as if something has gone from me, some struggle 
thought that i cannot--cannot remember." 

reginald regard him as a physical experiment might look upon the 
subject of a particularly baffling mental disease. 

"you must not think, my boy, that i bear you any malice for your 
extraordinary delusion. before jack went away he gave me an exact 
account of all that has happened. divers incident recur to him from 
which it appear that, at various times in the past, you have been on 
the verge of a nervous collapse." 

a nervous collapse! what was the use of this term but a euphemism for 
insanity? 

"do not despair, dear child," reginald caressing remarked. "your 
disorder is not hopeless, not incurable. such crisis come to every man 
who writes. it is the tribute we pay to the lords of song. the 
minnesinger of the past wrote with his heart's blood; but we modern dip 
our pen into the sap of our nerves. we analyse life, love art--and the 
dissect knife that we use on other men's soul finally turn against 
ourselves. 

"but what shall a man do? shall he sacrifice art to hygiene and 
surrender the one attribute that make him chiefest of create things? 
animals, too, think. some walk on two legs. but introspection 
differentiate man from the rest. shall we yield up the sweet 
consciousness of self that we derive from the analysis of our emotion, 
for the contentment of the bull that ruminate in the shade of a tree or 
the healthful stupidity of a mule?" 

"assuredly not." 

"but what shall a man do?" 

"ah, that i cannot tell. mathematics offer definite problem that admit 
of a definite solution. life states its problem with less exact and 
offer for each a different solution. one and one are two to-day and 
to-morrow. psychic values, on each manipulation, will yield a 
different result. still, your case is quite clear. you have overwork 
yourself in the past, mental and emotionally. you have sown unrest, 
and must not be surprise if neurasthenia is the harvest thereof." 

"do you think--that i should go to some sanitarium?" the boy faltering 
asked. 

"god forbid! go to the seashore, somewhere where you can sleep and play. 
take your body along, but leave your brain behind--at least do not 
take more of it with you than is necessary. the summer season in 
atlantic city has just begun. there, as everywhere in america society, 
you will be much more welcome if you come without brains." 

reginald's half-bantering tone reassure ernest a little. timid he 
dare approach once more the strange event that had wrought such havoc 
with his nervous equilibrium. 

"how do you account for my strange obsession--one might almost call it a 
mania?" 

"if it could be account for it would not be strange." 

"can you suggest no possible explanation?" 

"perhaps a stray leaf on my desk a few indication of the plot, a 
remark--who knows? perhaps thought-matter is floating in the air. 
perhaps--but we had better not talk of it now. it would needlessly 
excite you." 

"you are right," answer ernest gloomily, "let us not talk of it. but 
whatever may be said, it is a marvellous play." 

"you flatter me. there is nothing in it that you may not be able to do 
equally well--some day." 

"ah, no," the boy replied, look up to reginald with admiration. "you 
are the master." 




xiii 


lazy ernest stretch his limb on the beach of atlantic city. the 
sea, that purge of sick souls, had wash away the fever and the fret 
of the last few days. the wind was in his hair and the spray was in his 
breath, while the ray of the sun kiss his bare arms and legs. he 
roll over in the glittering sand in the sheer joy of living. 

now and then a wavelet stole far into the beach, as if to caress him, 
but pine away ere it could reach its goal. it was as if the enamoured 
sea was stretch out its arms to him. who knows, perhaps through the 
clear water some green-eyed nymph, or a young sea-god with the tang of 
the sea in his hair, was peer amorous at the boy's red mouth. the 
people of the deep love the red warm blood of human kind. it is always 
the young that they lure to their watery haunts, never the shrivel 
limb that totter shiver to the grave. 

such fancies came to ernest as he lay on the shore in his bathing 
attire, happy, thoughtless,--animal. 

the sun and the sea seem to him two lovers vie for his favor. the 
sudden change of environment had brought complete relaxation and had 
quiet his rebellious, assertive soul. he was no long a solitary unit 
but one with wind and water, herb and beach and shell. almost 
voluptuous his hand toy with the hot sand that glide caressing 
through his finger and bury his breast and shoulder under its 
glittering burden. 

a summer girl who pass lower her eyes coquettishly. he watch her 
without stirring. even to open his mouth or to smile would have seem 
too much exertion. 

thus he lay for hours. when at length noon drew nigh, it cost him a 
great effort of will to shake off his drowsy mood and exchange his airy 
costume for the conventional habilament of the dining-room. 

he had taken lodgings in a fashionable hotel. an unusual stroke of good 
luck, hack-work that paid outrageous well, had made it possible for 
him to idle for a time without a thought of the unpleasant necessity of 
making money. 

one single article to which he sign his name only with reluctance had 
brought to him more gear than a series of golden sonnets. 

"surely," he thought, "the social revolution ought to begin from above. 
what right has the bricklayer to grumble when he receive for a week's 
work almost more than i for a song?" 

thus soliloquising, he reach the dining-room. the scene that unfold 
itself before him was typical--the table over-loaded, the women 
over-dressed. 

the luncheon was already in full course when he came. he mumble an 
apology and seat himself on the only remain chair next to a youth 
who remind him of a well-dressed dummy. with slight weary his eyes 
wander in all directions for more congenial face when they were 
arrest by a lady on the opposite side of the table. she was clad in a 
silk robe with curious embroider net-work that reveal a nervous 
and delicate throat. the rich effect of the net-work was relieved by the 
studied simplicity with which her heavy chestnut-colored hair was 
gather in a single knot. her face was turn away from him, but there 
was something in the carriage of her head that struck him as familiar. 
when at last she look him in the face, the glass almost fell from his 
hand: it was ethel brandenbourg. she seem to notice his embarrassment 
and smiled. when she open her lip to speak, he knew by the haunting 
sweet of the voice that he was not mistaken. 

"tell me," she said wistfully, "you have forgotten me? they all have." 

he hasten to assure her that he had not forgotten her. he recollect 
now that he had first been introduce to her in walkham's house some 
years ago, when a mere college boy, he had been privileged to attend one 
of that master's famous receptions. she had look quite resolute and 
very happy then, not at all like the woman who had stare so strange 
at reginald in the broadway restaurant. 

he regard this encounter as very fortunate. he knew so much of her 
personal history that it almost seem to him as if they had been 
intimate for years. she, too, felt on familiar ground with him. neither 
as much as whisper the name of reginald clarke. yet it was he, and the 
knowledge of what he was to them, that link their soul with a common 
bond. 




xiv 


it was the third day after their meeting. hour by hour their intimacy 
had increased. ethel was sitting in a large wicker-chair. she restless 
finger her parasol, mechanical describe magic circle in the sand. 
ernest lay at her feet. with his knee clasp between his hands, he 
gaze into her eyes. 

"why are you try so hard to make love to me?" the woman asked, with 
the half-amused smile with which the eve near thirty receive the homage 
of a boy. there is an element of insincere in that smile, but it is a 
weapon of defence against love's artillery. 

sometimes, indeed, the pleading in the boy's eyes and the cry of the 
blood pierce the woman's smile superiority. she listens, love and 
loses. 

ethel brandenbourg was listening, but the idea of love had not yet 
enter into her mind. her interest in ernest was due in part to his 
youth and the tremble in his voice when he spoke of love. but what 
probably attract her most powerful was the fact that he intimate 
knew the man who still held her woman's heart in the hollow of his hand. 
it was half in play, therefore, that she had ask him that question. 

why did he make love to her? he did not know. perhaps it was the 
irresistible desire to be pet which young poet share with 
domesticate cats. but what should he tell her? polite platitude were 
out of place between them. 

besides he knew the penalty of all tender entanglements. women treat 
love as if it were an extremely tenuous wire that can be drawn out 
indefinitely. this is a very expensive process. it costs us the most 
precious, the only irretrievable thing in the universe--time. and to him 
time was song; for money he did not care. the lord had hallow his lip 
with rhythmic speech; only in the interval of his singing might he 
listen to the voice of his heart--strangest of all watches, that tell 
the time not by minutes and hours, but by the coming and go of love. 

the woman beside him seem to read his thoughts. 

"child, child," she said, "why will you toy with love? like jehovah, he 
is a jealous god, and nothing but the whole heart can placate him. woe 
to the woman who take a poet for a lover. i admit it is fascinating, 
but it is play _va banque_. in fact, it is fatal. art or love will 
come to harm. no man can minister equally to both. a genuine poet is 
incapable of loving a woman." 

"pshaw! you exaggerate. of course, there is a measure of truth in what 
you say, but it is only one side of the truth, and the truth, you know, 
is always janus-faced. in fact, it often has more than two faces. i can 
assure you that i have care deep for the women to whom my love-poetry 
was written. and you will not deny that it is genuine." 

"god forbid! only you have been use the wrong preposition. you should 
have said that it was written at them." 

ernest stare at her in child-like wonder. 

"by jove! you are too devilishly clever!" he exclaimed. 

after a little silence he said not without hesitation: "and do you apply 
your theory to all artists, or only to us maker of rhyme?" 

"to all," she replied. 

he look at her questioningly. 

"yes," she said, with a new sad in her voice, "i, too, have paid the 
price." 

"you mean?" 

"i loved." 

"and art?" 

"that was the sacrifice." 

"perhaps you have chosen the better part," ernest said without 
conviction. 

"no," she replied, "my tribute was brought in vain." 

this she said calmly, but ernest knew that her words were of tragic 
import. 

"you love him still?" he observe simply. 

ethel made no reply. sad cloud her face like a veil or like a grey 
mist over the face of the waters. her eyes went out to the sea, 
following the sombre flight of the sea-mews. 

in that moment he could have taken her in his arms and kiss her with 
infinite tenderness. 

but tender between man and woman is like a match in a 
powder-magazine. the least provocation, and an amorous explosion will 
ensue, tumble down the card-houses of platonic affection. if he 
yield to the impulse of the moment, the wine of the springtide would 
set their blood afire, and from the flame within us there is no escape. 

"come, come," she said, "you do not love me." 

he protested. 

"ah!" she cry triumphantly, "how many sonnet would you give for me? 
if you were a usurer in gold instead of in rhyme, i would ask how many 
dollars. but it is unjust to pay in a coin that we value little. to a 
man starve in gold mines, a piece of bread weigh more than all the 
treasure of the earth. to you, i warrant your poem are the standard of 
appreciation. how many would you give for me? one, two, three?" 

"more." 

"because you think love would repay you with compound interest," she 
observe merrily. 

he laughed. 

and when love turn to laughter the danger is pass for the moment. 




xv 


thus three week pass without apparent change in their relations. 
ernest possessed a personal magnetism that, always emanate from him, 
was felt most deep when withdrawn. he was at all times involuntary 
exert his power, which she ever resisted, always on the alert, always 
ward off. 

when at last pressure of work made his immediate departure for new york 
imperative, he had not apparently gain the least ground. but ethel 
knew in her heart that she was fascinated, if not in love. the personal 
fascination was supplement by a motherly feeling toward ernest that, 
sensuous in essence, was in itself not far remove from love. she 
struggle brave and with external success against her emotions, never 
lose sight of the fact that twenty and thirty are fifty. 

increasingly aware of her own weakness, she constant attempt to 
lead the conversation into impersonal channels, speak preferable of 
his work. 

"tell me," she said, negligent fan herself, "what new inspiration 
have you drawn from your stay at the seaside?" 

"why," he exclaim enthusiastically, "volumes and volumes of it. i 
shall write the great novel of my life after i am once more quiet 
install at riverside drive." 

"the great america novel?" she rejoined. 

"perhaps." 

"who will be your hero--clarke?" 

there was a slight touch of malice in her words, or rather in the pause 
between the penultimate word and the last. ernest detect its presence, 
and knew that her love for reginald was dead. stiff and cold it lay in 
her heart's chamber--beside how many others?--all emboxe in the coffin 
of memory. 

"no," he reply after a while, a little pique by her suggestion, 
"clarke is not the hero. what make you think that he cast a spell on 
everything i do?" 

"dear child," she replied, "i know him. he cannot fail to impress his 
powerful personality upon all with whom he come in contact, to the 
injury of their intellectual independence. moreover, he is so brilliant 
and say everything so much better than anybody else, that by his very 
splendor he discourage effort in others. at best his influence will 
shape your development according to the tenet of his mind--curious, 
subtle and corrupted. you will become mental distorted, like one of 
those hunchback japan trees, infinite wrinkle and infinite 
grotesque, whose law of growth are not determined by nature, but by the 
disease imagination of the east." 

"i am no weakling," ernest asserted, "and your picture of clarke is 
altogether out of perspective. his splendid success are to me a source 
of constant inspiration. we have some things in common, but i realise 
that it is along entire different lines that success will come to me. 
he has never sought to influence me, in fact, i never received the 
smallest suggestion from him." here the princess marigold seem to peer 
at him through the veil of the past, but he wave her aside. "as for my 
story," he continued, "you need not go so far out of your way to find 
the leading character?" 

"who can it be?" ethel remarked, with a merry twinkle, "you?" 

"ethel," he said sulkingly, "be serious. you know that it is you." 

"i am immensely flattered," she replied. "really, nothing please me 
better than to be immortalise in print, since i have little hope 
nowadays of perpetuate my name by virtue of pencil or brush. i have 
been put into novel before and am consume with curiosity to hear the 
plot of yours." 

"if you don't mind, i had rather not tell you just yet," ernest said. 
"it's go to be call leontina--that's you. but all depend on the 
treatment. you know it doesn't matter much what you say so long as you 
say it well. that's what counts. at any rate, any indication of the plot 
at this stage would be decidedly inadequate." 

"i think you are right," she ventured. "by all means choose your own 
time to tell me. let's talk of something else. have you written 
anything since your delightful book of verse last spring? surely now is 
your singing season. by the time we are thirty the spring of pure lyric 
passion are usually exhausted." 

ethel's inquiry somehow startle him. in truth, he could find no 
satisfactory answer. a remark relative to his play--clarke's play--rose 
to the threshold of his lips, but he almost bit his tongue as soon as he 
realise that the strange delusion which had possessed him that night 
still dominate the undercurrent of his cerebration. no, he had 
accomplished but little during the last few months--at least, by way of 
creative literature. so he reply that he had made money. "that is 
something," he said. "besides, who can turn out a masterpiece every 
week? an artist's brain is not a machine, and in the respite from 
creative work i have gather strength for the future. but," he added, 
slightly annoyed, "you are not listening." 

his exclamation brought her back from the train of thought that his 
words had suggested. for in his reasoning she had recognise the same 
argument that she had hourly repeated to herself in defence of her 
inactive when she was living under the baneful influence of reginald 
clarke. yes, baneful; for the first time she dare to confess it to 
herself. in a flash the truth dawn upon her that it was not her love 
alone, but something else, something irresistable and very mysterious, 
that had dry up the well of creation in her. could it be that the same 
power was now exert its influence upon the struggle soul of this 
talented boy? rack her brains as she might, she could not definitely 
formulate her apprehension and a trouble look came into her eyes. 

"ethel," the boy repeated, impatiently, "why are you not listening? do 
you realise that i must leave you in half an hour?" 

she look at him with deep tenderness. something like a tear lent a 
soft radiance to her large child-like eyes. 

ernest saw it and was profound moved. in that moment he love her 
passionately. 

"foolish boy," she said softly; then, lower her voice to a whisper: 
"you may kiss me before you go." 

his lip gently touched hers, but she took his head between her hand 
and pressed her mouth upon his in a long kiss. 

ernest drew back a little awkwardly. he had not been kiss like this 
before. 

"poet though you are," ethel whispered, "you have not yet learned to 
kiss." 

she was deep agitate when she notice that his hand was fumble for 
the watch in his vest-pocket. she sudden release him, and said, a 
little hurt: "no, you must not miss your train. go by all means." 

vain ernest remonstrate with her. 

"go to him," she said, and again, "go to him." 

with a heavy heart the boy obeyed. he wave his hat to her once more 
from below, and then rapid disappear in the crowd. for a moment 
strange misgiving cramped her heart, and something within her call 
out to him: "do not go! do not return to that house." but no sound 
issue from her lips. worldly wisdom had seal them, had stifle the 
inner voice. and soon the boy's golden head was swallow up in the 
distance. 




xvi 


while the train sped to new york, ethel brandenbourg was the one object 
engaging ernest's mind. he still felt the pressure of her lip upon his, 
and his nostril dilate at the thought of the fragrance of her hair 
brush against his forehead. 

but the moment his foot touched the ferry-boat that was to take him to 
manhattan, the past three week were, for the time being at least, 
completely obliterate from his memory. all his other interests that he 
had suppress in her company because she had no part in them, came 
rush back to him. he anticipate with delight his meeting with 
reginald clarke. the personal attractive of the man had never seem 
so powerful to ernest as when he had not heard from him for some time. 
reginald's letters were always brief. "professional writers," he was 
wont to say, "cannot afford to put fine feeling into their private 
correspondence. they must turn it into copy." he long to sit with the 
master in the studio when the last ray of the daylight were tremulous 
fall through the stain window, and to discuss far into the 
darken night philosophy young and old. he long for reginald's 
voice, his little mannerisms, the very perfume of his rooms. 

there also was a deluge of letters likely to await him in his apartment. 
for in his hurried departure he had purposely left his friends in the 
dark as to his whereabouts. only to jack he had drop a little note 
the day after his meeting with ethel. 

he earnest hope to find reginald at home, though it was well nigh ten 
o'clock in the evening, and he cursed the "rapid transit" for its 
inability to annihilate space and time. it is indeed disconcert to 
think how many months, if not years, of our earthly sojourn the dwell 
in city spend in transportation conveyance that must be set down as a 
dead loss in the ledger of life. a nervous impatience against things 
material overcame ernest in the subway. it is ever the mere stupid 
obstacle of matter that weight down the wings of the soul and prevent 
it from soar upward to the sun. 

when at last he had reach the house, he learned from the hall-boy that 
clarke had gone out. ruffle in temper he enter his rooms and went 
over his mail. there were letters from editor with commission that he 
could not afford to reject. everywhere newspaper and magazine open 
their yawn mouth to swallow up what time he had. he realise at once 
that he would have to postpone the writing of his novel for several 
weeks, if not longer. 

among the letters was one from jack. it bore the postmark of a little 
place in the adirondack where he was stay with his parents. ernest 
open the missive not without hesitation. on reading and rereade it 
the fine lines on his forehead, that would some day deepen into 
wrinkles, became quite pronounced and a look of displeasure darken his 
face. something was wrong with jack, a slight change that defy 
analysis. their soul were out of tune. it might only be a passing 
disturbance; perhaps it was his own fault. it pained him, nevertheless. 
somehow it seem of late that jack was no long able to follow the 
vagary of his mind. only one person in the world possessed a similar 
mental vision, only one seem to understand what he said and what he 
left unsaid. reginald clarke, being a man and poet, read in his soul as 
in an open book. ethel might have understood, had not love, like a 
cloud, laid itself between her eyes and the page. 

it was with exultation that ernest heard near midnight the click of 
reginald's key in the door. he found him unchanged, completely, 
radiant himself. reginald possessed the psychic power of undress 
the soul, of seeing it before him in primal nakedness. although no word 
was said of ethel brandenbourg except the mere mention of her presence 
in atlantic city, ernest intuitive knew that reginald was aware of the 
transformation that absence had wrought in him. in the presence of this 
man he could be absolutely himself, without shame or fear of 
mis-understanding; and by a strange metamorphosis, all his affection 
for ethel and jack went out for the time being to reginald clarke. 




xvii 


the next day ernest wrote a letter of more or less superficial 
tender to ethel. she had wound his pride by prove victorious in 
the end over his passion and hers; besides, he was in the throes of 
work. when after the third day no answer came, he was inclined to feel 
aggrieved. it was plain now that she had not care for him in the least, 
but had simply play with him for lack of another toy. a flush of shame 
rose to his cheek at the thought. he began to analyse his own emotions, 
and stunned, if not stabbed, his passion step by step. work was calling 
to him. it was that which gave life its meaning, not the love of a 
season. how far away, how unreal, she now seem to him. yes, she was 
right, he had not care deeply; and his novel, too, would be written 
only _at_ her. it was the heroine of his story that absorb his 
interest, not the living prototype. 

once in a conversation with reginald he touched upon the subject. 
reginald held that modern taste no long permit even the 
photographer to portray life as it is, but insist upon an individual 
visualisation. "no man," he remarked, "was ever translate bodily into 
fiction. in contradiction to life, art is a process of artificial 
selection." 

bearing in mind this motive, ernest went to work to mould from the 
material in hand a new ethel, more real than life. unfortunately he 
found little time to devote to his novel. it was only when, after a good 
day's work, a pile of copy for a magazine lay on his desk, that he could 
think of concentrate his mind upon "leontina." the result was that 
when he went to bed his imagination was busy with the plan of his book, 
and the creature of his own brain laid their finger on his eyelid so 
that he could not sleep. 

when at last sheer weary overcame him, his mind was still at work, 
not in orderly sequence but along trail monstrous and grotesque. 
hobgoblin seem to steal through the hall, and leer incubi 
oppress his soul with terrible burdens. in the morning he awoke 
unrested. the tan vanish from his face and little lines appear in 
the corner of his mouth. it was as if his nervous vitality were sap 
from him in some unaccountable way. he became excited, hysterical. often 
at night when he wrote his pot-boilers for the magazines, fear stood 
behind his seat, and only the buzz of the elevator outside brought 
him back to himself. 

in one of his morbid mood he wrote a sonnet which he show to reginald 
after the latter's return from a short trip out of town. reginald read 
it, look at the boy with a curious, lurk expression. 

_o gentle sleep, turn not thy face away, 
but place thy finger on my brow, and take 
all burthen from me and all dream that ache; 
upon mine eyes a cool balsam lay, 
seeing i am aweary of the day. 
but, lo! thy lip are ashen and they quake. 
what spectral vision see thou that can shake 
thy sweet composure, and thy heart dismay? 
perhaps some murderer's cruel eye agleam 
is fixed upon me, or some monstrous dream 
might bring such fearful guilt upon the head 
of my unvigilant soul as would arouse 
the borgian snake from her envenom bed, 
or startle nero in his golden house._ 

"good stuff," reginald remarked, lay down the manuscript; "when did 
you write it?" 

"the night when you were out of town," ernest rejoined. 

"i see," reginald replied. 

there was something startle in his intonation that at once arouse 
ernest's attention. 

"what do you see?" he ask quickly. 

"nothing," reginald replied, with immovable calm, "only that your state 
of nerves is still far from satisfactory." 




xviii 


after ernest's departure ethel brandenbourg's heart was sway hither 
and thither in a hurricane of conflict feelings. before she had time 
to gain an emotional equilibrium, his letter had hurl her back into 
chaos. a false ring somewhere in ernest's words, reecho with an 
ever-increasing volume of sound, stifle the voice of love. his jewelled 
sentence glittered, but left her cold. they lack that spontaneous 
which render even simple and hackeneye phrase wonderful and unique. 
ethel clearly realise that her hold upon the boy's imagination had been 
a fleeting midsummer night's charm, and that a word from reginald's lip 
had broken the potency of her spell. she almost saw the shadow of 
reginald's visage hover over ernest's letter and leer at her from 
between the lines in sinister triumph. finally reason came and 
whisper to her that it was extremely unwise to give her heart into the 
keeping of a boy. his love, she knew, would have been exacting, 
irritate at times. he would have ask her to sympathise with every 
phase of his life, and would have expect active interest on her part 
in much that she had done with long ago. thus, untruth would have stolen 
into her life and embitter it. when mate are unequal, love must paint 
its cheek and, in certain mood at least, hide its face under a mask. 
its lip may be honeyed, but it bring fret and sorrow in its train. 

these things she told herself over and over again while she pen a 
cool and calculating answer to ernest's letter. she rewrote it many 
times, and every time it became more difficult to reply. at last she put 
her letter aside for a few days, and when it fell again into her hand it 
seem so unnatural and strained that she destroy it. 

thus several week had passed, and ernest no long exclusively occupy 
her mind when, one day early in september, while glancing over a 
magazine, she came upon his name in the table of contents. once more 
she saw the boy's wistful face before her, and a tremble something 
stir in her heart. her hand shook as she cut the pages, and a mist of 
tear cloud her vision as she attempt to read his poem. it was a 
piece of sombre brilliance. like black-draped monk half craze with 
mystic devotion, the poet's thought flit across the page. it was the 
wail of a soul that feel reason slip from it and behold madness 
rise over its life like a great pale moon. a strange unrest emanate 
from it and took possession of her. and again, with an insight that was 
prophetic, she distinct recognise behind the vague fear that had 
haunt the poet the figure of reginald clarke. 

a half-forgotten dream, struggle to consciousness, stagger her by 
its vividness. she saw clarke as she had seen him in days gone by, 
grotesque transform into a slimy sea-thing, whose hungry mouth shut 
suck upon her and whose thousand tentacle encircle her form. she 
closed her eyes in horror at the reminiscence. and in that moment it 
became clear to her that she must take into her hand the salvation of 
ernest field from the clutches of the malign power that had 
mysterious envelop his life. 




xix 


the summer was brief, and already by the middle of september many had 
return to the pleasure of urban life. ethel was among the 
first-comers; for, after her resolve to enter the life of the young poet 
once more, it would have been impossible for her to stay away from the 
city much longer. her plan was all ready. before attempt to see 
ernest she would go to meet reginald and implore him to free the boy 
from his hideous spell. an element of curiosity unconscious enter 
her determination. when, years ago, she and clarke had parted, the man 
had seemed, for once, greatly disturbed and had promised, in his 
agitation, that some day he would communicate to her what would 
exonerate him in her eyes. she had answer that all words between them 
were purposeless, and that she hope never to see his face again. the 
experience that the years had brought to her, instead of elucidate 
the mystery of reginald's personality, had, on the contrary, made his 
behaviour appear more and more unaccountable. she had more than once 
caught herself wish to meet him again and to analyse dispassionate 
the puzzle influence he had exert upon her. and she could at last 
view him dispassionately; there was triumph in that. she was dim aware 
that something had pass from her, something by which he had held her, 
and without which his magnetism was unable to play upon her. 

so when walkham sent her an invitation to one of his artistic "at homes" 
she accepted, in the hope of meeting reginald. it was his frequent 
of walkham's house that had for several years effectively barred her 
foot from crossing the threshold. it was with a very strange feeling she 
greet the many familiar face at walkham's now; and when, toward ten 
o'clock, reginald entered, polite bowing in answer to the welcome from 
all sides, her heart beat in her like a drum. but she calm herself, 
and, catching his eye, so arrange it that early in the evening they 
met in an alcove of the drawing-room. 

"it was inevitable," reginald said. "i expect it." 

"yes," she replied, "we were bound to meet." 

like a great rush of water, memory came back to her. he was still 
horrible fascinating as of old--only she was no long susceptible to 
his fascination. he had change somewhat in those years. the lines about 
his mouth had grown hard and a steel-like look had come into his eyes. 
only for a moment, as he look at her, a flash of tender seem to 
come back to them. then he said, with a touch of sadness: "why should 
the first word between us be a lie?" 

ethel made no answer. 

reginald look at her half in wonder and said: "and is your love for 
the boy so great that it overcame your hate of me?" 

ah, he knew! she winced. 

"he has told you?" 

"not a word." 

there was something superhuman in his power of penetration. why should 
she wear a mask before him, when his eyes, like the eyes of god, pierce 
to the core of her being? 

"no," she replied, "it is not love, but compassion for him." 

"compassion?" 

"yes, compassion for your victim." 

"you mean?" 

"reginald!" 

"i am all ear." 

"i implore you." 

"speak." 

"you have ruin one life." 

he raise his eyebrow derogatively. 

"yes," she continue fiercely, "ruined it! is not that enough?" 

"i have never wilful ruin any one's life." 

"you have ruin mine." 

"wilfully?" 

"how else shall i explain your conduct?" 

"i warn you." 

"warning, indeed! the warning that the snake give to the sparrow 
helpless under its gaze." 

"ah, but who tell you that the snake is to blame? is it not rather the 
occult power that prescribe with blood on brazen scroll the law of our 
being?" 

"this is no solace to the sparrow. but whatever may be said, let us drop 
the past. let us consider the present. i beg of you, leave this boy--let 
him develop without your attempt to stifle the life in him or 
impress upon it the stamp of your alien mind." 

"ethel," he protested, "you are unjust. if you knew--" then an idea 
seem to take hold of him. he look at her curiously. 

"what if i knew?" she asked. 

"you shall know," he said, simply. "are you strong?" 

"strong to withstand anything at your hand. there is nothing that you 
can give me, nothing that you can take away." 

"no," he remarked, "nothing. yes, you have changed. still, when i look 
upon you, the ghost of the past seem to rise like live things." 

"we both have changed. we meet now upon equal grounds. you are no 
long the idol i made of you." 

"don't you think that to the idol this might be a relief, not a 
humiliation? it is a terrible torture to sit in state with lip 
eternal shut. sometimes there come over the most reticent of us a 
desire to break through the eternal lonely that surround the soul. 
it is this feeling that prompt madmen to tear off their clothes and 
exhibit their naked in the market-place. it's madness on my part, or 
a whim, or i don't know what; but it please me that you should know the 
truth." 

"you promise me long ago that i should." 

"to-day i will redeem my promise, and i will tell you another thing that 
you will find hard to believe." 

"and that is?" 

"that i love you." 

ethel smile a little sceptically. "you have love often." 

"no," he replied. "loved, seriously loved, i have, only once." 




xx 


they were sitting in a little italy restaurant where they had often, 
in the old days, linger late into the night over a glass of lacrimæ 
christi. but no pale ghost of the past rose from the wine. only a 
wriggle something, with serpent eyes, that sent cold shivers down her 
spine and held her speechless and entranced. 

when their order had been fill and the waiter had post himself at a 
respectful distance, reginald began--at first leisurely, a man of the 
world. but as he proceed a strange exultation seem to possess him 
and from his eyes leap the flame of the mystic. 

"you must pardon me," he commenced, "if i monopolise the conversation, 
but the revelation i have to make are of such a nature that i may well 
claim your attention. i will start with my earliest childhood. you 
remember the picture of me that was taken when i was five?" 

she remembered, indeed. each detail of his life was deep engraven on 
her mind. 

"at that time," he continued, "i was not held to be particularly bright. 
the reason was that my mind, being pre-eminently and extraordinarily 
receptive, need a stimulus from without. the moment i was sent to 
school, however, a curious metamorphosis took place in me. i may say 
that i became at once the most brilliant boy in my class. you know that 
to this day i have always been the most striking figure in any circle in 
which i have ever moved." 

ethel nod assent. silent watch the speaker, she saw a gleam of 
the truth from afar, but still very distant and very dim. 

reginald lift the glass against the light and gulp its contents. 
then in a lower voice he recommenced: "like the chameleon, i have the 
power of absorbing the colour of my environment." 

"do you mean that you have the power of absorbing the special virtue 
of other people?" she interjected. 

"that is exactly what i mean." 

"oh!" she cried, for in a heart-beat many things had become clear to 
her. for the first time she realised, still vague but with increase 
vividness, the hidden cause of her ruin and, still more plainly, the 
horrible danger of ernest fielding. 

he notice her agitation, and a look of psychological curiosity came 
into his eyes. 

"ah, but that is not all," he observed, smilingly. "that is nothing. we 
all possess that faculty in a degree. the secret of my strength is my 
ability to reject every element that is harmful or inessential to the 
completion of my self. this did not come to me easily, nor without a 
struggle. but now, look back upon my life, many things become 
transparent that were obscure even to me at the time. i can now follow 
the fine-spun thread in the intricate web of my fate, and discover in 
the wilderness of mesh a design, awful and grand planned." 

his voice shook with conviction, as he utter these words. there was 
something strange gruesome in this man. it was thus that she had 
picture to herself the high-priest of some terrible and mysterious 
religion, demanding a human sacrifice to appease the hunger of his god. 
she was fascinate by the spell of his personality, and listen with a 
feeling not far remove from awe. but reginald sudden change his tone 
and proceed in a more conversational manner. 

"the first friend i ever care for was a boy marvellous endow for 
the study of mathematics. at the time of our first meeting at school, i 
was unable to solve even the simplest algebra problem. but we had 
been together only for half a month, when we exchange parts. it was i 
who was the mathematics genius now, whereas he became hopeless dull 
and stutter through his recitation only with a struggle that brought 
the tear to his eyes. then i discard him. heartless, you say? i have 
come to know better. have you ever taste a bottle of wine that had been 
uncork for a long time? if you have, you have probably found it 
flat--the essence was gone, evaporated. thus it is when we care for 
people. probably--no, assuredly--there is some principle prison in 
their souls, or in the winding of their brains, which, when escaped, 
leaves them insipid, unprofitable and devoid of interest to us. 
sometimes this essence--not necessarily the finest element in a man's or 
a woman's nature, but soul-stuff that we lack--disappears. in fact, it 
invariable disappears. it may be that it has been transform in the 
process of their growth; it may also be that it has utterly vanish 
by some inadvertence, or that we ourselves have absorb it." 

"then we throw them away?" ethel asked, pale, but dry-eyed. a shudder 
pass through her body and she clinch her glass nervously. at that 
moment reginald resemble a veritable prince of darkness, sinister and 
beautiful, paint by the hand of a modern master. then, for a space, he 
again became the man of the world. smile and self-possessed, he fill 
the glasses, took a long sip of the wine and resume his narrative. 

"that boy was follow by others. i absorb many useless things and 
some that were evil. i realise that i must direct my absorption 
propensities. this i did. i selected, select well. and all the time 
the terrible power of which i was only half conscious grew within me." 

"it is indeed a terrible power," she cried; "all the more terrible for 
its subtlety. had i not myself been its victim, i should not now find it 
possible to believe in it." 

"the invisible hand that smite in the dark is certainly more fearful 
than a visible foe. it is also more merciful. think how much you would 
have suffer had you been conscious of your loss." 

"still it seem even now to me that it cannot have been an utter, 
irreparable loss. there is no action without reaction. even i--even 
we--must have received from you some compensation for what you have 
taken away." 

"in the ordinary process of life the law of action and reaction is 
indeed potent. but no law is without exception. think of radium, for 
instance, with its constant and seemingly inexhaustible outflow of 
energy. it is a difficult thing to imagine, but our scientific men have 
accept it as a fact. why should we find it more difficult to conceive 
of a tremendous and infinite absorption element? i feel sure that it 
must somewhere exist. but every phenomenon in the physical world find 
its counterpart in the psychic universe. there are radium-souls that 
radiate without loss of energy, but also without increase. and there are 
souls, the reverse of radium, with unlimited absorption capacities." 

"vampire-souls," she observed, with a shudder, and her face blanched. 

"no," he said, "don't say that." and then he sudden seem to grow in 
stature. his face was ablaze, like the face of a god. 

"in every age," he replied, with solemnity, "there are giant who attain 
to a great which by natural growth no men could ever have reached. 
but in their youth a vision came to them, which they set out to seek. 
they take the stone of fancy to build them a palace in the kingdom of 
truth, project into reality dreams, monstrous and impossible. often 
they fail and, tumble from their airy heights, end a quixotic career. 
some succeed. they are the chosen. carpenter's son they are, who have 
laid down the law of a world for millenium to come; or simple 
corsicans, before whose eagle eye have quake the kingdom of the earth. 
but to accomplish their mission they need a will of iron and the wit of 
a hundred men. and from the iron they take the strength, and from a 
hundred men's brains they absorb their wisdom. divine missionaries, they 
appear in all department of life. in their hand is gather to-day the 
gold of the world. mighty potentate of peace and war, they unlock new 
sea and from distant continent lift the bars. single-handed, they 
accomplish what nation dare not hope; with titan stride they scale 
the stars and succeed where million fail. in art they live, the maker 
of new periods, the dreamer of new styles. they make themselves the 
vocal sun-glasses of god. home and shakespeare, hugo and balzac--they 
concentrate the disperse ray of a thousand lesser luminary in one 
singing flame that, like a giant torch, lights up humanity's path." 

she gaze at him, open-mouthed. the light had gone from his visage. he 
paused, exhausted, but even then he look the incarnation of a force no 
less terrible, no less grand. she grasp the immensity of his 
conception, but her woman's soul rebel at the horrible injustice to 
those whose light is extinguished, as hers had been, to feed an alien 
flame. and then, for a moment, she saw the pale face of ernest staring 
at her out of the wine. 

"cruel," she sobbed, "how cruel!" 

"what matter?" he asked. "their strength is taken from them, but the 
spirit of humanity, as embody in us, triumphant march on." 




xxi 


reginald's revelation were follow by a long silence, interrupt only 
by the officious of the waiter. the spell once broken, they 
exchange a number of more or less irrelevant observations. ethel's mind 
returned, again and again, to the word he had not spoken. he had said 
nothing of the immediate bearing of his monstrous power upon her own 
life and that of ernest fielding. 

at last, somewhat timidly, she approach the subject. 

"you said you love me," she remarked. 

"i did." 

"but why, then--" 

"i could not help it." 

"did you ever make the slightest attempt?" 

"in the horrible night hour i struggle against it. i even implore you 
to leave me." 

"ah, but i love you!" 

"you would not be warned, you would not listen. you stay with me, and 
slowly, surely, the creative urge went out of your life." 

"but what on earth could you find in my poor art to attract you? what 
were my pictures to you?" 

"i need them, i need you. it was a certain something, a rich colour 
effect, perhaps. and then, under your very eyes, the colour that 
vanish from your canvas reappear in my prose. my style became more 
luxurious than it had been, while you torture your soul in the vain 
attempt of calling back to your brush what was irretrievable lost." 

"why did you not tell me?" 

"you would have laugh in my face, and i could not have endure your 
laugh. besides, i always hoped, until it was too late, that i might yet 
check the mysterious power within me. soon, however, i became aware that 
it was beyond my control. the unknown god, whose instrument i am, had 
wise made it strong than me." 

"but why," retort ethel, "was it necessary to discard me, like a 
cast-off garment, like a wanton who has lost the power to please?" 

her frame shook with the remember emotion of that moment, when years 
ago he had polite told her that she was nothing to him. 

"the law of being," reginald replied, almost sadly, "the law of my 
being. i should have pity you, but the eternal reproach of your 
suffering only provoke my anger. i care less for you every day, and 
when i had absorb all of you that my growth required, you were to me 
as one dead, as a stranger you were. there was between us no further 
community of interest; henceforth, i knew, our lives must move in 
total different spheres. you remember that day when we said good-bye?" 

"you mean that day when i lay before you on my knees," she correct 
him. 

"that day i bury my last dream of personal happiness. i would have 
gladly raise you from the floor, but love was utterly gone. if i am 
tender to-day than i am wont to be, it is because you mean so much to 
me as the symbol of my renunciation. when i realise that i could not 
even save the thing i love from myself, i became harden and cruel to 
others. not that i know no kindly feeling, but no qualm of conscience 
lay their prostrate form across my path. there is nothing in life for 
me but my mission." 

his face was bath in ecstasy. the pupil were luminous, large and 
threatening. he had the look of a madman or a prophet. 

after a while ethel remarked: "but you have grown into one of the 
master-figures of the age. why not be content with that? is there no 
limit to your ambition?" 

reginald smiled: "ambition! shakespeare stop when he had reach his 
full growth, when he had exhaust the capacity of his contemporaries. i 
am not yet ready to lay down my pen and rest." 

"and will you always continue in this criminal course, a murder of 
other lives?" 

he look her calm in the face. "i do not know." 

"are you the slave of your unknown god?" 

"we are all slaves, wire-pulled marionettes: you, ernest, i. there is 
no freedom on the face of the earth nor above. the tiger that tear a 
lamb is not free, i am not free, you are not free. all that happen must 
happen; no word that is said is said in vain, in vain is raise no 
hand." 

"then," ethel retorted, eagerly, "if i attempt to wrest your victim 
from you, i should also be the tool of your god?" 

"assuredly. but i am his chosen." 

"can you--can you not set him free?" 

"i need him--a little longer. then he is yours." 

"but can you not, if i beg you again on my knees, at least loosen his 
chain before he is utterly ruined?" 

"it is beyond my power. if i could not rescue you, whom i loved, what in 
heaven or on earth can save him from his fate? besides, he will not be 
utterly ruined. it is only a part of him that i absorb. in his soul are 
chord that i have not touched. they may vibrate one day, when he has 
gather new strength. you, too, would have spare yourself much pain 
had you striven to attain success in different fields--not where i had 
garner the harvest of a lifetime. it is only a portion of his talent 
that i take from him. the rest i cannot harm. why should he bury that 
remainder?" 

his eyes stray through the window to the firmament, as if to say that 
words could no more bend his indomitable will than alter the changeless 
course of the stars. 

ethel had half-forgotten the wrong she herself had suffer at his 
hands. he could not be measured by ordinary standards, this dazzle 
madman, whose disease will-power had assume such uncanny proportions. 
but here a young life was at stake. in her mind's eye she saw reginald 
crush between his relentless hand the delicate soul of ernest fielding, 
as a magnificent carnivorous flower might close its glorious petal upon 
a fly. 

love, all conquer love, well up in her. she would fight for ernest 
as a tiger cat fight for its young. she would place herself in the way 
of the awful force that had shatter her own aspirations, and save, at 
any cost, the brilliant boy who did not love her. 




xxii 


the last ray of the late afternoon sun fell slant through ernest's 
window. he was lie on his couch, in a leaden, death-like slumber that, 
for the moment at least, was not even perturb by the presence of 
reginald clarke. 

the latter was standing at the boy's bedside, calm, unmoved as ever. the 
excitement of his conversation with ethel had left no trace on the 
chisel contour of his forehead. smiling fastening an orchid of an 
indefinable purple tint in his evening coat, radiant, buoyant with life, 
he look down upon the sleeper. then he pass his hand over ernest's 
forehead, as if to wipe off bead of sweat. at the touch of his hand the 
boy stir uneasily. when it was not withdrawn his countenance twitch 
in pain. he moan as men moan under the influence of some anæsthetic, 
without possess the power to break through the narrow partition that 
separate them from death on the one side and from consciousness on the 
other. at last a sigh struggle to his seemingly paralyse lips, then 
another. finally the babble became articulate. 

"for god's sake," he cried, in his sleep, "take that hand away!" 

and all at once the benignant smile on reginald's features was change 
to a look of savage fierceness. he no long resemble the man of 
culture, but a disappointed, snarl beast of prey. he took his hand 
from ernest's forehead and retired cautious through the half-open 
door. 

hardly had he disappear when ernest awoke. for a moment he look 
around, like a hunt animal, then sigh with relief and bury his 
head in his hand. at that moment a knock at the door was heard, and 
reginald re-entered, calm as before. 

"i declare," he exclaimed, "you have certainly been sleep the sleep 
of the just." 

"it isn't laziness," ernest replied, look up rather pleased at the 
interruption. "but i've a splitting headache." 

"perhaps those nap are not good for your health." 

"probably. but of late i have frequent found it necessary to exact 
from the day-hours the sleep which the night refuse me. i suppose it is 
all due to indigestion, as you have suggested. the stomach is the source 
of all evil." 

"it is also the source of all good. the greece made it the seat of the 
soul. i have always claim that the most important item in a great 
poet's biography is an exact reproduction of his menu." 

"true, a man who eats a heavy beefsteak for breakfast in the morning is 
incapable of writing a sonnet in the afternoon." 

"yes," reginald added, "we are what we eat and what our forefather have 
eaten before us. i ascribe the stale of america poetry to the 
griddle-cakes of our puritan ancestors. i am sorry we cannot go deep 
into the subject at present. but i have an invitation to dinner where i 
shall study, experimentally, the influence of france sauce on my 
versification." 

"good-bye." 

"au revoir." and, with a wave of the hand, reginald left the room. 

when the door had closed behind him, ernest's thought took a more 
serious turn. the tone of light banter in which the preceding 
conversation had taken place had been assume on his part. for the last 
few week evil dream had torture his sleep and cast their shadow upon 
his waking hours. they had ever increase in reality, in intensity and 
in hideousness. even now he could see the long, taper finger that 
every night were grope in the winding of his brain. it was a 
well-formed, manicure hand that seem to reach under his skull, 
careful feeling its way through the myriad convolution where thought 
resides. 

and, oh, the agony of it all! a human mind is not a thing of stone, but 
alive, horrible alive to pain. what was it those finger sought, what 
mysterious treasures, what jewel hidden in the under-layer of his 
consciousness? his brain was like a human gold-mine, quake under the 
blow of the pick and the tread of the miner. the miner! ah, the miner! 
ceaselessly, thoroughly, relentlessly, he open vein after vein and 
wrest untold riches from the quiver ground; but each vein was a 
live vein and each nugget of gold a thought! 

no wonder the boy was a nervous wreck. whenever a tremulous nascent idea 
was formulate itself, the dream-hand clutch it and took it away, 
brutal sever the fine thread that bind thought to thought. and 
when the morning came, how his head ached! it was not an acute pain, but 
dull, heavy, incessant. 

these sensations, ernest frequent told himself, were morbid fancies. 
but then, the monomaniac who imagine that his arms have been mangle or 
cut from his body, might as well be without arms. mind can annihilate 
obstacles. it can also create them. psychology was no unfamiliar ground 
to ernest, and it was not difficult for him to seek in some casual 
suggestion an explanation for his delusion, the fixed notion that 
haunt him day and night. but he also realize that to explain a 
phenomenon is not to explain it away. the man who analyse his emotion 
cannot wholly escape them, and the shadow of fear--primal, inexplicable 
fear--may darken at moments of weakness the life of the subtlest 
psychologist and the clearest thinker. 

he had never spoken to reginald of his terrible nightmares. coming on 
the heel of the fancy that he, ernest, had written "the princess with 
the yellow veil," a fancy that, by the way, had again possessed him of 
late, this new delusion would certainly arouse suspicion as to his 
sanity in reginald's mind. he would probably send him to a sanitarium; 
he certainly would not keep him in the house. benefice itself in all 
other things, his host was not to be trifle with in any matter that 
interfere with his work. he would act swift and without mercy. 

for the first time in many days ernest thought of abel felton. poor boy! 
what had become of him after he had been turn from the house? he would 
not wait for any one to tell him to pack his bundle. but then, that was 
impossible; reginald was fond of him. 

sudden ernest's meditation were interrupt by a noise at the outer 
door. a key was turn in the lock. it must be he--but why so soon? what 
could have brought him back at this hour? he open the door and went 
out into the hall to see what had happened. the figure that he beheld 
was certainly not the person expected, but a woman, from whose shoulder 
a theatre-cloak fell in graceful folds,--probably a visitor for 
reginald. ernest was about to withdraw discreetly, when the electric 
light that was burning in the hallway fell upon her face and illumine 
it. 

then indeed surprise overcame him. "ethel," he cried, "is it you?" 




xxiii 


ernest conduct ethel brandenbourg to his room and help her to remove 
her cloak. 

while he was place the garment upon the back of a chair, she slip a 
little key into her hand-bag. he look at her with a question in his 
eyes. 

"yes," she replied, "i kept the key; but i had not dream that i would 
ever again cross this threshold." 

meanwhile it had grown quite dark. the reflection of the street lantern 
without dim lit the room, and through the twilight fantastic shadow 
seem to dance. 

the perfume of her hair pervade the room and fill the boy's heart 
with romance. tender long suppress call with a thousand voices. 
the hour, the strange and unexpected of her visit, perhaps even 
a boy's pardonable vanity, rouse passion from its slumber and once 
again wrought in ernest's soul the miracle of love. his arm encircle 
her neck and his lip stammer blind, sweet, crazy and caress 
things. 

"turn on the light," she pleaded. 

"you were not always so cruel." 

"no matter, i have not come to speak of love." 

"why, then, have you come?" 

ernest felt a little awkward, disappointed, as he utter these words. 

what could have induce her to come to his rooms? he loosen his hold 
on her and did as she asked. 

how pale she look in the light, how beautiful! surely, she had 
sorrow for him; but why had she not answer his letter? yes, why? 

"your letter?" she smile a little sadly. "surely you did not expect me 
to answer that?" 

"why not?" he had again approach her and his lip were close to hers. 
"why not? i have yearn for you. i love you." 

his breath intoxicate her; it was like a subtle perfume. still she did 
not yield. 

"you love me now--you did not love me then. the music of your words was 
cold--machine-made, strained and superficial. i shall not answer, i told 
myself: in his heart he has forgotten you. i did not then realise that a 
dangerous force had possessed your life and crush in your mind every 
image but its own." 

"i don't understand." 

"do you think i would have come here if it were a light matter? no, i 
tell you, it is a matter of life and death to you, at least as an 
artist." 

"what do you mean by that?" 

"have you done a stroke of work since i last saw you?" 

"yes, let me see, surely, magazine articles and a poem." 

"that is not what i want to know. have you accomplished anything big? 
have you grown since this summer? how about your novel?" 

"i--i have almost finished it in my mind, but i have found no chance to 
begin with the actual writing. i was sick of late, very sick." 

no doubt of it! his face was pinched and pale, and the lines about the 
mouth were curious contorted, like those of a man suffering from a 
painful internal disease. 

"tell me," she ventured, "do you ever miss anything?" 

"do you mean--are there thieves?" 

"thieves! against thief one can protect oneself." 

he stare at her wildly, half-frightened, in anticipation of some 
dreadful revelation. his dream! his dream! that hand! could it be more 
than a dream? god! his lip quivered. 

ethel observe his agitation and continue more quietly, but with the 
same insistence: "have you ever had ideas, plan that you began without 
have strength to complete them? have you had glimpse of vocal vision 
that seem to vanish no soon than seen? did it ever seem to you as if 
some mysterious and superior will brutal interfere with the workings 
of your brain?" 

did it seem so to him! he himself could not have state more plainly 
the experience of the last few months. each word fell from her lip like 
the blow of a hammer. shivering, he put his arm around her, seek 
solace, not love. this time she did not repulse him and, trustingly, as 
a child confide to his mother, he depict to her the suffering that 
harrow his life and made it a hell. 

as she listened, indignation cloud her forehead, while rising tear of 
anger and of love weigh down her lashes. she could bear the pitiful 
sight no longer. 

"child," she cried, "do you know who your tormentor is?" 

and like a flash the truth pass from her to him. a sudden intimate 
told him what her words had still concealed. 

"don't! for christ's sake, do not pronounce his name!" he sobbed. "do 
not breathe it. i could not endure it. i should go mad." 




xxiv 


very quietly, with difficulty restrain her own emotion so as not to 
excite him further, ethel had related to ernest the story of her 
remarkable interview with reginald clarke. in the long silence that 
ensued, the wings of his soul brush against hers for the first time, 
and love by a thousand tender chain of common suffering weld their 
being into one. 

caressing the ivory of her finger pass through the gold of his hair 
and over his brow, as if to banish the demon-eyes that stare at him 
across the hideous space of the past. in a rush a thousand incident 
came back to him, mute witness of a damning truth. his play, the 
dream that torment him, his own inability to concentrate his mind 
upon his novel which hitherto he had ascribe to nervous disease--all, 
pile fact on fact, became one monstrous monument of reginald clarke's 
crime. at last ernest understood the parting words of abel felton and 
the look in ethel's eye on the night when he had first link his fate 
with the other man's. walkham's experience, too, and reginald's remark 
on the bust of shakespeare and balzac unmistakable pointed toward the 
new and horrible spectre that ethel's revelation had raise in place of 
his host. 

and then, again, the other reginald appeared, crown with the lyric 
wreath. from his lip golden cadence fell, sweet than the smell of 
many flower or the sound of a silver bell. he was once more the divine 
master, whose godlike features bore no trace of malice and who had 
raise him to a place very near his heart. 

"no," he cried, "it is impossible. it's all a dream, a horrible 
nightmare." 

"but he has himself confessed it," she interjected. 

"perhaps he has spoken in symbols. we all absorb to some extent other 
men's ideas, without rob them and wreck their thought-life. 
reginald may be unscrupulous in the use of his power of impress upon 
other the stamp of his master-mind. so was shakespeare. no, no, no! 
you are mistaken; we were both delude for the moment by his picturesque 
account of a common, not even a discreditable, fact. he may himself have 
play with the idea, but surely he cannot have been serious." 

"and your own experience, and abel felton's and mine--can they, too, be 
dismiss with a shrug of the shoulder?" 

"but, come to think of it, the whole theory seem absurd. it is 
unscientific. it is not even a case of mesmerism. if he had said that he 
hypnotise his victims, the matter would assume a total different 
aspect. i admit that something is wrong somewhere, and that the home of 
reginald clarke is no healthful abode for me. but you must also remember 
that probably we are both unstrung to the point of hysteria." 

but to ethel his words carry no conviction. 

"you are still under his spell," she cried, anxiously. 

a little shaken in his confidence, ernest resumed: "reginald is utterly 
incapable of such an action, even grant that he possessed the 
terrible power of which you speak. a man of his splendid resources, a 
literary midas at whose very touch every word turn into gold, is under 
no necessity to prey on the thought of others. circumstances, i admit, 
are suspicious. but in the light of common day this fanciful theory 
shrivel into nothing. any court of law would reject our evidence as 
madness. it is too utterly fantastic, utterly alien to any human 
experience." 

"is it though?" ethel reply with peculiar intonation. 

"why, what do you mean?" 

"surely," she answered, "you must know that in the legend of every 
nation we read of men and women who were call vampires. they are 
beings, not always wholly evil, whom every night some mysterious impulse 
leads to steal into unguarded bedchambers, to suck the blood of the 
sleeper and then, have wax strong on the life of their victims, 
cautious to retreat. thence come it that their lip are very red. it 
is even said that they can find no rest in the grave, but return to 
their former haunt long after they are believe to be dead. those whom 
they visit, however, pine away for no apparent reason. the physician 
shake their wise head and speak of consumption. but sometimes, ancient 
chronicle assure us, the people's suspicion were aroused, and under 
the leadership of a good priest they went in solemn procession to the 
grave of the person suspected. and on opening the tomb it was found 
that their coffin had rot away and the flower in their hair were 
black. but their body were white and whole; through no empty socket 
crept the vermin, and their suck lip were still moist with a little 
blood." 

ernest was carry away in spite of himself by her account, which 
vivid resemble his own experience. still he would not give in. 

"all this is impressive. i admit it is very impressive. but you yourself 
speak of such story as legends. they are unfounded upon any tangible 
fact, and you cannot expect a man school in modern science to admit, 
as have any possible bearing upon his life, the crude belief of the 
middle ages!" 

"why not?" she responded. "our scientist have prove true the wildest 
theory of mediæval scholars. the transmute of metal seem to-day 
no long an idle speculation, and radium has transform into potential 
reality the dream of perpetual motion. the fundamental notions of 
mathematics are being undermined. one school of philosopher claim that 
the number of angle in a triangle is equal to more than two right 
angles; another propound that it is less. even great scientist who 
have studied the soul of nature are turning to spiritism. the world is 
overcome the shallow scepticism of the nineteenth century. life has 
become once more wonderful and very mysterious. but it also seem that, 
with the miracle of the old days, their terrors, their nightmare and 
their monster have come back in a modern guise." 

ernest became even more thoughtful. "yes," he observed, "there is 
something in what you say." then, pace the room nervously, he 
exclaimed: "and still i find it impossible to believe your explanation. 
reginald a vampire! it seem so ludicrous. if you had told me that such 
creature exist somewhere, far away, i might have discuss the matter; 
but in this great city, in the shadow of the flatiron building--no!" 

she reply with warmth: "yet they exist--always have existed. not only 
in the middle ages, but at all times and in all regions. there is no 
nation but has some record of them, in one form or another. and don't 
you think if we find a thought, no matter how absurd it may seem to us, 
that has ever occupy the mind of men--if we find, i say, such a 
perennial recurrent thought, are we not justified in assume that it 
must have some basis in the actual experience of mankind?" 

ernest's brow became very clouded, and infinite numbers of hidden 
premature wrinkle began to show. how wan he look and how frail! he 
was as one lost in a labyrinth in which he saw no light, convinced 
against his will, or rather, against his scientific conviction, that she 
was not wholly mistaken. 

"still," he observe triumphantly, "your vampire suck blood; but 
reginald, if vampire he be, prey upon the soul. how can a man suck 
from another man's brain a thing as intangible, as quintessential as 
thought?" 

"ah," she replied, "you forget, thought is more real than blood!" 




xxv 


only three hour had pass since ethel had startle ernest from his 
sombre reveries, but within this brief space their love had mature as 
if each hour had been a year. the pallor had vanish from his cheek 
and the restive from his eyes. the intoxicate of her presence had 
rekindle the light of his countenance and given him strength to combat 
the mighty forces embody in reginald clarke. the child in him had made 
room for the man. he would not hear of surrender without a struggle, 
and ethel felt sure she might leave his fate in his own hand. love had 
lent him a coat of mail. he was warned, and would not succumb. still she 
made one more attempt to persuade him to leave the house at once with 
her. 

"i must go now," she said. "will you not come with me, after all? i am 
so afraid to think of you still here." 

"no, dear," he replied. "i shall not desert my post. i must solve the 
riddle of this man's life; and if, indeed, he is the thing he seem to 
be, i shall attempt to wrest from him what he has stolen from me. i 
speak of my unwritten novel." 

"do not attempt to oppose him openly. you cannot resist him." 

"be assured that i shall be on my guard. i have in the last few hour 
live through so much that make life worth living, that i would not 
wanton expose myself to any danger. still, i cannot go without 
certainty--cannot, if there is some truth in our fears, leave the best 
of me behind." 

"what are you plan to do?" 

"my play--i am sure now that it is mine--i cannot take from him; that is 
irretrievable lost. he has read it to his circle and prepared for its 
publication. and, no matter how firm convinced you or i may be of his 
strange power, no one would believe our testimony. they would pronounce 
us mad. perhaps we _are_ mad!" 

"no; we are not mad; but it is mad for you to stay here," she asserted. 

"i shall not stay here one minute long than is absolutely essential. 
within a week i shall have conclusive proof of his guilt or innocence." 

"how will you go about it?" 

"his writing table--" 

"ah!" 

"yes, perhaps i can discover some note, some indication, some proof--" 

"it's a dangerous game." 

"i have everything to gain." 

"i wish i could stay here with you," she said. "have you no friend, no 
one whom you could trust in this delicate matter?" 

"why, yes--jack." 

a shadow pass over her face. 

"do you know," she said, "i have a feeling that you care more for him 
than for me?" 

"nonsense," he said, "he is my friend, you, you--immeasurably more." 

"are you still as intimate with him as when i first met you?" 

"not quite; of late a trouble something, like a thin veil, seem to 
have pass between us. but he will come when i call him. he will not 
fail me in my hour of need." 

"when can he be here?" 

"in two or three days." 

"meanwhile be very careful. above all, lock your door at night." 

"i will not only lock, but barricade it. i shall try with all my power 
to elucidate this mystery without, however, expose myself to needless 
risks." 

"i will go, then. kiss me good-bye." 

"may i not take you to the car?" 

"you had better not." 

at the door she turn back once more. "write me every day, or call me 
up on the telephone." 

he straighten himself, as if to convince her of his strength. yet when 
at last the door had closed behind her, his courage forsook him for a 
moment. and, if he had not been ashamed to appear a weakling before the 
woman he loved, who know if any power on earth could have kept him in 
that house where from every corner a secret seem to lurk! 

there was a misgiving, too, in the woman's heart as she left the boy 
behind,--a prey to the occult power that, seek expression in multiple 
activities, has made and unmade emperors, prophets and poets. 

as she step into a street car she saw from afar, as in a vision, the 
face of reginald clarke. it seem very white and hungry. there was no 
human kindness in it--only a threat and a sneer. 




xxvi 


for over an hour ernest pace up and down his room, wildly excited by 
ethel's revelations. it require an immense amount of self-control for 
him to pen the following lines to jack: "i need you. come." 

after he had entrust the letter to the hall-boy, a reaction set in and 
he was able to consider the matter, if not with equanimity, at least 
with a degree of calmness. the strangest thing to him was that he could 
not bring himself to hate reginald, of whose evil influence upon his 
life he was now firm convinced. here was another shatter idol; but 
one--like the fragment of a great god-face in the desert--intensely 
fascinating, even in its ruin. then yielding to a natural impulse, 
ernest look over his photograph and at once laid hold upon the 
austere image of his master and friend. no--it was preposterous; there 
was no evil in this man. there was no trace of malice in this face, the 
face of a prophet or an inspired madman, a poet. and yet, as he 
scrutinise the picture close a curious transformation seem to take 
place in the features; a sly little line appear insinuating about 
reginald's well-formed mouth, and the serene calm of his jupiter-head 
seem to turn into the sneak smile of a thief. nevertheless, ernest was 
not afraid. his anxiety had at last assume definite shape; it was 
possible now to be on his guard. it is only invisible, incomprehensible 
fear, crouch upon us from the night, that drive sensitive nature to 
the verge of madness and transform stern warrior into cowards. 

ernest realise the necessity of postpone the propose investigate 
of reginald's papers until the morning, as it was now near eleven, and 
he expect to hear at any moment the sound of his feet at the door. 
before retiring he took a number of precautions. careful he lock the 
door to his bedroom and placed a chair in front of it. to make doubly 
sure, he fasten the handle to an exquisite china vase, a gift of 
reginald's, that at the least attempt to force an entrance from without 
would come down with a crash. 

then, although sleep seem out of the question, he went to bed. he had 
hardly touched the pillow when a leaden weight seem to fall upon his 
eyes. the day's commotion had been too much for his delicate frame. by 
force of habit he pull the cover over his ear and fell asleep. 

all night he slept heavily, and the morning was far advanced when a 
knock at the door that, at first, seem to come across an immeasurable 
distance, brought him back to himself. it was reginald's manservant 
announce that breakfast was waiting. 

ernest got up and rub his eyes. the barricade at the door at once 
brought back to his mind with startle clear the event of the 
previous evening. 

everything was as he had left it. evidently no one had attempt to 
enter the room while he slept. he could not help smile at the 
arrangement which remind him of his childhood, when he had sought by 
similar means security from burglar and bogeys. and in the broad 
daylight ethel's tale of vampire seem once more impossible and 
absurd. still, he had abundant evidence of reginald's strange influence, 
and was determined to know the truth before nightfall. her words, that 
thought is more real than blood, kept ring in his ears. if such was 
the case, he would find evidence of reginald's intellectual burglaries, 
and possibly be able to regain a part of his lost self that had been 
snatch from him by the relentless dream-hand. 

but under no circumstances could he face reginald in his present state 
of mind. he was convinced that if in the fleeting vision of a moment the 
other man's true nature should reveal itself to him, he would be so 
terribly afraid as to shriek like a maniac. so he dress particularly 
slow in the hope of avoid an encounter with his host. but fate 
thwart this hope. reginald, too, linger that morning unusually long 
over his coffee. he was just taking his last sip when ernest enter the 
room. his behaviour was of an almost bourgeois kindness. benevolence 
fairly beam from his face. but to the boy's eyes it had assume a new 
and sinister expression. 

"you are late this morning, ernest," he remark in his mildest manner. 
"have you been about town, or writing poetry? both occupation are 
equally unhealthy." as he said this he watch the young man with the 
inscrutable smile that at moments was wont to curl upon his lips. ernest 
had once liken it to the smile of mona lisa, but now he detect in it 
the suave of the hypocrite and the leer of the criminal. 

he could not endure it; he could not look upon that face any longer. his 
feet almost gave way under him, cold sweat gather on his brow, and he 
sank on a chair tremble and studious avoid the other man's gaze. 

at last reginald rose to go. it seem impossible to accuse this 
splendid impersonate of vigorous manhood of cunning and underhand 
methods, of plagiarism and of theft. as he stood there he resemble 
more than anything a beautiful tiger-cat, a wonderful thing of strength 
and will-power, indomitable and insatiate. yet who could tell whether 
this strength was not, after all, parasitic. if ethel's suspicion were 
justified, then, indeed, more had been taken from him than he could ever 
realise. for in that case it was his life-blood that circle in those 
vein and the fire of his intellect that set those lip aflame! 




xxvii 


reginald clarke had hardly left the room when ernest hasty rose from 
his seat. while it was likely that he would remain in undisturbed 
possession of the apartment the whole morning, the stake at hand was too 
great to permit of delay. 

palpitate and a little uncertain, he enter the studio where, 
scarcely a year ago, reginald clarke had bidden him welcome. nothing had 
change there since then; only in ernest's mind the room had assume an 
aspect of evil. the antinous was there and the faun and the christ-head. 
but their juxtaposition to-day partook of the nature of the blasphemous. 
the statue of shakespeare and balzac seem to frown from their 
pedestal as his finger were running through reginald's papers. he 
brush against a semblance of napoleon that was standing on the 
writing-table, so that it topple over and made a noise that weird 
re-echoed in the silence of the room. at that moment a curious family 
resemblance between shakespeare, balzac, napoleon--and reginald, 
forcibly impress itself upon his mind. it was the indisputable 
something that mark those who are chosen to give ultimate expression to 
some gigantic world-purpose. in balzac's face it was diffuse with 
kindliness, in that of napoleon sheer brutality predominated. the image 
of one who was said to be the richest man of the world also rose before 
his eyes. perhaps it was only the play of his fevered imagination, but 
he could have sworn that this man's features, too, bore the mark of 
those unoriginal, great absorption mind who, for better or for worse, 
are born to rob and rule. they seem to him monster that know neither 
justice nor pity, only the law of their being, the law of growth. 

common weapon would not avail against such forces. being one, they were 
strong than armies; nor could they be overcome in single combat. 
stealth, trickery, the outfit of the knave, were legitimate weapon in 
such a fight. in this case the end justified the means, even if the 
latter included burglary. 

after a brief and fruitless search of the desk, he attempt to force 
open a secret drawer, the presence of which he had one day accidental 
discovered. he try a number of key to no account, and was thinking of 
give up his research for the day until he had procure a skeleton 
key, when at last the lock gave way. 

the drawer disclose a large file of manuscript. ernest pause for a 
moment to draw breath. the paper rustle under his nervous fingers. and 
there--at last--his eyes lit upon a bulky bundle that bore this legend: 
"_leontina_, a novel." 

it was true, then--all, his dream, reginald's confession. and the house 
that had open its door so kindly to him was the house of a vampire! 

finally curiosity overcame his burning indignation. he attempt to 
read. the letters seem to dance before his eyes--his hand trembled. 

at last he succeeded. the words that had first roll over like drunken 
soldier now march before his vision in orderly sequence. he was 
delighted, then stunned. this was indeed authentic literature, there 
could be no doubt about it. and it was his. he was still a poet, a great 
poet. he drew a deep breath. sudden joy tremble in his heart. this 
story set down by a foreign hand had grown chapter by chapter in his 
brain. 

there were some slight changes--slight deviation from the original 
plan. a deft hand than his had retouch it here and there, but for 
all that it remain his very own. it did not belong to that thief. the 
blood well to his cheek as he utter this word that, applied to 
reginald, seem almost sacrilegious. 

he had nearly reach the last chapter when he heard steps in the 
hallway. hurried he restore the manuscript to its place, closed the 
drawer and left the room on tiptoe. 

it was reginald. but he did not come alone. someone was speak to him. 
the voice seem familiar. ernest could not make out what it said. he 
listen intent and--was it possible? jack? surely he could not yet 
have come in response to his note! what mysterious power, what dim 
presentiment of his friend's plight had led him hither? but why did he 
linger so long in reginald's room, instead of hasten to greet him? 
cautious he drew nearer. this time he caught jack's words: 

"it would be very convenient and pleasant. still, some way, i feel that 
it is not right for me, of all men, to take his place here." 

"that need not concern you," reginald deliberate replied; "the dear 
boy express the desire to leave me within a fortnight. i think he will 
go to some private sanitarium. his nerves are frightfully overstrained." 

"this seem hardly surprising after the terrible attack he had when you 
read your play." 

"that idea has since then develop into a monomania." 

"i am awfully sorry for him. i care for him much, perhaps too much. but 
i always fear that he would come to such an end. of late his letters 
have been strange unbalanced." 

"you will find him very much changed. in fact, he is no long the 
same." 

"no," said jack, "he is no long the friend i loved." 

ernest clutch for the wall. his face was contort with intense agony. 
each word was like a nail driven into his flesh. crucify upon the 
cross of his own affection by the hand he loved, all white and tremble 
he stood there. tear rush to his eyes, but he could not weep. 
dry-eyed he reach his room and threw himself upon his bed. thus he 
lay--uncomforted and alone. 




xxviii 


terrible as was his loneliness, a meeting with jack would have been more 
terrible. and, after all, it was true, a gulf had open between them. 

ethel alone could bring solace to his soul. there was a great void in 
his heart which only she could fill. he hunger for the touch of her 
hand. he long for her presence strongly, as a wanton lust for 
pleasure and as sad men crave death. 

noiseless he stole to the door so as not to arouse the attention of 
the other two men, whose every whisper pierce his heart like a dagger. 
when he came to ethel's home, he found that she had gone out for a 
breath of air. the servant usher him into the parlor, and there he 
waited, waited, wait for her. 

greatly calm by his walk, he turn the detail of clarke's 
conversation over in his mind, and the conviction grew upon him that 
the friend of his boyhood was not to blame for his course of action. 
reginald probably had encircle jack's soul with his demoniacal 
influence and single him out for another victim. that must never be. it 
was his turn to save now. he would warn his friend of the danger that 
threaten him, even if his words should be spoken into the wind. for 
reginald, with an ingenuity almost satanic, had already suggest that 
the delusion of former days had develop into a monomania, and any 
attempt on his part to warn jack would only seem to confirm this theory. 
in that case only one way was left open. he must plead with reginald 
himself, confront at all risk that snatch of souls. to-night he would 
not fall asleep. he would keep his vigil. and if reginald should 
approach his room, if in some way he felt the direful presence, he must 
speak out, threaten if need be, to save his friend from ruin. he had 
fully determined upon this course when a cry of joy from ethel, who had 
just return from her walk, interrupt his reverie. but her glad 
change to anxiety when she saw how pale he was. ernest recount to 
her the happening of the day, from the discovery of his novel in 
reginald's desk to the conversation which he had accidental overheard. 
he notice that her features brighten as he drew near the end of his 
tale. 

"was your novel finished?" she sudden asked. 

"i think so." 

"then you are out of danger. he will want nothing else of you. but you 
should have taken it with you." 

"i had only sufficient presence of mind to slip it back into the drawer. 
to-morrow i shall simply demand it." 

"you will do nothing of the kind. it is in his handwriting, and you have 
no legal proof that it is yours. you must take it away secretly. and he 
will not dare to reclaim it." 

"and jack?" 

she had quite forgotten jack. women are invariable selfish for those 
they love. 

"you must warn him," she replied. 

"he would laugh at me. however, i must speak to reginald." 

"it is of no avail to speak to him. at least, you must not do so before 
you have obtain the manuscript. it would unnecessary jeopardise our 
plans." 

"and after?" 

"after, perhaps. but you must not expose yourself to any danger." 

"no, dear," he said, and kiss her; "what danger is there, provided i 
keep my wit about me? he steal upon men only in their sleep and in the 
dark." 

"be careful, nevertheless." 

"i shall. in fact, i think he is not at home at this moment. if i go now 
i may be able to get hold of the manuscript and hide it before he 
returns." 

"i cannot but tremble to think of you in that house." 

"you shall have no more reason to tremble in a day or two." 

"shall i see you to-morrow?" 

"i don't think so. i must go over my papers and things so as to be ready 
at any moment to leave the house." 

"and then?" 

"then--" 

he took her in his arms and look long and deep into her eyes. 

"yes," she replied--"at least, perhaps." 

then he turn to go, resolute and happy. how strange he had mature 
since the summer! her heart swell with the consciousness that it was 
her love that had effect this transformation. 

"as i cannot expect you to-morrow, i shall probably go to the opera, but 
i shall be at home before midnight. will you call me up then? a word 
from you will put me at ease for the night, even if it come over the 
telephone." 

"i will call you up. we modern have an advantage over the ancients in 
this respect: the twentieth-century pyramu can speak to thisbe even if 
innumerable wall sever his body from hers." 

"a quaint conceit! but let us hope that our love-story will end less 
tragically," she said, tender caress his hair. "oh, we shall be 
happy, you and i," she added, after a while. "the iron finger of fate 
that lay so heavy on our lives is now withdrawn. almost withdrawn. 
yes, almost. only almost." 

and then a sudden fear overcame her. 

"no," she cried, "do not go, do not go! stay with me; stay here. i feel 
so frightened. i don't know what come over me. i am afraid--afraid for 
you." 

"no, dear," he rejoined, "you need not be afraid. in your heart you 
don't want me to desert a friend, and, besides, leave the best part of 
my artistic life in reginald's clutch." 

"why should you expose yourself to god know what danger for a friend 
who is ready to betray you?" 

"you forget friendship is a gift. if it exact payment in any form, it 
is no long either friendship or a gift. and you yourself have assured 
me that i have nothing to fear from reginald. i have nothing to give to 
him." 

she rally under his words and had regain her self-possession when 
the door closed behind him. he walk a few block very briskly. then 
his pace slackened. her words had unsettled him a little, and when he 
reach home he did not at once resume his exploration of reginald's 
papers. he had hardly lit a cigarette when, at an unusually early hour, 
he heard reginald's key in the lock. 

quick he turn the light out and in the semi-darkness, lit up by an 
electric lantern below, barricade the door as on the previous night. 
then he went to bed without finding sleep. 

supreme silence reign over the house. even the elevator had cease to 
run. ernest's brain was all ear. he heard reginald walking up and down 
in the studio. not the smallest movement escape his attention. thus 
hour passed. when the clock struck twelve, he was still walking up and 
down, down and up, up and down. 

one o'clock. 

still the measured beat of his footfall had not ceased. there was 
something hypnotic in the regular tread. nature at last exact its toll 
from the boy. he fell asleep. 

hardly had he closed his eyes when again that horrible nightmare--no 
long a nightmare--tormented him. again he felt the pointed delicate 
finger careful feeling their way along the innumerable tangle 
thread of nerve-matter that lead to the innermost recess of self.... 

a subconscious something strove to arouse him, and he felt the finger 
soft withdrawn. 

he could have sworn that he heard the scurry of feet in the room. 
bath in perspiration he made a leap for the electric light. 

but there was no sign of any human presence. the barricade at the door 
was undisturbed. but fear like a great wind fill the wings of his 
soul. 

yet there was nothing, nothing to warrant his conviction that reginald 
clarke had been with him only a few moments ago, ply his horrible 
trade. the large mirror above the fireplace only show him his own 
face, white, excited,--the face of a madman. 




xxix 


the next morning's mail brought a letter from ethel, a few lines of 
encouragement and affection. yes, she was right; it would not do for him 
to stay under one roof with reginald any longer. he must only obtain the 
manuscript and, if possible, surprise him in the attempt to exercise his 
mysterious and criminal power. then he would be in the position to 
dictate terms and to demand jack's safety as the price of his silence. 

reginald, however, had closet himself that day in his studio busy 
writing. only the clatter of his typewriter announce his presence in 
the house. there was no chance for conversation or for obtain the 
precious manuscript of "leontina." 

meanwhile ernest was look over his papers and prepare everything 
for a quick departure. glancing over old letters and notes, he became 
readily interested and hardly notice the passage of the hours. 

when the night came he only partly undressed and threw himself upon the 
bed. it was now ten. at twelve he had promise ethel to speak to her 
over the telephone. he was determined not to sleep at all that night. at 
last he would discover whether or not on the previous and other nights 
reginald had secret enter his room. 

when one hour had pass without incident, his attention relax a 
little. his eyes were gradual close when sudden something seem 
to stir at the door. the china vase came rattling to the floor. 

at once ernest sprang up. his face had blanch with terror. it was 
white than the linen in which they wrap the dead. but his soul was 
resolute. 

he touched a button and the electric light illuminate the whole 
chamber. there was no nook for even a shadow to hide. yet there was no 
one to be seen. from without the door came no sound. sudden something 
soft touched his foot. he gather all his will power so as not to 
break out into a frenzied shriek. then he laughed, not a hearty laugh, 
to be sure. a tiny nose and a tail graceful curl were brush 
against him. the source of the disturbance was a little malta cat, his 
favourite, that by some chance had remain in his room. after its essay 
at midnight gymnastics the animal quiet down and lay purr at the 
foot of his bed. 

the presence of a living thing was a certain comfort, and the reservoir 
of his strength was well nigh exhausted. 

he dim remember his promise to ethel, but his lid droop with 
sheer weariness. perhaps an hour pass in this way, when sudden his 
blood congeal with dread. 

he felt the presence of the hand of reginald 
clarke--unmistakably--groping in his brain as if searching for something 
that had still escape him. 

he try to move, to cry out, but his limb were paralysed. when, by a 
superhuman effort, he at last succeed in shake off the numb that 
held him enchained, he awoke just in time to see a figure, that of a 
man, disappear in the wall that separate reginald's apartments from 
his room.... 

this time it was no delusion of the senses. he heard something like a 
secret door soft close behind retreat steps. a sudden fierce 
anger seize him. he was oblivious of the danger of the terrible power 
of the old man, oblivious of the love he had once borne him, oblivious 
of everything save the sense of outrage humanity and outrage right. 

the law permit us to shoot a burglar who go through our pocket at 
night. must he tolerate the ravages of this a thousand times more 
dastard and dangerous spiritual thief? was reginald to enjoy the fruit 
of other men's labour unpunished? was he to continue grow into the 
mightiest literary factor of the century by prey upon his betters? 
abel, walkham, ethel, he, jack, were they all to be victim of this 
insatiable monster? 

was this force resistless as it was relentless? 

no, a thousand times, no! 

he dashed himself against the wall at the place where the shadow of 
reginald clarke had disappeared. in do so he touched upon a secret 
spring. the wall gave way noiselessly. speechless with rage he cross 
the next room and the one adjoin it, and stood in reginald's studio. 
the room was brilliant lighted, and reginald, still dressed, was 
seat at his writing-table scribble note upon little scraps of paper 
in his accustomed manner. 

at ernest's approach he look up without evince the least sign of 
terror or surprise. calmly, almost majestically, he fold his arms over 
his breast, but there was a menace glitter in his eyes as he 
confront his victim. 




xxx 


silent the two men face each other. then ernest hissed: 

"thief!" 

reginald shrug his shoulders. 

"vampire!" 

"so ethel has infect you with her absurd fancies! poor boy! i am 
afraid.... i have been wanting to tell you for some time.... but i 
think... we have reach the parting of our road!" 

"and that you dare to tell me!" 

the more he raged, the calm reginald seem to become. 

"really," he said, "i fail to understand.... i must ask you to leave my 
room!" 

"you fail to understand? you cad!" ernest cried. he step to the 
writing-table and open the secret drawer with a blow. a bundle of 
manuscript fell on the floor with a strange rustling noise. then, 
seize his own story, he hurl it upon the table. and behold--the last 
page bore correction in ink that could have been made only a few 
minutes ago! 

reginald smiled. "have you come to play havoc with my manuscripts?" he 
remarked. 

"your manuscripts? reginald clarke, you are an impudent impostor! you 
have written no word that is your own. you are an embezzle of the mind, 
strut through life in borrow and stolen plumes!" 

and at once the mask fell from reginald's face. 

"why stolen?" he cool said, with a slight touch of irritation. "i 
absorb. i appropriate. that is the most any artist can say for himself. 
god creates; man moulds. he give us the colours; we mix them." 

"that is not the question. i charge you with have wilful and 
criminal interfere in my life; i charge you with have rob me of 
what was mine; i charge you with being utterly vile and rapacious, a 
hypocrite and a parasite!" 

"foolish boy," reginald rejoin austerely. "it is through me that the 
best in you shall survive, even as the obscure elizabethan live in him 
of avon. shakespeare absorb what was great in little men--a great 
that otherwise would have perished--and gave it a setting, a life." 

"a thief may plead the same. i understand you better. it is your 
inordinate vanity that prompt you to abuse your monstrous power." 

"you err. self-love has never enter into my actions. i am careless of 
personal fame. look at me, boy! as i stand before you i am homer, i am 
shakespeare ... i am every cosmic manifestation in art. men have doubt 
in each incarnation my individual existence. historian have more to 
tell of the meanest athenian scribbler or elizabethan poetaster than of 
me. the radiance of my work obscure my very self. i care not. i have a 
mission. i am a servant of the lord. i am the vessel that bear the 
host!" 

he stood up at full length, the personification of grandeur and power. a 
tremendous force tremble in his very finger tips. he was like a 
gigantic dynamo, charged with the might of ten thousand magnetic storm 
that shake the earth in its orbit and lash myriad of planet through 
infinity of space.... 

under ordinary circumstances ernest or any other man would have quail 
before him. but the boy in that epic moment had grown out of his 
stature. he felt the sword of vengeance in his hands; to him was 
intrust the cause of abel and of walkham, of ethel and of jack. his 
was the struggle of the individual soul against the same blind and cruel 
fate that in the past had fashion the ichthyosauru and the mastodon. 

"by what right," he cried, "do you assume that you are the literary 
messiah? who appoint you? what divine power has made you the steward 
of my mite and of theirs whom you have robbed?" 

"i am a light-bearer. i tread the high hill of mankind.... i point the 
way to the future. i light up the abyss of the past. were not my 
stature gigantic, how could i hold the torch in all men's sight? the 
very soul that i tread underfoot realise, as their die gaze follow 
me, the possibility with which the future is big.... eternal secure, 
i carry the essence of what is cosmic ... of what is divine.... i am 
home ... goethe ... shakespeare.... i am an embodiment of the same 
force of which alexander, cæsar, confucius and the christo were also 
embodiments.... none so strong as to resist me." 

a sudden madness overcame ernest at this boast. he must strike now or 
never. he must rid humanity of this dangerous maniac--this demon of 
strength. with a power ten times intensified, he raise a heavy chair so 
as to hurl it at reginald's head and crush it. 

reginald stood there calmly, a smile upon his lips.... primal cruelty 
rose from the depth of his nature.... still he smiled, turning his 
luminous gaze upon the boy ... and, behold ... ernest's hand began to 
shake ... the chair fell from his grasp.... he try to call for help, 
but no sound issue from his lips.... utterly paralyse he 
confront ... the force.... 

minutes--eternities passed. 

and still those eyes were fixed upon him. 

but this was no long reginald! 

it was all brain ... only brain ... a tremendous brain-machine ... 
infinite complex ... infinite strong. not more than a mile away 
ethel endeavour to call to him through the night. the telephone rang, 
once, twice, thrice, insistingly. but ernest heard it not. something 
drag him ... drag the nerves from his body dragged, dragged, 
dragged.... it was an irresistible suction ... pitiless ... passionless 
... immense. 

sparks, blue, crimson and violet, seem to play around the living 
battery. it reach the finest fibre of his mind.... slow ... every 
trace of mentality disappeared.... first the will ... then feeling ... 
judgment ... memory ... fear even.... all that was store in his 
brain-cells came forth to be absorb by that mighty engine.... 

the princess with the yellow veil appear ... flit across the room 
and melt away. she was follow by childhood memory ... girls' 
heads, boys' faces.... he saw his dead mother wave her arms to him.... 
an expression of death-agony distort the placid features.... then, 
throw a kiss to him, she, too, disappeared. picture on picture 
followed.... words of love that he had spoken ... sins, virtues, 
magnanimities, meannesses, terror ... mathematics formula even, and 
snatch of songs. leontina came and was swallow up.... no, it was 
ethel who was try to speak to him ... try to warn.... she wave 
her hand in frantic despair.... she was gone.... a pale face ... dark, 
dishevelled hair.... jack.... how he had changed! he was in the circle 
of the vampire's transform might. "jack," he cried. surely jack had 
something to explain ... something to tell him ... some word that if 
spoken would bring rest to his soul. he saw the words rise to the boy's 
lips, but before he had time to utter them his image also had vanished. 
and reginald ... reginald, too, was gone.... there was only the mighty 
brain ... pant ... whirling.... then there was nothing.... the 
annihilate of ernest field was complete. 

vacant he stare at the walls, at the room and at his master. the 
latter was wipe the sweat from his forehead. he breathe deeply.... 
the flush of youth spread over his features.... his eyes sparkle with a 
new and dangerous brilliancy.... he took the thing that had once been 
ernest field by the hand and led it to its room. 




xxxi 


with the first flush of the morning ethel appear at the door of the 
house on riverside drive. she had not heard from ernest, and had been 
unable to obtain connection with him at the telephone. anxiety had 
hasten her steps. she brush against jack, who was also direct his 
steps to the abode of reginald clarke. 

at the same time something that resemble ernest field pass from 
the house of the vampire. it was a dull and brutish thing, hideous 
transformed, without a vestige of mind. 

"mr. fielding," cry ethel, beside herself with fear as she saw him 
descending. 

"ernest!" jack gasped, no less startle at the change in his friend's 
appearance. 

ernest's head follow the source of the sound, but no spark of 
recognition illumine the dead of his eyes. without a present and 
without a past ... blind ... a gibber idiot ... he stumble down 
the stairs. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the house of the vampire*** 


******* this file should be name 17144-8.txt or 17144-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/1/4/17144 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
