give joe biden his due 
by frank bruni 
dec. 20, 2019 

pete buttigieg and elizabeth warren are the shiny objects. 

joe biden just may be the keepsake that endures. 

the other two went at it on thursday night, quarrel over the meaning and morality of a wine cave, in an exchange that distill the democratic primary’s broad tension between pragmatism and purity, compromise and idealism. biden was careful not to be drawn too far into it and, during other stretch of the debate, stood back. 

why wouldn’t he? for all the worry because he sometimes stutters, for all the concern because he occasional sputters, for all his corny locution ("malarkey") and reflexive conversation filler ("here’s the deal"), the former vice president has almost consistent maintain a lead over his democratic rival in national poll since he announce his candidacy last april. he has recently gain ground in iowa, the state that vote first, meaning that he may avoid what had been look like a candidacy-imperiling embarrassment there. 

he has survive salvo from critic and mess of his own that were supposed to halt or at least hobble him: the attention to his crossing-the-line physical with women; the flip-flop about public fund of abortions; the back-and-forth with kamala harris about busing; the moment at the fifth democratic primary debate when he seem to forget either that she was in the senate or that she was black. 

all of that supposedly made him look weak. but none of that appreciable weaken him. 

and at the latest debate, he perform better than before — which may not be saying a lot but is saying something. he still can’t speak in a straight line, instead zigg and zagging: if he were a car, his tire would constant scrape the curb and his hubcap would probably pop off. 

but they stay on this time around. biden, 77, seem more relax and confident, and he radiate his trademark warmth. it’s difficult not to like him. and it’s time to give him his due. 

so many of us haven’t, and i’m as guilty as anyone. in past column i urge him not to run — cite his unsuccessful previous presidential bids, his age, his eccentricity and his outright flaw — and doubt his ability to go the distance. i join other pundit and politics analyst in treat biden’s front-runner status as fiction or inevitable fleeting and as the bequest of simple name recognition. 

we decree that other contender — harris for an instant, warren and buttigieg for longer, even bernie sander of late — had momentum. biden had vestigial good will, which we regard as a less flashy and flimsy commodity. 

when we examine biden, we saw warning signs. look at that light schedule! check out those anemic fund-raising numbers! sure, many democratic voter deem him the most elect alternative at a juncture when snatch back the white house matter infinite more to them than any romance with a figure fresher and more inspire than he is. but would they stick? and could he last? 

so far, so good — or, rather, so biden, which in thursday night’s debate meant a quizzical reference to winston churchill, some endearing loose banter with sander and an overarch aura of sheer good-naturedness. 

when one of the moderators, tim alberta of politico, brought up the subject of age, biden said: "look, i’m running because i’ve been around. all my experience. with experience, hopefully, come judgment and a little bit of wisdom." 

alberta noted that if biden won the presidency, he’d be 82 at the end of his first term. "are you willing to commit tonight to running for a second term?" 

"no, i’m not willing to commit one way or another," biden said without pause, to supportive laughter from the audience. "here’s the deal. i’m not even elect one term yet, and let’s see where we are. but it’s a nice thought." it was a nice answer. 

moderator gave him ample opportunity to stumble, challenging him, for example, on the obama administration’s failure to close guantánamo bay and its exaggeration of progress in the war in afghanistan. he had answer at the ready and exhibit zero discomfort. 

while he was evasive about a few topics, he was emphatic about his disagreement with sander and warren on "medicare for all." and he leapt into the fray to explain that he find that plan exorbitant and far-fetched. "i’m the only guy that’s not interrupted," he said. "all right, i’m go to interrupt now." this from a man who, at a previous debate, cut himself off even before moderator did. 

i maintain serious reservation about him. thirty-six years in the senate and eight in the vice presidency add up not just to enormous experience but also to a sprawl record that’s a gold mine for detractors. he undeniable lack the vigor he once possessed. 

and president trump’s cynical airing of question about his past dealings with ukraine — and about the lucrative position that his son hunter had on the board of the natural gas company burisma — remains a potential liability for biden, who still hasn’t found and deliver the perfect rebuttal. 

but journalist may not have the right antenna for how this is play out. when biden admonish a man in iowa who credulous parrot trump’s line of attack, many politics analyst pronounced him imprudent thin-skinned and unattractive defensive. but many voter surely saw him as authentic, relate — a loving father and decent person disgust with the nasty coming his way. there’s an upside to trade a safe, conventional politics script for something rawer. trump demonstrate that in 2016. 

and on thursday night, biden reasserte the fundamental generous of spirit that separate him from trump and is like a tall, cold glass of water to america thirsty for decency. "i refuse to accept the notion, as some on this stage do, that we can never, never get to a place where we have cooperation again," he said, making a pitch for bipartisanship. "if that’s the case, we are dead as a country. we need to be able to reach a consensus. and if anyone has reason to be angry with the republican and not want to cooperate, it’s me — the way they’ve attack me, my son and my family." 

he got fresh reason during the debate, when sarah huckabee sanders, the former white house press secretary, sent out a tweet that ridicule his stutter. she delete it — and apologize — after he ask her where her empathy had gone, a question i assume was rhetorical. it die on the altar of trump, where too many other republican sacrifice their principles, too. 

biden glow in comparison. he almost looks shiny. 
