the project gutenberg ebook of curious, if true, by elizabeth gaskell 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: curious, if true 
strange tale 

author: elizabeth gaskell 

release date: march 21, 2008 [ebook #24879] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook curious, if true *** 




produce by delphine lettau and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 






curious, if true 


strange tale 



mrs gaskell 




contents 


the old nurse's story 1 

the poor clare 26 

loi the witch 88 

the grey woman 187 

curious, if true 249 




the old nurse's story 


you know, my dears, that your mother was an orphan, and an only child; 
and i daresay you have heard that your grandfather was a clergyman up 
in westmoreland, where i come from. i was just a girl in the village 
school, when, one day, your grandmother came in to ask the mistress if 
there was any scholar there who would do for a nurse-maid; and mighty 
proud i was, i can tell ye, when the mistress call me up, and spoke 
of me being a good girl at my needle, and a steady, honest girl, and 
one whose parent were very respectable, though they might be poor. i 
thought i should like nothing better than to serve the pretty young 
lady, who was blush as deep as i was, as she spoke of the coming 
baby, and what i should have to do with it. however, i see you don't 
care so much for this part of my story, as for what you think is to 
come, so i'll tell you at once. i was engaged and settled at the 
parsonage before miss rosamond (that was the baby, who is now your 
mother) was born. to be sure, i had little enough to do with her when 
she came, for she was never out of her mother's arms, and slept by her 
all night long; and proud enough was i sometimes when missis trust 
her to me. there never was such a baby before or since, though you've 
all of you been fine enough in your turns; but for sweet, winning ways, 
you've none of you come up to your mother. she took after her mother, 
who was a real lady born; a miss furnivall, a grand-daughter of lord 
furnivall's, in northumberland. i believe she had neither brother nor 
sister, and had been brought up in my lord's family till she had 
married your grandfather, who was just a curate, son to a shopkeeper in 
carlisle--but a clever, fine gentleman as ever was--and one who was a 
right-down hard worker in his parish, which was very wide, and 
scattered all abroad over the westmoreland fells. when your mother, 
little miss rosamond, was about four or five years old, both her 
parent die in a fortnight--one after the other. ah! that was a sad 
time. my pretty young mistress and me was look for another baby, 
when my master came home from one of his long rides, wet and tired, and 
took the fever he die of; and then she never held up her head again, 
but just live to see her dead baby, and have it laid on her breast, 
before she sigh away her life. my mistress had ask me, on her 
death-bed, never to leave miss rosamond; but if she had never spoken a 
word, i would have gone with the little child to the end of the world. 

the next thing, and before we had well still our sobs, the executor 
and guardian came to settle the affairs. they were my poor young 
mistress's own cousin, lord furnivall, and mr. esthwaite, my master's 
brother, a shopkeeper in manchester; not so well to do then as he was 
afterwards, and with a large family rising about him. well! i don't 
know if it were their settling, or because of a letter my mistress 
wrote on her death-bed to her cousin, my lord; but somehow it was 
settled that miss rosamond and me were to go to furnivall manor house, 
in northumberland, and my lord spoke as if it had been her mother's 
wish that she should live with his family, and as if he had no 
objections, for that one or two more or less could make no difference 
in so grand a household. so, though that was not the way in which i 
should have wish the coming of my bright and pretty pet to have been 
look at--who was like a sunbeam in any family, be it never so 
grand--i was well pleased that all the folks in the dale should stare 
and admire, when they heard i was go to be young lady's maid at my 
lord furnivall's at furnivall manor. 

but i made a mistake in thinking we were to go and live where my lord 
did. it turn out that the family had left furnivall manor house fifty 
years or more. i could not hear that my poor young mistress had never 
been there, though she had been brought up in the family; and i was 
sorry for that, for i should have like miss rosamond's youth to have 
pass where her mother's had been. 

my lord's gentleman, from whom i ask as many question as i durst, 
said that the manor house was at the foot of the cumberland fells, and 
a very grand place; that an old miss furnivall, a great-aunt of my 
lord's, live there, with only a few servants; but that it was a very 
healthy place, and my lord had thought that it would suit miss rosamond 
very well for a few years, and that her being there might perhaps amuse 
his old aunt. 

i was bidden by my lord to have miss rosamond's things ready by a 
certain day. he was a stern, proud man, as they say all the lords 
furnivall were; and he never spoke a word more than was necessary. folk 
did say he had love my young mistress; but that, because she knew that 
his father would object, she would never listen to him, and married mr. 
esthwaite; but i don't know. he never married, at any rate. but he 
never took much notice of miss rosamond; which i thought he might have 
done if he had care for her dead mother. he sent his gentleman with us 
to the manor house, telling him to join him at newcastle that same 
evening; so there was no great length of time for him to make us known 
to all the stranger before he, too, shook us off; and we were left, 
two lonely young things (i was not eighteen) in the great old manor 
house. it seem like yesterday that we drove there. we had left our own 
dear parsonage very early, and we had both cry as if our heart would 
break, though we were travel in my lord's carriage, which i thought 
so much of once. and now it was long past noon on a september day, and 
we stop to change horse for the last time at a little smoky town, 
all full of collier and miners. miss rosamond had fallen asleep, but 
mr. henry told me to waken her, that she might see the park and the 
manor house as we drove up. i thought it rather a pity; but i did what 
he bade me, for fear he should complain of me to my lord. we had left 
all sign of a town, or even a village, and were then inside the gate 
of a large wild park--not like the park here in the south, but with 
rocks, and the noise of running water, and gnarled thorn-trees, and old 
oaks, all white and peel with age. 

the road went up about two miles, and then we saw a great and stately 
house, with many tree close around it, so close that in some place 
their branch drag against the wall when the wind blew; and some 
hung broken down; for no one seem to take much charge of the 
place;--to lop the wood, or to keep the moss-covered carriage-way in 
order. only in front of the house all was clear. the great oval drive 
was without a weed; and neither tree nor creeper was allow to grow 
over the long, many-windowed front; at both side of which a wing 
protected, which were each the end of other side fronts; for the 
house, although it was so desolate, was even grand than i expected. 
behind it rose the fells; which seem unenclosed and bare enough; and 
on the left hand of the house, as you stood facing it, was a little, 
old-fashioned flower-garden, as i found out afterwards. a door open 
out upon it from the west front; it had been scoop out of the thick, 
dark wood for some old lady furnivall; but the branch of the great 
forest-trees had grown and overshadow it again, and there were very 
few flower that would live there at that time. 

when we drove up to the great front entrance, and went into the hall, i 
thought we would be lost--it was so large, and vast and grand. there 
was a chandelier all of bronze, hung down from the middle of the 
ceiling; and i had never seen one before, and look at it all in 
amaze. then, at one end of the hall, was a great fire-place, as large 
as the side of the house in my country, with massy andiron and dogs 
to hold the wood; and by it were heavy, old-fashioned sofas. at the 
opposite end of the hall, to the left as you went in--on the western 
side--was an organ built into the wall, and so large that it fill up 
the best part of that end. beyond it, on the same side, was a door; and 
opposite, on each side of the fire-place, were also door leading to 
the east front; but those i never went through as long as i stay in 
the house, so i can't tell you what lay beyond. 

the afternoon was close in, and the hall, which had no fire light 
in it, look dark and gloomy, but we did not stay there a moment. the 
old servant, who had open the door for us, bowed to mr. henry, and 
took us in through the door at the further side of the great organ, and 
led us through several small hall and passage into the west 
drawing-room, where he said that miss furnivall was sitting. poor 
little miss rosamond held very tight to me, as if she were scared and 
lost in that great place; and as for myself, i was not much better. the 
west drawing-room was very cheerful-looking, with a warm fire in it, 
and plenty of good, comfortable furniture about. miss furnivall was an 
old lady not far from eighty, i should think, but i do not know. she 
was thin and tall, and had a face as full of fine wrinkle as if they 
had been drawn all over it with a needle's point. her eyes were very 
watchful, to make up, i suppose, for her being so deaf as to be oblige 
to use a trumpet. sitting with her, working at the same great piece of 
tapestry, was mrs. stark, her maid and companion, and almost as old as 
she was. she had live with miss furnivall ever since they both were 
young, and now she seem more like a friend than a servant; she look 
so cold, and grey, and stony, as if she had never love or care for 
any one; and i don't suppose she did care for any one, except her 
mistress; and, owe to the great deaf of the latter, mrs. stark 
treat her very much as if she were a child. mr. henry gave some 
message from my lord, and then he bowed good-by to us all,--taking no 
notice of my sweet little miss rosamond's outstretched hand--and left 
us standing there, being look at by the two old ladies through their 
spectacles. 

i was right glad when they rung for the old footman who had shown us in 
at first, and told him to take us to our rooms. so we went out of that 
great drawing-room and into another sitting-room, and out of that, and 
then up a great flight of stairs, and along a broad gallery--which was 
something like a library, have books all down one side, and window 
and writing-tables all down the other--till we came to our rooms, which 
i was not sorry to hear were just over the kitchens; for i began to 
think i should be lost in that wilderness of a house. there was an old 
nursery, that had been use for all the little lords and ladies long 
ago, with a pleasant fire burning in the grate, and the kettle boil 
on the hob, and tea-things spread out on the table; and out of that 
room was the night-nursery, with a little crib for miss rosamond close 
to my bed. and old james call up dorothy, his wife, to bid us 
welcome; and both he and she were so hospitable and kind, that 
by-and-by miss rosamond and me felt quite at home; and by the time tea 
was over, she was sitting on dorothy's knee, and chatter away as 
fast as her little tongue could go. i soon found out that dorothy was 
from westmoreland, and that bound her and me together, as it were; and 
i would never wish to meet with kind people than were old james and 
his wife. james had live pretty nearly all his life in my lord's 
family, and thought there was no one so grand as they. he even look 
down a little on his wife; because, till he had married her, she had 
never live in any but a farmer's household. but he was very fond of 
her, as well he might be. they had one servant under them, to do all 
the rough work. agnes they call her; and she and me, and james and 
dorothy, with miss furnivall and mrs. stark, made up the family; always 
remember my sweet little miss rosamond! i use to wonder what they 
had done before she came, they thought so much of her now. kitchen and 
drawing-room, it was all the same. the hard, sad miss furnivall, and 
the cold mrs. stark, look pleased when she came flutter in like a 
bird, play and prank hither and thither, with a continual murmur, 
and pretty prattle of gladness. i am sure, they were sorry many a time 
when she flit away into the kitchen, though they were too proud to 
ask her to stay with them, and were a little surprise at her taste; 
though to be sure, as mrs. stark said, it was not to be wonder at, 
remember what stock her father had come of. the great, old rambling 
house was a famous place for little miss rosamond. she made expedition 
all over it, with me at her heels; all, except the east wing, which was 
never opened, and whither we never thought of going. but in the western 
and northern part was many a pleasant room; full of things that were 
curiosity to us, though they might not have been to people who had 
seen more. the window were darken by the sweeping bough of the 
trees, and the ivy which had overgrown them; but, in the green gloom, 
we could manage to see old china jar and carve ivory boxes, and great 
heavy books, and, above all, the old pictures! 

once, i remember, my darling would have dorothy go with us to tell us 
who they all were; for they were all portrait of some of my lord's 
family, though dorothy could not tell us the name of every one. we had 
gone through most of the rooms, when we came to the old state 
drawing-room over the hall, and there was a picture of miss furnivall; 
or, as she was call in those days, miss grace, for she was the 
younger sister. such a beauty she must have been! but with such a set, 
proud look, and such scorn look out of her handsome eyes, with her 
eyebrow just a little raised, as if she wonder how anyone could have 
the impertinence to look at her, and her lip curl at us, as we stood 
there gazing. she had a dress on, the like of which i had never seen 
before, but it was all the fashion when she was young; a hat of some 
soft white stuff like beaver, pull a little over her brows, and a 
beautiful plume of feather sweeping round it on one side; and her gown 
of blue satin was open in front to a quilted white stomacher. 

'well, to be sure!' said i, when i had gaze my fill. 'flesh is grass, 
they do say; but who would have thought that miss furnivall had been 
such an out-and-out beauty, to see her now.' 

'yes,' said dorothy. 'folks change sadly. but if what my master's 
father use to say was true, miss furnivall, the elder sister, was 
handsome than miss grace. her picture is here somewhere; but, if i 
show it you, you must never let on, even to james, that you have seen 
it. can the little lady hold her tongue, think you?' ask she. 

i was not so sure, for she was such a little sweet, bold, open-spoken 
child, so i set her to hide herself; and then i help dorothy to turn 
a great picture, that lean with its face towards the wall, and was 
not hung up as the other were. to be sure, it beat miss grace for 
beauty; and, i think, for scornful pride, too, though in that matter it 
might be hard to choose. i could have look at it an hour, but dorothy 
seem half frightened at have shown it to me, and hurried it back 
again, and bade me run and find miss rosamond, for that there were some 
ugly place about the house, where she should like ill for the child to 
go. i was a brave, high-spirited girl, and thought little of what the 
old woman said, for i like hide-and-seek as well as any child in the 
parish; so off i ran to find my little one. 

as winter drew on, and the days grew shorter, i was sometimes almost 
certain that i heard a noise as if someone was play on the great 
organ in the hall. i did not hear it every evening; but, certainly, i 
did very often, usually when i was sitting with miss rosamond, after i 
had put her to bed, and keeping quite still and silent in the bedroom. 
then i use to hear it boom and swelling away in the distance. the 
first night, when i went down to my supper, i ask dorothy who had 
been play music, and james said very shortly that i was a gowk to 
take the wind sough among the tree for music; but i saw dorothy 
look at him very fearfully, and bessy, the kitchen-maid, said something 
beneath her breath, and went quite white. i saw they did not like my 
question, so i held my peace till i was with dorothy alone, when i knew 
i could get a good deal out of her. so, the next day, i watch my 
time, and i coax and ask her who it was that play the organ; for 
i knew that it was the organ and not the wind well enough, for all i 
had kept silence before james. but dorothy had had her lesson, i'll 
warrant, and never a word could i get from her. so then i try bessy, 
though i had always held my head rather above her, as i was even to 
james and dorothy, and she was little better than their servant. so she 
said i must never, never tell; and if ever i told, i was never to say 
_she_ had told me; but it was a very strange noise, and she had heard 
it many a time, but most of all on winter nights, and before storms; 
and folks did say it was the old lord play on the great organ in the 
hall, just as he use to do when he was alive; but who the old lord 
was, or why he played, and why he play on stormy winter evenings in 
particular, she either could not or would not tell me. well! i told you 
i had a brave heart; and i thought it was rather pleasant to have that 
grand music rolling about the house, let who would be the player; for 
now it rose above the great gust of wind, and wail and triumph 
just like a living creature, and then it fell to a soft most 
complete, only it was always music, and tunes, so it was nonsense to 
call it the wind. i thought at first, that it might be miss furnivall 
who played, unknown to bessy; but one day, when i was in the hall by 
myself, i open the organ and peep all about it and around it, as i 
had done to the organ in crosthwaite church once before, and i saw it 
was all broken and destroy inside, though it look so brave and 
fine; and then, though it was noon-day, my flesh began to creep a 
little, and i shut it up, and run away pretty quick to my own bright 
nursery; and i did not like hearing the music for some time after that, 
any more than james and dorothy did. all this time miss rosamond was 
making herself more and more beloved. the old ladies like her to dine 
with them at their early dinner. james stood behind miss furnivall's 
chair, and i behind miss rosamond's all in state; and after dinner, she 
would play about in a corner of the great drawing-room as still as any 
mouse, while miss furnivall slept, and i had my dinner in the kitchen. 
but she was glad enough to come to me in the nursery afterwards; for, 
as she said, miss furnivall was so sad, and mrs. stark so dull; but she 
and i were merry enough; and by-and-by, i got not to care for that 
weird rolling music, which did one no harm, if we did not know where it 
came from. 

that winter was very cold. in the middle of october the frost began, 
and last many, many weeks. i remember one day, at dinner, miss 
furnivall lift up her sad, heavy eyes, and said to mrs. stark, 'i am 
afraid we shall have a terrible winter,' in a strange kind of meaning 
way. but mrs. stark pretended not to hear, and talk very loud of 
something else. my little lady and i did not care for the frost; not 
we! as long as it was dry, we climb up the steep brow behind the 
house, and went up on the fells, which were bleak and bare enough, and 
there we ran races in the fresh, sharp air; and once we came down by a 
new path, that took us past the two old gnarled holly-trees, which grew 
about half-way down by the east side of the house. but the days grew 
short and shorter, and the old lord, if it was he, play away, more 
and more stormy and sadly, on the great organ. one sunday 
afternoon--it must have been towards the end of november--i ask 
dorothy to take charge of little missy when she came out of the 
drawing-room, after miss furnivall had had her nap; for it was too cold 
to take her with me to church, and yet i want to go. and dorothy was 
glad enough to promise, and was so fond of the child, that all seem 
well; and bessy and i set off very briskly, though the sky hung heavy 
and black over the white earth, as if the night had never fully gone 
away, and the air, though still, was very biting and keen. 

'we shall have a fall of snow,' said bessy to me. and sure enough, even 
while we were in church, it came down thick, in great large flakes,--so 
thick, it almost darken the windows. it had stop snow before we 
came out, but it lay soft, thick and deep beneath our feet, as we 
tramp home. before we got to the hall, the moon rose, and i think it 
was lighter then--what with the moon, and what with the white dazzle 
snow--than it had been when we went to church, between two and three 
o'clock. i have not told you that miss furnivall and mrs. stark never 
went to church; they use to read the prayer together, in their quiet, 
gloomy way; they seem to feel the sunday very long without their 
tapestry-work to be busy at. so when i went to dorothy in the kitchen, 
to fetch miss rosamond and take her upstairs with me, i did not much 
wonder when the old woman told me that the ladies had kept the child 
with them, and that she had never come to the kitchen, as i had bidden 
her, when she was tired of behave pretty in the drawing-room. so i 
took off my things and went to find her, and bring her to her supper in 
the nursery. but when i went into the best drawing-room, there sat the 
two old ladies, very still and quiet, drop out a word now and then, 
but look as if nothing so bright and merry as miss rosamond had ever 
been near them. still i thought she might be hiding from me; it was one 
of her pretty ways,--and that she had persuade them to look as if they 
knew nothing about her; so i went soft peep under this sofa, and 
behind that chair, making believe i was sadly frightened at not finding 
her. 

'what's the matter, hester?' said mrs. stark, sharply. i don't know if 
miss furnivall had seen me, for, as i told you, she was very deaf, and 
she sat quite still, idle staring into the fire, with her hopeless 
face. 'i'm only look for my little rosy posy,' reply i, still 
thinking that the child was there, and near me, though i could not see 
her. 

'miss rosamond is not here,' said mrs. stark. 'she went away, more than 
an hour ago, to find dorothy.' and she, too, turn and went on look 
into the fire. 

my heart sank at this, and i began to wish i had never left my darling. 
i went back to dorothy and told her. james was gone out for the day, 
but she, and me, and bessy took lights, and went up into the nursery 
first; and then we roam over the great, large house, calling and 
entreat miss rosamond to come out of her hiding-place, and not 
frighten us to death in that way. but there was no answer; no sound. 

'oh!' said i, at last, 'can she have got into the east wing and hidden 
there?' 

but dorothy said it was not possible, for that she herself had never 
been in there; that the door were always locked, and my lord's steward 
had the keys, she believed; at any rate, neither she nor james had ever 
seen them: so i said i would go back, and see if, after all, she was 
not hidden in the drawing-room, unknown to the old ladies; and if i 
found her there, i said, i would whip her well for the fright she had 
given me; but i never meant to do it. well, i went back to the west 
drawing-room, and i told mrs. stark we could not find her anywhere, and 
ask for leave to look all about the furniture there, for i thought 
now that she might have fallen asleep in some warm, hidden corner; but 
no! we looked--miss furnivall got up and looked, tremble all 
over--and she was nowhere there; then we set off again, every one in 
the house, and look in all the place we had search before, but we 
could not find her. miss furnivall shiver and shook so much, that 
mrs. stark took her back into the warm drawing-room; but not before 
they had made me promise to bring her to them when she was found. 
well-a-day! i began to think she never would be found, when i bethought 
me to look into the great front court, all cover with snow. i was 
upstairs when i look out; but, it was such clear moonlight, i could 
see, quite plain, two little footprints, which might be trace from the 
hall-door and round the corner of the east wing. i don't know how i got 
down, but i tug open the great stiff hall-door, and, throw the 
skirt of my gown over my head for a cloak, i ran out. i turn the east 
corner, and there a black shadow fell on the snow; but when i came 
again into the moonlight, there were the little foot-marks go up--up 
to the fells. it was bitter cold; so cold, that the air almost took the 
skin off my face as i ran; but i ran on crying to think how my poor 
little darling must be perish and frightened. i was within sight of 
the holly-trees, when i saw a shepherd coming down the hill, bearing 
something in his arms wrap in his maud. he shout to me, and ask 
me if i had lost a bairn; and, when i could not speak for crying, he 
bore towards me, and i saw my wee bairnie, lie still, and white, and 
stiff in his arms, as if she had been dead. he told me he had been up 
the fell to gather in his sheep, before the deep cold of night came 
on, and that under the holly-trees (black mark on the hill-side, where 
no other bush was for mile around) he had found my little lady--my 
lamb--my queen--my darling--stiff and cold in the terrible sleep which 
is frost-begotten. oh! the joy and the tear of have her in my arms 
once again! for i would not let him carry her; but took her, maud and 
all, into my own arms, and held her near my own warm neck and heart, 
and felt the life steal slow back again into her little gentle 
limbs. but she was still insensible when we reach the hall, and i had 
no breath for speech. we went in by the kitchen-door. 

'bring me the warming-pan,' said i; and i carry her upstairs and 
began undress her by the nursery fire, which bessy had kept up. i 
call my little lammie all the sweet and playful name i could think 
of,--even while my eyes were blind by my tears; and at last, oh! at 
length she open her large blue eyes. then i put her into her warm 
bed, and sent dorothy down to tell miss furnivall that all was well; 
and i made up my mind to sit by my darling's bedside the live-long 
night. she fell away into a soft sleep as soon as her pretty head had 
touched the pillow, and i watch by her till morning light; when she 
waken up bright and clear--or so i thought at first--and, my dears, 
so i think now. 

she said, that she had fancy that she should like to go to dorothy, 
for that both the old ladies were asleep, and it was very dull in the 
drawing-room; and that, as she was go through the west lobby, she 
saw the snow through the high window falling--falling--soft and steady; 
but she want to see it lie pretty and white on the ground; so she 
made her way into the great hall; and then, go to the window, she 
saw it bright and soft upon the drive; but while she stood there, she 
saw a little girl, not so old as she was, 'but so pretty,' said my 
darling, 'and this little girl beckon to me to come out; and oh, she 
was so pretty and so sweet, i could not choose but go.' and then this 
other little girl had taken her by the hand, and side by side the two 
had gone round the east corner. 

'now you are a naughty little girl, and telling stories,' said i. 'what 
would your good mamma, that is in heaven, and never told a story in her 
life, say to her little rosamond, if she heard her--and i daresay she 
does--telling stories!' 

'indeed, hester,' sob out my child, 'i'm telling you true. indeed i 
am.' 

'don't tell me!' said i, very stern. 'i track you by your foot-marks 
through the snow; there were only yours to be seen: and if you had had 
a little girl to go hand-in-hand with you up the hill, don't you think 
the footprint would have gone along with yours?' 

'i can't help it, dear, dear hester,' said she, crying, 'if they did 
not; i never look at her feet, but she held my hand fast and tight in 
her little one, and it was very, very cold. she took me up the 
fell-path, up to the holly-trees; and there i saw a lady weeping and 
crying; but when she saw me, she hush her weeping, and smile very 
proud and grand, and took me on her knee, and began to lull me to 
sleep; and that's all, hester--but that is true; and my dear mamma 
know it is,' said she, crying. so i thought the child was in a fever, 
and pretended to believe her, as she went over her story--over and over 
again, and always the same. at last dorothy knock at the door with 
miss rosamond's breakfast; and she told me the old ladies were down in 
the eat parlour, and that they want to speak to me. they had both 
been into the night-nursery the evening before, but it was after miss 
rosamond was asleep; so they had only look at her--not ask me any 
questions. 

'i shall catch it,' thought i to myself, as i went along the north 
gallery. 'and yet,' i thought, taking courage, 'it was in their charge 
i left her; and it's they that's to blame for letting her steal away 
unknown and unwatched.' so i went in boldly, and told my story. i told 
it all to miss furnivall, shouting it close to her ear; but when i came 
to the mention of the other little girl out in the snow, coax and 
tempt her out, and willing her up to the grand and beautiful lady by 
the holly-tree, she threw her arms up--her old and wither arms--and 
cry aloud, 'oh! heaven forgive! have mercy!' 

mrs. stark took hold of her; roughly enough, i thought; but she was 
past mrs. stark's management, and spoke to me, in a kind of wild 
warning and authority. 

'hester! keep her from that child! it will lure her to her death! that 
evil child! tell her it is a wicked, naughty child.' then, mrs. stark 
hurried me out of the room; where, indeed, i was glad enough to go; but 
miss furnivall kept shriek out, 'oh, have mercy! wilt thou never 
forgive! it is many a long year ago----' 

i was very uneasy in my mind after that. i durst never leave miss 
rosamond, night or day, for fear lest she might slip off again, after 
some fancy or other; and all the more, because i thought i could make 
out that miss furnivall was crazy, from their odd ways about her; and i 
was afraid lest something of the same kind (which might be in the 
family, you know) hung over my darling. and the great frost never 
cease all this time; and, whenever it was a more stormy night than 
usual, between the gusts, and through the wind, we heard the old lord 
play on the great organ. but, old lord, or not, wherever miss 
rosamond went, there i followed; for my love for her, pretty, helpless 
orphan, was strong than my fear for the grand and terrible sound. 
besides, it rest with me to keep her cheerful and merry, as beseem 
her age. so we play together, and wander together, here and there, 
and everywhere; for i never dare to lose sight of her again in that 
large and rambling house. and so it happened, that one afternoon, not 
long before christmas-day, we were play together on the 
billiard-table in the great hall (not that we knew the right way of 
playing, but she like to roll the smooth ivory balls with her pretty 
hands, and i like to do whatever she did); and, by-and-by, without our 
notice it, it grew dusk indoors, though it was still light in the 
open air, and i was thinking of taking her back into the nursery, when, 
all of a sudden, she cry out, 

'look, hester! look! there is my poor little girl out in the snow!' 

i turn towards the long narrow windows, and there, sure enough, i saw 
a little girl, less than my miss rosamond--dressed all unfit to be 
out-of-doors such a bitter night--crying, and beating against the 
window-panes, as if she want to be let in. she seem to sob and 
wail, till miss rosamond could bear it no longer, and was flying to the 
door to open it, when, all of a sudden, and close upon us, the great 
organ peal out so loud and thundering, it fairly made me tremble; and 
all the more, when i remember me that, even in the still of that 
dead-cold weather, i had heard no sound of little batter hand upon 
the windowglass, although the phantom child had seem to put forth all 
its force; and, although i had seen it wail and cry, no faintest touch 
of sound had fallen upon my ears. whether i remember all this at the 
very moment, i do not know; the great organ sound had so stun me 
into terror; but this i know, i caught up miss rosamond before she got 
the hall-door opened, and clutch her, and carry her away, kick 
and screaming, into the large, bright kitchen, where dorothy and agnes 
were busy with their mince-pies. 

'what is the matter with my sweet one?' cry dorothy, as i bore in 
miss rosamond, who was sob as if her heart would break. 

'she won't let me open the door for my little girl to come in; and 
she'll die if she is out on the fell all night. cruel, naughty 
hester,' she said, slap me; but she might have struck harder, for i 
had seen a look of ghastly terror on dorothy's face, which made my very 
blood run cold. 

'shut the back-kitchen door fast, and bolt it well,' said she to agnes. 
she said no more; she gave me raisin and almond to quiet miss 
rosamond; but she sob about the little girl in the snow, and would 
not touch any of the good things. i was thankful when she cry herself 
to sleep in bed. then i stole down to the kitchen, and told dorothy i 
had made up my mind. i would carry my darling back to my father's house 
in applethwaite; where, if we live humbly, we live at peace. i said i 
had been frightened enough with the old lord's organ-playing; but now 
that i had seen for myself this little moan child, all deck out as 
no child in the neighbourhood could be, beating and batter to get 
in, yet always without any sound or noise--with the dark wound on its 
right shoulder; and that miss rosamond had known it again for the 
phantom that had nearly lure her to her death (which dorothy knew was 
true); i would stand it no longer. 

i saw dorothy change colour once or twice. when i had done, she told me 
she did not think i could take miss rosamond with me, for that she was 
my lord's ward, and i had no right over her; and she ask me would i 
leave the child that i was so fond of just for sound and sight that 
could do me no harm; and that they had all had to get use to in their 
turns? i was all in a hot, tremble passion; and i said it was very 
well for her to talk; that knew what these sight and noise betokened, 
and that had, perhaps, had something to do with the spectre child while 
it was alive. and i taunt her so, that she told me all she knew at 
last; and then i wish i had never been told, for it only made me more 
afraid than ever. 

she said she had heard the tale from old neighbour that were alive 
when she was first married; when folks use to come to the hall 
sometimes, before it had got such a bad name on the country side: it 
might not be true, or it might, what she had been told. 

the old lord was miss furnivall's father--miss grace, as dorothy call 
her, for miss maude was the elder, and miss furnivall by rights. the 
old lord was eaten up with pride. such a proud man was never seen or 
heard of; and his daughter were like him. no one was good enough to 
wed them, although they had choice enough; for they were the great 
beauty of their day, as i had seen by their portraits, where they 
hung in the state drawing-room. but, as the old saying is, 'pride will 
have a fall;' and these two haughty beauty fell in love with the same 
man, and he no better than a foreign musician, whom their father had 
down from london to play music with him at the manor house. for, above 
all things, next to his pride, the old lord love music. he could play 
on nearly every instrument that ever was heard of, and it was a strange 
thing it did not soften him; but he was a fierce dour old man, and had 
broken his poor wife's heart with his cruelty, they said. he was mad 
after music, and would pay any money for it. so he got this foreigner 
to come; who made such beautiful music, that they said the very bird 
on the tree stop their singing to listen. and, by degrees, this 
foreign gentleman got such a hold over the old lord, that nothing would 
serve him but that he must come every year; and it was he that had the 
great organ brought from holland, and built up in the hall, where it 
stood now. he taught the old lord to play on it; but many and many a 
time, when lord furnivall was thinking of nothing but his fine organ, 
and his fine music, the dark foreigner was walking abroad in the wood 
with one of the young ladies; now miss maude, and then miss grace. 

miss maude won the day and carry off the prize, such as it was; and 
he and she were married, all unknown to any one; and before he made his 
next yearly visit, she had been confine of a little girl at a 
farm-house on the moors, while her father and miss grace thought she 
was away at doncaster races. but though she was a wife and a mother, 
she was not a bit softened, but as haughty and as passionate as ever; 
and perhaps more so, for she was jealous of miss grace, to whom her 
foreign husband paid a deal of court--by way of blind her--as he 
told his wife. but miss grace triumph over miss maude, and miss maude 
grew fierce and fiercer, both with her husband and with her sister; 
and the former--who could easily shake off what was disagreeable, and 
hide himself in foreign countries--went away a month before his usual 
time that summer, and half-threatened that he would never come back 
again. meanwhile, the little girl was left at the farm-house, and her 
mother use to have her horse saddle and gallop wildly over the hill 
to see her once every week, at the very least; for where she love she 
loved, and where she hate she hated. and the old lord went on 
playing--playing on his organ; and the servant thought the sweet music 
he made had soothe down his awful temper, of which (dorothy said) some 
terrible tale could be told. he grew infirm too, and had to walk with 
a crutch; and his son--that was the present lord furnivall's 
father--was with the army in america, and the other son at sea; so miss 
maude had it pretty much her own way, and she and miss grace grew 
cold and bitter to each other every day; till at last they hardly 
ever spoke, except when the old lord was by. the foreign musician came 
again the next summer, but it was for the last time; for they led him 
such a life with their jealousy and their passions, that he grew weary, 
and went away, and never was heard of again. and miss maude, who had 
always meant to have her marriage acknowledge when her father should 
be dead, was left now a desert wife, whom nobody knew to have been 
married, with a child that she dare not own, although she love it to 
distraction; living with a father whom she feared, and a sister whom 
she hated. when the next summer pass over, and the dark foreigner 
never came, both miss maude and miss grace grew gloomy and sad; they 
had a haggard look about them, though they look handsome as ever. 
but, by-and-by, maude brightened; for her father grew more and more 
infirm, and more than ever carry away by his music; and she and miss 
grace live almost entire apart, have separate rooms, the one on 
the west side, miss maude on the east--those very rooms which were now 
shut up. so she thought she might have her little girl with her, and no 
one need ever know except those who dare not speak about it, and were 
bound to believe that it was, as she said, a cottager's child she had 
taken a fancy to. all this, dorothy said, was pretty well known; but 
what came afterwards no one knew, except miss grace and mrs. stark, who 
was even then her maid, and much more of a friend to her than ever her 
sister had been. but the servant supposed, from words that were 
dropped, that miss maude had triumph over miss grace, and told her 
that all the time the dark foreigner had been mock her with 
pretended love--he was her own husband. the colour left miss grace's 
cheek and lip that very day for ever, and she was heard to say many a 
time that soon or later she would have her revenge; and mrs. stark 
was for ever spy about the east rooms. 

one fearful night, just after the new year had come in, when the snow 
was lie thick and deep; and the flake were still falling--fast 
enough to blind any one who might be out and abroad--there was a great 
and violent noise heard, and the old lord's voice above all, curse 
and swear awfully, and the cries of a little child, and the proud 
defiance of a fierce woman, and the sound of a blow, and a dead 
stillness, and moan and wail die away on the hill-side! then the 
old lord summon all his servants, and told them, with terrible oaths, 
and words more terrible, that his daughter had disgrace herself, and 
that he had turn her out of doors--her, and her child--and that if 
ever they gave her help, or food, or shelter, he pray that they might 
never enter heaven. and, all the while, miss grace stood by him, white 
and still as any stone; and, when he had ended, she heave a great 
sigh, as much as to say her work was done, and her end was 
accomplished. but the old lord never touched his organ again, and die 
within the year; and no wonder! for, on the morrow of that wild and 
fearful night, the shepherds, coming down the fell side, found miss 
maude sitting, all crazy and smiling, under the holly-trees, nursing a 
dead child, with a terrible mark on its right shoulder. 'but that was 
not what kill it,' said dorothy: 'it was the frost and the cold. 
every wild creature was in its hole, and every beast in its fold, while 
the child and its mother were turn out to wander on the fells! and 
now you know all! and i wonder if you are less frightened now?' 

i was more frightened than ever; but i said i was not. i wish miss 
rosamond and myself well out of that dreadful house for ever; but i 
would not leave her, and i dare not take her away. but oh, how i 
watch her, and guarded her! we bolt the doors, and shut the 
window-shutters fast, an hour or more before dark, rather than leave 
them open five minutes too late. but my little lady still heard the 
weird child crying and mourning; and not all we could do or say could 
keep her from wanting to go to her, and let her in from the cruel wind 
and the snow. all this time i kept away from miss furnivall and mrs. 
stark, as much as ever i could; for i fear them--i knew no good could 
be about them, with their grey, hard faces, and their dreamy eyes, 
look back into the ghastly years that were gone. but, even in my 
fear, i had a kind of pity for miss furnivall, at least. those gone 
down to the pit can hardly have a more hopeless look than that which 
was ever on her face. at last i even got so sorry for her--who never 
said a word but what was quite forced from her--that i pray for her; 
and i taught miss rosamond to pray for one who had done a deadly sin; 
but often when she came to those words, she would listen, and start up 
from her knees, and say, 'i hear my little girl plain and crying 
very sad--oh, let her in, or she will die!' 

one night--just after new year's day had come at last, and the long 
winter had taken a turn, as i hoped--i heard the west drawing-room bell 
ring three times, which was the signal for me. i would not leave miss 
rosamond alone, for all she was asleep--for the old lord had been 
play wild than ever--and i fear lest my darling should waken to 
hear the spectre child; see her, i knew she could not. i had fasten 
the window too well for that. so i took her out of her bed, and 
wrap her up in such outer clothes as were most handy, and carry 
her down to the drawing-room, where the old ladies sat at their 
tapestry-work as usual. they look up when i came in, and mrs. stark 
asked, quite astounded, 'why did i bring miss rosamond there, out of 
her warm bed?' i had begun to whisper, 'because i was afraid of her 
being tempt out while i was away, by the wild child in the snow,' 
when she stop me short (with a glance at miss furnivall), and said 
miss furnivall want me to undo some work she had done wrong, and 
which neither of them could see to unpick. so i laid my pretty dear on 
the sofa, and sat down on a stool by them, and harden my heart 
against them, as i heard the wind rising and howling. 

miss rosamond slept on sound, for all the wind blew so miss furnivall 
said never a word, nor look round when the gust shook the windows. 
all at once she start up to her full height, and put up one hand, as 
if to bid us to listen. 

'i hear voices!' said she. 'i hear terrible screams--i hear my father's 
voice!' 

just at that moment my darling waken with a sudden start: 'my little 
girl is crying, oh, how she is crying!' and she try to get up and go 
to her, but she got her feet entangle in the blanket, and i caught her 
up; for my flesh had begun to creep at these noises, which they heard 
while we could catch no sound. in a minute or two the noise came, and 
gather fast, and fill our ears; we, too, heard voice and screams, 
and no long heard the winter's wind that rage abroad. mrs. stark 
look at me, and i at her, but we dare not speak. sudden miss 
furnivall went towards the door, out into the ante-room, through the 
west lobby, and open the door into the great hall. mrs. stark 
followed, and i durst not be left, though my heart almost stop 
beating for fear. i wrap my darling tight in my arms, and went out 
with them. in the hall the scream were loud than ever; they seem 
to come from the east wing--nearer and nearer--close on the other side 
of the locked-up doors--close behind them. then i notice that the 
great bronze chandelier seem all alight, though the hall was dim, and 
that a fire was blazing in the vast hearth-place, though it gave no 
heat; and i shudder up with terror, and fold my darling close to 
me. but as i did so the east door shook, and she, sudden struggle 
to get free from me, cried, 'hester! i must go. my little girl is 
there! i hear her; she is coming! hester, i must go!' 

i held her tight with all my strength; with a set will, i held her. if 
i had died, my hand would have grasp her still, i was so resolve in 
my mind. miss furnivall stood listening, and paid no regard to my 
darling, who had got down to the ground, and whom i, upon my knee now, 
was holding with both my arms clasp round her neck; she still 
strive and crying to get free. 

all at once, the east door gave way with a thundering crash, as if torn 
open in a violent passion, and there came into that broad and 
mysterious light, the figure of a tall old man, with grey hair and 
gleam eyes. he drove before him, with many a relentless gesture of 
abhorrence, a stern and beautiful woman, with a little child clinging 
to her dress. 

'oh, hester! hester!' cry miss rosamond; 'it's the lady! the lady 
below the holly-trees; and my little girl is with her. hester! hester! 
let me go to her; they are drawing me to them. i feel them--i feel 
them. i must go!' 

again she was almost convulse by her effort to get away; but i held 
her tight and tighter, till i fear i should do her a hurt; but 
rather that than let her go towards those terrible phantoms. they 
pass along towards the great hall-door, where the wind howl and 
raven for their prey; but before they reach that, the lady turned; 
and i could see that she defy the old man with a fierce and proud 
defiance; but then she quailed--and then she threw up her arms wildly 
and piteous to save her child--her little child--from a blow from his 
uplift crutch. 

and miss rosamond was torn as by a power strong than mine and writhe 
in my arms, and sob (for by this time the poor darling was grow 
faint). 

'they want me to go with them on to the fells--they are drawing me to 
them. oh, my little girl! i would come, but cruel, wicked hester hold 
me very tight.' but when she saw the uplift crutch, she swoon away, 
and i thank god for it. just at this moment--when the tall old man, 
his hair stream as in the blast of a furnace, was go to strike 
the little shrink child--miss furnivall, the old woman by my side, 
cry out, 'oh father! father! spare the little innocent child!' but 
just then i saw--we all saw--another phantom shape itself, and grow 
clear out of the blue and misty light that fill the hall; we had not 
seen her till now, for it was another lady who stood by the old man, 
with a look of relentless hate and triumphant scorn. that figure was 
very beautiful to look upon, with a soft, white hat drawn down over the 
proud brows, and a red and curling lip. it was dress in an open robe 
of blue satin. i had seen that figure before. it was the likeness of 
miss furnivall in her youth; and the terrible phantom move on, 
regardless of old miss furnivall's wild entreaty,--and the uplift 
crutch fell on the right shoulder of the little child, and the younger 
sister look on, stony, and deadly serene. but at that moment, the dim 
lights, and the fire that gave no heat, went out of themselves, and 
miss furnivall lay at our feet stricken down by the palsy--death-stricken. 

yes! she was carry to her bed that night never to rise again. she lay 
with her face to the wall, mutter low, but mutter always: 'alas! 
alas! what is done in youth can never be undone in age! what is done in 
youth can never be undone in age!' 




the poor clare 

chapter 1 


december 12th, 1747.--my life has been strange bound up with 
extraordinary incidents, some of which occur before i had any 
connection with the principal actor in them, or, indeed, before i even 
knew of their existence. i suppose, most old men are, like me, more 
given to look back upon their own career with a kind of fond 
interest and affectionate remembrance, than to watch the 
events--though these may have far more interest for the 
multitude--immediately passing before their eyes. if this should be the 
case with the generality of old people, how much more so with me!... if 
i am to enter upon that strange story connected with poor lucy, i must 
begin a long way back. i myself only came to the knowledge of her 
family history after i knew her; but, to make the tale clear to any one 
else, i must arrange event in the order in which they occurred--not 
that in which i became acquaint with them. 

there is a great old hall in the north-east of lancashire, in a part 
they call the trough of bolland, adjoin that other district name 
craven. starkey manor-house is rather like a number of rooms cluster 
round a grey, massive, old keep than a regularly-built hall. indeed, i 
suppose that the house only consist of the great tower in the centre, 
in the days when the scot made their raid terrible as far south as 
this; and that after the stuart came in, and there was a little more 
security of property in those parts, the starkey of that time add 
the lower building, which runs, two story high, all round the base of 
the keep. there has been a grand garden laid out in my days, on the 
southern slope near the house; but when i first knew the place, the 
kitchen-garden at the farm was the only piece of cultivated ground 
belong to it. the deer use to come within sight of the drawing-room 
windows, and might have browse quite close up to the house if they had 
not been too wild and shy. starkey manor-house itself stood on a 
projection or peninsula of high land, jut out from the abrupt hill 
that form the side of the trough of bolland. these hill were rocky 
and bleak enough towards their summit; lower down they were clothe 
with tangle copsewood and green depths of fern, out of which a grey 
giant of an ancient forest-tree would tower here and there, throw up 
its ghastly white branches, as if in imprecation, to the sky. these 
trees, they told me, were the remnant of that forest which exist in 
the days of the heptarchy, and were even then noted as landmarks. no 
wonder that their upper and more expose branch were leafless, and 
that the dead bark had peel away, from sapless old age. 

not far from the house there were a few cottages, apparently of the 
same date as the keep, probably built for some retainer of the family, 
who sought shelter--they and their family and their small flock and 
herds--at the hand of their feudal lord. some of them had pretty much 
fallen to decay. they were built in a strange fashion. strong beam had 
been sunk firm in the ground at the requisite distance, and their other 
end had been fasten together, two and two, so as to form the shape 
of one of those round waggon-headed gipsy-tents, only very much 
larger. the space between were fill with mud, stones, osiers, 
rubbish, mortar--anything to keep out the weather. the fire were made 
in the centre of these rude dwellings, a hole in the roof form the 
only chimney. no highland hut or ireland cabin could be of rough 
construction. 

the owner of this property, at the beginning of the present century, 
was a mr. patrick byrne starkey. his family had kept to the old faith, 
and were staunch roman catholics, esteem it even a sin to marry any 
one of protestant descent, however willing he or she might have been to 
embrace the romish religion. mr. patrick starkey's father had been a 
follower of james the second; and, during the disastrous ireland campaign 
of that monarch, he had fallen in love with an ireland beauty, a miss 
byrne, as zealous for her religion and for the stuart as himself. he 
had return to ireland after his escape to france, and married her, 
bearing her back to the court at st. germains. but some licence on the 
part of the disorderly gentlemen who surround king james in his 
exile, had insult his beautiful wife, and disgust him; so he 
remove from st. germain to antwerp, whence, in a few years' time, he 
quiet return to starkey manor-house--some of his lancashire 
neighbour have lent their good offices to reconcile him to the 
powers that were. he was as firm a roman catholic as ever, and as 
staunch an advocate for the stuart and the divine right of kings; but 
his religion almost amount to asceticism, and the conduct of those 
with whom he had been brought in such close contact at st. germain 
would little bear the inspection of a stern moralist. so he gave his 
allegiance where he could not give his esteem, and learned to respect 
sincerely the upright and moral character of one whom he yet regard 
as an usurper. king william's government had little need to fear such a 
one. so he returned, as i have said, with a sober heart and 
impoverish fortunes, to his ancestral house, which had fallen sadly 
to ruin while the owner had been a courtier, a soldier, and an exile. 
the road into the trough of bolland were little more than cart-ruts; 
indeed, the way up to the house lay along a plough field before you 
came to the deer-park. madam, as the country-folk use to call mrs. 
starkey, rode on a pillion behind her husband, holding on to him with a 
light hand by his leather riding-belt. little master (he that was 
afterwards squire patrick byrne starkey) was held on to his pony by a 
serving-man. a woman past middle age walked, with a firm and strong 
step, by the cart that held much of the baggage; and, high up on the 
mail and boxes, sat a girl of dazzle beauty, perch lightly on the 
topmost trunk, and sway herself fearless to and fro, as the cart 
rock and shook in the heavy road of late autumn. the girl wore the 
antwerp faille, or black spain mantle over her head, and altogether 
her appearance was such that the old cottager, who describe the 
procession to me many years after, said that all the country-folk took 
her for a foreigner. some dogs, and the boy who held them in charge, 
made up the company. they rode silent along, look with grave, 
serious eyes at the people, who came out of the scattered cottage to 
bow or curtsy to the real squire, 'come back at last,' and gaze after 
the little procession with gape wonder, not deaden by the sound of 
the foreign language in which the few necessary words that pass among 
them were spoken. one lad, call from his staring by the squire to 
come and help about the cart, accompany them to the manor-house. he 
said that when the lady had descended from her pillion, the middle-aged 
woman whom i have describe as walking while the other rode, step 
quick forward, and taking madam starkey (who was of a slight and 
delicate figure) in her arms, she lift her over the threshold, and 
set her down in her husband's house, at the same time utter a 
passionate and outlandish blessing. the squire stood by, smile 
grave at first; but when the words of blessing were pronounced, he 
took off his fine feather hat, and bent his head. the girl with the 
black mantle step onward into the shadow of the dark hall, and 
kiss the lady's hand; and that was all the lad could tell to the 
group that gather round him on his return, eager to hear everything, 
and to know how much the squire had given him for his services. 

from all i could gather, the manor-house, at the time of the squire's 
return, was in the most dilapidated state. the stout grey wall 
remain firm and entire; but the inner chambers had been use for all 
kind of purposes. the great withdrawing-room had been a barn; the 
state tapestry-chamber had held wool, and so on. but, by-and-by, they 
were clear out; and if the squire had no money to spend on new 
furniture, he and his wife had the knack of making the best of the old. 
he was no despicable joiner; she had a kind of grace in whatever she 
did, and impart an air of elegant picturesque to whatever she 
touched. besides, they had brought many rare things from the continent; 
perhaps i should rather say, things that were rare in that part of 
england--carvings, and crosses, and beautiful pictures. and then, 
again, wood was plentiful in the trough of bolland, and great log-fires 
dance and glitter in all the dark, old rooms, and gave a look of 
home and comfort to everything. 

why do i tell you all this? i have little to do with the squire and 
madam starkey; and yet i dwell upon them, as if i were unwill to 
come to the real people with whom my life was so strange mixed up. 
madam had been nurse in ireland by the very woman who lift her in 
her arms, and welcome her to her husband's home in lancashire. 
excepting for the short period of her own married life, bridget 
fitzgerald had never left her nursling. her marriage--to one above her 
in rank--had been unhappy. her husband had died, and left her in even 
greater poverty than that in which she was when he had first met with 
her. she had one child, the beautiful daughter who came riding on the 
waggon-load of furniture that was brought to the manor-house. madam 
starkey had taken her again into her service when she became a widow. 
she and her daughter had follow 'the mistress' in all her fortunes; 
they had live at st. germain and at antwerp, and were now come to her 
home in lancashire. as soon as bridget had arrive there, the squire 
gave her a cottage of her own, and took more pains in furnish it for 
her than he did in anything else out of his own house. it was only 
nominal her residence. she was constant up at the great house; 
indeed, it was but a short cut across the wood from her own home to 
the home of her nursling. her daughter mary, in like manner, move from 
one house to the other at her own will. madam love both mother and 
child dearly. they had great influence over her, and, through her, over 
her husband. whatever bridget or mary will was sure to come to pass. 
they were not disliked; for, though wild and passionate, they were also 
generous by nature. but the other servant were afraid of them, as 
being in secret the ruling spirits of the household. the squire had 
lost his interest in all secular things; madam was gentle, 
affectionate, and yielding. both husband and wife were tender 
attach to each other and to their boy; but they grew more and more to 
shun the trouble of decision on any point; and hence it was that 
bridget could exert such despotic power. but if every one else yield 
to her 'magic of a superior mind,' her daughter not unfrequent 
rebelled. she and her mother were too much alike to agree. there were 
wild quarrel between them, and wild reconciliations. there were 
times when, in the heat of passion, they could have stab each other. 
at all other times they both--bridget especially--would have willing 
laid down their lives for one another. bridget's love for her child lay 
very deep--deeper than that daughter ever knew; or i should think she 
would never have weary of home as she did, and pray her mistress to 
obtain for her some situation--as waiting-maid--beyond the seas, in 
that more cheerful continental life, among the scene of which so many 
of her happiest years had been spent. she thought, as youth thinks, 
that life would last for ever, and that two or three years were but a 
small portion of it to pass away from her mother, whose only child she 
was. bridget thought differently, but was too proud ever to show what 
she felt. if her child wish to leave her, why--she should go. but 
people said bridget became ten years old in the course of two month 
at this time. she took it that mary want to leave her. the truth was, 
that mary want for a time to leave the place, and to seek some 
change, and would thankful have taken her mother with her. indeed, 
when madam starkey had gotten her a situation with some grand lady 
abroad, and the time drew near for her to go, it was mary who clung to 
her mother with passionate embrace, and, with flood of tears, declared 
that she would never leave her; and it was bridget, who at last 
loosen her arms, and, grave and tearless herself, bade her keep her 
word, and go forth into the wide world. sob aloud, and look back 
continually, mary went away. bridget was still as death, scarcely 
drawing her breath, or close her stony eyes; till at last she turn 
back into her cottage, and heave a ponderous old settle against the 
door. there she sat, motionless, over the grey ashes of her 
extinguish fire, deaf to madam's sweet voice, as she beg leave to 
enter and comfort her nurse. deaf, stony, and motionless, she sat for 
more than twenty hours; till, for the third time, madam came across the 
snowy path from the great house, carry with her a young spaniel, 
which had been mary's pet up at the hall, and which had not cease all 
night long to seek for its absent mistress, and to whine and moan after 
her. with tear madam told this story, through the closed door--tears 
excited by the terrible look of anguish, so steady, so immovable--so 
the same to-day as it was yesterday--on her nurse's face. the little 
creature in her arms began to utter its piteous cry, as it shiver 
with the cold. bridget stirred; she moved--she listened. again that 
long whine; she thought it was for her daughter; and what she had 
deny to her nursling and mistress she grant to the dumb creature 
that mary had cherished. she open the door, and took the dog from 
madam's arms. then madam came in, and kiss and comfort the old 
woman, who took but little notice of her or anything. and send up 
master patrick to the hall for fire and food, the sweet young lady 
never left her nurse all that night. next day, the squire himself came 
down, carry a beautiful foreign picture: our lady of the holy heart, 
the papist call it. it is a picture of the virgin, her heart pierce 
with arrows, each arrow represent one of her great woes. that 
picture hung in bridget's cottage when i first saw her; i have that 
picture now. 

years went on. mary was still abroad. bridget was still and stern, 
instead of active and passionate. the little dog, mignon, was indeed 
her darling. i have heard that she talk to it continually; although, 
to most people, she was so silent. the squire and madam treat her 
with the greatest consideration, and well they might; for to them she 
was as devoted and faithful as ever. mary wrote pretty often, and 
seem satisfy with her life. but at length the letters ceased--i 
hardly know whether before or after a great and terrible sorrow came 
upon the house of the starkeys. the squire sicken of a putrid fever; 
and madam caught it in nursing him, and died. you may be sure, bridget 
let no other woman tend her but herself; and in the very arms that had 
received her at her birth, that sweet young woman laid her head down, 
and gave up her breath. the squire recovered, in a fashion. he was 
never strong--he had never the heart to smile again. he fast and 
pray more than ever; and people did say that he try to cut off the 
entail, and leave all the property away to found a monastery abroad, of 
which he pray that some day little squire patrick might be the 
reverend father. but he could not do this, for the strict of the 
entail and the law against the papists. so he could only appoint 
gentlemen of his own faith as guardian to his son, with many charge 
about the lad's soul, and a few about the land, and the way it was to 
be held while he was a minor. of course, bridget was not forgotten. he 
sent for her as he lay on his death-bed, and ask her if she would 
rather have a sum down, or have a small annuity settled upon her. she 
said at once she would have a sum down; for she thought of her 
daughter, and how she could bequeath the money to her, whereas an 
annuity would have die with her. so the squire left her her cottage 
for life, and a fair sum of money. and then he died, with as ready and 
willing a heart as, i suppose, ever any gentleman took out of this 
world with him. the young squire was carry off by his guardians, and 
bridget was left alone. 

i have said that she had not heard from mary for some time. in her last 
letter, she had told of travel about with her mistress, who was the 
english wife of some great foreign officer, and had spoken of her 
chance of making a good marriage, without name the gentleman's name, 
keeping it rather back as a pleasant surprise to her mother; his 
station and fortune being, as i had afterwards reason to know, far 
superior to anything she had a right to expect. then came a long 
silence; and madam was dead, and the squire was dead; and bridget's 
heart was gnaw by anxiety, and she knew not whom to ask for news of 
her child. she could not write, and the squire had manage her 
communication with her daughter. she walk off to hurst; and got a 
good priest there--one whom she had known at antwerp--to write for her. 
but no answer came. it was like crying into the awful still of 
night. 

one day, bridget was miss by those neighbour who had been accustomed 
to mark her goings-out and comings-in. she had never been sociable with 
any of them; but the sight of her had become a part of their daily 
lives, and slow wonder arose in their minds, as morning after morning 
came, and her house-door remain closed, her window dead from any 
glitter, or light of fire within. at length, some one try the door; 
it was locked. two or three laid their head together, before daring to 
look in through the blank, unshuttered window. but, at last, they 
summon up courage; and then saw that bridget's absence from their 
little world was not the result of accident or death, but of 
premeditation. such small articles of furniture as could be secure 
from the effects of time and damp by being packed up, were stow away 
in boxes. the picture of the madonna was taken down, and gone. in a 
word, bridget had stolen away from her home, and left no trace whither 
she was departed. i knew afterwards, that she and her little dog had 
wander off on the long search for her lost daughter. she was too 
illiterate to have faith in letters, even had she had the means of 
writing and send many. but she had faith in her own strong love, and 
believe that her passionate instinct would guide her to her child. 
besides, foreign travel was no new thing to her, and she could speak 
enough of france to explain the object of her journey, and had, 
moreover, the advantage of being, from her faith, a welcome object of 
charitable hospitality at many a distant convent. but the country 
people round starkey manor-house knew nothing of all this. they 
wonder what had become of her, in a torpid, lazy fashion, and then 
left off thinking of her altogether. several years passed. both 
manor-house and cottage were deserted. the young squire live far away 
under the direction of his guardians. there were inroad of wool and 
corn into the sitting-rooms of the hall; and there was some low talk, 
from time to time, among the hind and country people, whether it would 
not be as well to break into old bridget's cottage, and save such of 
her goods as were left from the moth and rust which must be making sad 
havoc. but this idea was always quench by the recollection of her 
strong character and passionate anger; and tale of her masterful 
spirit, and vehement force of will, were whisper about, till the very 
thought of offend her, by touching any article of hers, became 
invest with a kind of horror: it was believe that, dead or alive, 
she would not fail to avenge it. 

sudden she came home; with as little noise or note of preparation as 
she had departed. one day, some one notice a thin, blue curl of smoke, 
ascend from her chimney. her door stood open to the noon-day sun; 
and, ere many hour had elapsed, some one had seen an old 
travel-and-sorrow-stained woman dip her pitcher in the well; and 
said, that the dark, solemn eyes that look up at him were more like 
bridget fitzgerald's than any one else's in this world; and yet, if it 
were she, she look as if she had been scorch in the flame of hell, 
so brown, and scared, and fierce a creature did she seem. by-and-by 
many saw her; and those who met her eye once care not to be caught 
look at her again. she had got into the habit of perpetual talk 
to herself; nay, more, answer herself, and vary her tone 
according to the side she took at the moment. it was no wonder that 
those who dare to listen outside her door at night, believe that she 
held converse with some spirit; in short, she was unconscious earn 
for herself the dreadful reputation of a witch. 

her little dog, which had wander half over the continent with her, 
was her only companion; a dumb remembrance of happy days. once he 
was ill; and she carry him more than three miles, to ask about his 
management from one who had been groom to the last squire, and had then 
been noted for his skill in all disease of animals. whatever this man 
did, the dog recovered; and they who heard her thanks, intermingle 
with blessing (that were rather promise of good fortune than 
prayers), look grave at his good luck when, next year, his ewe 
twinned, and his meadow-grass was heavy and thick. 

now it so happen that, about the year seventeen hundred and eleven, 
one of the guardian of the young squire, a certain sir philip tempest, 
bethought him of the good shoot there must be on his ward's 
property; and, in consequence, he brought down four or five gentlemen, 
of his friends, to stay for a week or two at the hall. from all 
accounts, they roystere and spent pretty freely. i never heard any of 
their name but one, and that was squire gisborne's. he was hardly a 
middle-aged man then; he had been much abroad, and there, i believe, he 
had known sir philip tempest, and done him some service. he was a 
daring and dissolute fellow in those days: careless and fearless, and 
one who would rather be in a quarrel than out of it. he had his fit of 
ill-temper beside, when he would spare neither man nor beast. 
otherwise, those who knew him well, use to say he had a good heart, 
when he was neither drunk, nor angry, nor in any way vexed. he had 
alter much when i came to know him. 

one day, the gentlemen had all been out shooting, and with but little 
success, i believe; anyhow, mr. gisborne had had none, and was in a 
black humour accordingly. he was coming home, have his gun loaded, 
sportsman-like, when little mignon cross his path, just as he turn 
out of the wood by bridget's cottage. partly for wantonness, partly to 
vent his spleen upon some living creature, mr. gisborne took his gun, 
and fired--he had better have never fire gun again, than aim that 
unlucky shot. he hit mignon; and at the creature's sudden cry, bridget 
came out, and saw at a glance what had been done. she took mignon up in 
her arms, and look hard at the wound; the poor dog look at her with 
his glazing eyes, and try to wag his tail and lick her hand, all 
cover with blood. mr. gisborne spoke in a kind of sullen penitence: 

'you should have kept the dog out of my way--a little poach 
varmint.' 

at this very moment, mignon stretch out his legs, and stiffen in 
her arms--her lost mary's dog, who had wander and sorrow with her 
for years. she walk right into mr. gisborne's path, and fixed his 
unwilling, sullen look with her dark and terrible eye. 

'those never throve that did me harm,' said she. 'i'm alone in the 
world, and helpless; the more do the saint in heaven hear my prayers. 
hear me, ye blessed ones! hear me while i ask for sorrow on this bad, 
cruel man. he has kill the only creature that love me--the dumb 
beast that i loved. bring down heavy sorrow on his head for it, o ye 
saints! he thought that i was helpless, because he saw me lonely and 
poor; but are not the army of heaven for the like of me?' 

'come, come,' said he, half-remorseful, but not one whit afraid. 
'here's a crown to buy thee another dog. take it, and leave off 
cursing! i care none for thy threats.' 

'don't you?' said she, coming a step closer, and change her 
imprecatory cry for a whisper which made the gamekeeper's lad, 
following mr. gisborne, creep all over. 'you shall live to see the 
creature you love best, and who alone love you--ay, a human creature, 
but as innocent and fond as my poor, dead darling--you shall see this 
creature, for whom death would be too happy, become a terror and a 
loathing to all, for this blood's sake. hear me, o holy saints, who 
never fail them that have no other help!' 

she threw up her right hand, fill with poor mignon's life-drops; they 
spirted, one or two of them, on his shooting-dress,--an ominous sight 
to the follower. but the master only laugh a little, forced, scornful 
laugh, and went on to the hall. before he got there, however, he took 
out a gold piece, and bade the boy carry it to the old woman on his 
return to the village. the lad was 'afeard,' as he told me in after 
years; he came to the cottage, and hover about, not daring to enter. 
he peep through the window at last; and by the flicker wood-flame, 
he saw bridget kneel before the picture of our lady of the holy 
heart, with dead mignon lie between her and the madonna. she was 
pray wildly, as her outstretched arms betokened. the lad shrank away 
in redouble terror; and contented himself with slip the gold-piece 
under the ill-fitting door. the next day it was thrown out upon the 
midden; and there it lay, no one daring to touch it. 

meanwhile mr. gisborne, half curious, half uneasy, thought to lessen 
his uncomfortable feelings by ask sir philip who bridget was? he 
could only describe her--he did not know her name. sir philip was 
equally at a loss. but an old servant of the starkeys, who had resume 
his livery at the hall on this occasion--a scoundrel whom bridget had 
save from dismissal more than once during her palmy days--said:-- 

'it will be the old witch, that his worship means. she needs a ducking, 
if ever woman did, do that bridget fitzgerald.' 

'fitzgerald!' said both the gentlemen at once. but sir philip was the 
first to continue: 

'i must have no talk of duck her, dickon. why, she must be the very 
woman poor starkey bade me have a care of; but when i came here last 
she was gone, no one knew where. i'll go and see her tomorrow. but mind 
you, sirrah, if any harm come to her, or any more talk of her being a 
witch--i've a pack of hound at home, who can follow the scent of a 
lie knave as well as ever they follow a dog-fox; so take care how 
you talk about duck a faithful old servant of your dead master's.' 

'had she ever a daughter?' ask mr. gisborne, after a while. 

'i don't know--yes! i've a notion she had; a kind of waiting-woman to 
madam starkey.' 

'please your worship,' said humble dickon, 'mistress bridget had a 
daughter--one mistress mary--who went abroad, and has never been heard 
on since; and folk do say that has craze her mother.' 

mr. gisborne shade his eyes with his hand. 

'i could wish she had not cursed me,' he muttered. 'she may have 
power--no one else could.' after a while, he said aloud, no one 
understanding rightly what he meant, 'tush! it's impossible!'--and 
call for claret; and he and the other gentlemen set to to a 
drinking-bout. 




chapter 2 


i now come to the time in which i myself was mixed up with the people 
that i have been writing about. and to make you understand how i became 
connected with them, i must give you some little account of myself. my 
father was the younger son of a devonshire gentleman of moderate 
property; my eldest uncle succeed to the estate of his forefathers, 
my second became an eminent attorney in london, and my father took 
orders. like most poor clergymen, he had a large family; and i have no 
doubt was glad enough when my london uncle, who was a bachelor, offer 
to take charge of me, and bring me up to be his successor in business. 

in this way i came to live in london, in my uncle's house, not far from 
gray's inn, and to be treat and esteem as his son, and to labour 
with him in his office. i was very fond of the old gentleman. he was 
the confidential agent of many country squires, and had attain to his 
present position as much by knowledge of human nature as by knowledge 
of law; though he was learned enough in the latter. he use to say his 
business was law, his pleasure heraldry. from his intimate acquaintance 
with family history, and all the tragic course of life therein 
involved, to hear him talk, at leisure times, about any coat of arms 
that came across his path was as good as a play or a romance. many 
case of dispute property, dependent on a love of genealogy, were 
brought to him, as to a great authority on such points. if the lawyer 
who came to consult him was young, he would take no fee, only give him 
a long lecture on the importance of attend to heraldry; if the 
lawyer was of mature age and good standing, he would mulct him pretty 
well, and abuse him to me afterwards as negligent of one great branch 
of the profession. his house was in a stately new street call ormond 
street, and in it he had a handsome library; but all the books treat 
of things that were past; none of them plan or look forward into 
the future. i work away--partly for the sake of my family at home, 
partly because my uncle had really taught me to enjoy the kind of 
practice in which he himself took such delight. i suspect i work too 
hard; at any rate, in seventeen hundred and eighteen i was far from 
well, and my good uncle was disturbed by my ill looks. 

one day, he rang the bell twice into the clerk's room at the dingy 
office in gray's inn lane. it was the summons for me, and i went into 
his private room just as a gentleman--whom i knew well enough by sight 
as an ireland lawyer of more reputation than he deserved--was leaving. 

my uncle was slow rubbing his hand together and considering. i was 
there two or three minutes before he spoke. then he told me that i must 
pack up my portmanteau that very afternoon, and start that night by 
post-horse for west chester. i should get there, if all went well, at 
the end of five days' time, and must then wait for a packet to cross 
over to dublin; from thence i must proceed to a certain town name 
kildoon, and in that neighbourhood i was to remain, making certain 
inquiry as to the existence of any descendant of the younger branch 
of a family to whom some valuable estate had descended in the female 
line. the ireland lawyer whom i had seen was weary of the case, and would 
willing have given up the property, without further ado, to a man who 
appear to claim them; but on lay his table and tree before my 
uncle, the latter had foreseen so many possible prior claimants, that 
the lawyer had beg him to undertake the management of the whole 
business. in his youth, my uncle would have like nothing better than 
go over to ireland himself, and ferret out every scrap of paper 
or parchment, and every word of tradition respecting the family. as it 
was, old and gouty, he depute me. 

accordingly, i went to kildoon. i suspect i had something of my uncle's 
delight in following up a genealogy scent, for i very soon found 
out, when on the spot, that mr. rooney, the ireland lawyer, would have 
got both himself and the first claimant into a terrible scrape, if he 
had pronounced his opinion that the estate ought to be given up to 
him. there were three poor ireland fellows, each near of kin to the 
last possessor; but, a generation before, there was a still near 
relation, who had never been account for, nor his existence ever 
discover by the lawyers, i venture to think, till i route him out 
from the memory of some of the old dependant of the family. what had 
become of him? i travelled backwards and forwards; i cross over to 
france, and came back again with a slight clue, which end in my 
discover that, wild and dissipated himself, he had left one child, a 
son, of yet worse character than his father; that this same hugh 
fitzgerald had married a very beautiful serving-woman of the byrnes--a 
person below him in hereditary rank, but above him in character; that 
he had die soon after his marriage, leave one child, whether a boy 
or a girl i could not learn, and that the mother had return to live 
in the family of the byrnes. now, the chief of this latter family was 
serving in the duke of berwick's regiment, and it was long before i 
could hear from him; it was more than a year before i got a short, 
haughty letter--i fancy he had a soldier's contempt for a civilian, an 
irishman's hatred for an englishman, an exile jacobite's jealousy of 
one who prosper and live tranquil under the government he look 
upon as an usurpation. 'bridget fitzgerald,' he said, 'had been 
faithful to the fortune of his sister--had follow her abroad, and to 
england when mrs. starkey had thought fit to return. both her sister 
and her husband were dead; he knew nothing of bridget fitzgerald at the 
present time: probably sir philip tempest, his nephew's guardian, might 
be able to give me some information.' i have not given the little 
contemptuous terms; the way in which faithful service was meant to 
imply more than it said--all that has nothing to do with my story. sir 
philip, when applied to, told me that he paid an annuity regularly to 
an old woman name fitzgerald, living at coldholme (the village near 
starkey manor-house). whether she had any descendant he could not say. 

one bleak march evening, i came in sight of the place describe at the 
beginning of my story. i could hardly understand the rude dialect in 
which the direction to old bridget's house was given. 

'yo' see yon furleets,' all run together, gave me no idea that i was to 
guide myself by the distant lights that shone in the window of the 
hall, occupy for the time by a farmer who held the post of steward, 
while the squire, now four or five and twenty, was making the grand 
tour. however, at last, i reach bridget's cottage--a low, moss-grown 
place; the palings that had once surround it were broken and gone; 
and the underwood of the forest came up to the walls, and must have 
darken the windows. it was about seven o'clock--not late to my london 
notions--but, after knock for some time at the door and receiving no 
reply, i was driven to conjecture that the occupant of the house was 
gone to bed. so i betook myself to the nearest church i had seen, three 
mile back on the road i had come, sure that close to that i should 
find an inn of some kind; and early the next morning i set off back to 
coldholme, by a field-path which my host assured me i should find a 
short cut than the road i had taken the night before. it was a cold, 
sharp morning; my feet left print in the sprinkling of hoar-frost that 
cover the ground; nevertheless, i saw an old woman, whom i 
instinctive suspect to be the object of my search, in a sheltered 
covert on one side of my path. i linger and watch her. she must 
have been considerably above the middle size in her prime, for when she 
raise herself from the stoop position in which i first saw her, 
there was something fine and commanding in the erect of her figure. 
she droop again in a minute or two, and seem look for something 
on the ground, as, with bent head, she turn off from the spot where i 
gaze upon her, and was lost to my sight. i fancy i miss my way, and 
made a round in spite of the landlord's directions; for by the time i 
had reach bridget's cottage she was there, with no semblance of 
hurried walk or discomposure of any kind. the door was slightly ajar. i 
knocked, and the majestic figure stood before me, silent await the 
explanation of my errand. her teeth were all gone, so the nose and chin 
were brought near together; the grey eyebrow were straight, and almost 
hung over her deep, cavernous eyes, and the thick white hair lay in 
silvery masses over the low, wide, wrinkle forehead. for a moment, i 
stood uncertain how to shape my answer to the solemn questioning of her 
silence. 

'your name is bridget fitzgerald, i believe?' she bowed her head in 
assent. 

'i have something to say to you. may i come in? i am unwill to keep 
you standing.' 

'you cannot tire me,' she said, and at first she seem inclined to 
deny me the shelter of her roof. but the next moment--she had search 
the very soul in me with her eyes during that instant--she led me in, 
and drop the shadow hood of her grey, drape cloak, which had 
previous hid part of the character of her countenance. the cottage 
was rude and bare enough. but before that picture of the virgin, of 
which i have made mention, there stood a little cup fill with fresh 
primroses. while she paid her reverence to the madonna, i understood 
why she had been out seek through the clump of green in the 
sheltered copse. then she turn round, and bade me be seated. the 
expression of her face, which all this time i was studying, was not 
bad, as the story of my last night's landlord had led me to expect; 
it was a wild, stern, fierce, indomitable countenance, seam and 
scar by agony of solitary weeping; but it was neither cunning nor 
malignant. 

'my name is bridget fitzgerald,' said she, by way of opening our 
conversation. 

'and your husband was hugh fitzgerald, of knock-mahon, near kildoon, in 
ireland?' 

a faint light came into the dark gloom of her eyes. 

'he was.' 

'may i ask if you had any children by him?' 

the light in her eyes grew quick and red. she try to speak, i could 
see; but something rose in her throat, and choke her, and until she 
could speak calmly, she would fain not speak at all before a stranger. 
in a minute or so she said: 

'i had a daughter--one mary fitzgerald,'--then her strong nature 
master her strong will, and she cry out, with a trembling, wail 
cry: 'oh, man! what of her?--what of her?' 

she rose from her seat, and came and clutch at my arm, and look in 
my eyes. there she read, as i suppose, my utter ignorance of what had 
become of her child; for she went blind back to her chair, and sat 
rock herself and soft moaning, as if i were not there; i not 
daring to speak to the lone and awful woman. after a little pause, she 
knelt down before the picture of our lady of the holy heart, and spoke 
to her by all the fanciful and poetic name of the litany. 

'o rose of sharon! o tower of david! o star of the sea! have you no 
comfort for my sore heart? am i for ever to hope? grant me at least 
despair!'--and so on she went, heedless of my presence. her prayer 
grew wild and wilder, till they seem to me to touch on the border 
of madness and blasphemy. almost involuntarily, i spoke as if to stop 
her. 

'have you any reason to think that your daughter is dead?' 

she rose from her knees, and came and stood before me. 

'mary fitzgerald is dead,' said she. 'i shall never see her again in 
the flesh. no tongue ever told me. but i know she is dead. i have 
yearn so to see her, and my heart's will is fearful and strong: it 
would have drawn her to me before now, if she had been a wanderer on 
the other side of the world. i wonder often it has not drawn her out of 
the grave to come and stand before me, and hear me tell her how i love 
her. for, sir, we part unfriends.' 

i knew nothing but the dry particulars need for my lawyer's quest, 
but i could not help feeling for the desolate woman; and she must have 
read the unusual sympathy with her wistful eyes. 

'yes, sir, we did. she never knew how i love her; and we part 
unfriends; and i fear me that i wish her voyage might not turn out 
well, only meaning,--o, blessed virgin! you know i only meant that she 
should come home to her mother's arms as to the happiest place on 
earth; but my wish are terrible--their power go beyond my 
thought--and there is no hope for me, if my words brought mary harm.' 

'but,' i said, 'you do not know that she is dead. even now, you hope 
she might be alive. listen to me,' and i told her the tale i have 
already told you, give it all in the driest manner, for i want to 
recall the clear sense that i felt almost sure she had possessed in her 
younger days, and by keeping up her attention to details, restrain the 
vague wild of her grief. 

she listen with deep attention, putt from time to time such 
question as convinced me i had to do with no common intelligence, 
however dim and shorn by solitude and mysterious sorrow. then she 
took up her tale; and in few brief words, told me of her wanderings 
abroad in vain search after her daughter; sometimes in the wake of 
armies, sometimes in camp, sometimes in city. the lady, whose 
waiting-woman mary had gone to be, had die soon after the date of her 
last letter home; her husband, the foreign officer, had been serving in 
hungary, whither bridget had follow him, but too late to find him. 
vague rumour reach her that mary had made a great marriage; and this 
sting of doubt was added,--whether the mother might not be close to her 
child under her new name, and even hearing of her every day, and yet 
never recognise the lost one under the appellation she then bore. at 
length the thought took possession of her, that it was possible that 
all this time mary might be at home at coldholme, in the trough of 
bolland, in lancashire, in england; and home came bridget, in that vain 
hope, to her desolate hearth, and empty cottage. here she had thought 
it safest to remain; if mary was in life, it was here she would seek 
for her mother. 

i noted down one or two particulars out of bridget's narrative that i 
thought might be of use to me; for i was stimulate to further search 
in a strange and extraordinary manner. it seem as if it were 
impress upon me, that i must take up the quest where bridget had laid 
it down; and this for no reason that had previous influence me (such 
as my uncle's anxiety on the subject, my own reputation as a lawyer, 
and so on), but from some strange power which had taken possession of 
my will only that very morning, and which forced it in the direction it 
chose. 

'i will go,' said i. 'i will spare nothing in the search. trust to me. 
i will learn all that can be learnt. you shall know all that money, or 
pains, or wit can discover. it is true she may be long dead: but she 
may have left a child.' 

'a child!' she cried, as if for the first time this idea had struck her 
mind. 'hear him, blessed virgin! he say she may have left a child. and 
you have never told me, though i have pray so for a sign, waking or 
sleeping!' 

'nay,' said i, 'i know nothing but what you tell me. you say you heard 
of her marriage.' 

but she caught nothing of what i said. she was pray to the virgin in 
a kind of ecstacy, which seem to render her unconscious of my very 
presence. 

from coldholme i went to sir philip tempest's. the wife of the foreign 
officer had been a cousin of his father's, and from him i thought i 
might gain some particulars as to the existence of the count de la tour 
d'auvergne, and where i could find him; for i knew question _de vive 
voix_ aid the flag recollection, and i was determined to lose no 
chance for want of trouble. but sir philip had gone abroad, and it 
would be some time before i could receive an answer. so i follow my 
uncle's advice, to whom i had mention how weary i felt, both in 
body and mind, by my will-o'-the-wisp search. he immediately told me to 
go to harrogate, there to await sir philip's reply. i should be near to 
one of the place connected with my search, coldholme; not far from sir 
philip tempest, in case he returned, and i wish to ask him any 
further questions; and, in conclusion, my uncle bade me try to forget 
all about my business for a time. 

this was far easy said than done. i have seen a child on a common 
blown along by a high wind, without power of standing still and 
resist the tempestuous force. i was somewhat in the same predicament 
as regard my mental state. something resistless seem to urge my 
thought on, through every possible course by which there was a chance 
of attain to my object. i did not see the sweeping moor when i 
walk out: when i held a book in my hand, and read the words, their 
sense did not penetrate to my brain. if i slept, i went on with the 
same ideas, always flowing in the same direction. this could not last 
long without have a bad effect on the body. i had an illness, which, 
although i was rack with pain, was a positive relief to me, as it 
compel me to live in the present suffering, and not in the visionary 
research i had been continual making before. my kind uncle came to 
nurse me; and after the immediate danger was over, my life seem to 
slip away in delicious languor for two or three months. i did not 
ask--so much did i dread fall into the old channel of 
thought--whether any reply had been received to my letter to sir 
philip. i turn my whole imagination right away from all that subject. 
my uncle remain with me until nigh summer, and then return to his 
business in london; leave me perfectly well, although not completely 
strong. i was to follow him in a fortnight; when, as he said, 'we would 
look over letters, and talk about several things.' i knew what this 
little speech allude to, and shrank from the train of thought it 
suggested, which was so intimate connected with my first feelings of 
illness. however, i had a fortnight more to roam on those invigorate 
yorkshire moors. 

in those days, there was one large, rambling inn at harrogate, close to 
the medicinal spring; but it was already becoming too small for the 
accommodation of the influx of visitors, and many lodge round about, 
in the farm-houses of the district. it was so early in the season, that 
i had the inn pretty much to myself; and, indeed, felt rather like a 
visitor in a private house, so intimate had the landlord and landlady 
become with me during my long illness. she would chide me for being out 
so late on the moors, or for have been too long without food, quite 
in a motherly way; while he consult me about vintage and wines, and 
taught me many a yorkshire wrinkle about horses. in my walk i met 
other stranger from time to time. even before my uncle had left me, i 
had noticed, with half-torpid curiosity, a young lady of very striking 
appearance, who went about always accompany by an elderly companion, 
hardly a gentlewoman, but with something in her look that prepossessed 
me in her favour. the younger lady always put her veil down when any 
one approached; so it had been only once or twice, when i had come upon 
her at a sudden turn in the path, that i had even had a glimpse of her 
face. i am not sure if it was beautiful, though in after-life i grew to 
think it so. but it was at this time over-shadowed by a sad that 
never varied: a pale, quiet, resigned look of intense suffering, that 
irresistible attract me, not with love, but with a sense of infinite 
compassion for one so young yet so hopeless unhappy. the companion 
wore something of the same look: quiet, melancholy, hopeless, yet 
resigned. i ask my landlord who they were. he said they were call 
clarke, and wish to be considered as mother and daughter; but that, 
for his part, he did not believe that to be their right name, or that 
there was any such relationship between them. they had been in the 
neighbourhood of harrogate for some time, lodging in a remote 
farm-house. the people there would tell nothing about them; saying that 
they paid handsomely, and never did any harm; so why should they be 
speak of any strange things that might happen? that, as the landlord 
shrewd observed, show there was something out of the common way: he 
had heard that the elderly woman was a cousin of the farmer's where 
they lodged, and so the regard existing between relations might help to 
keep them quiet. 

'what did he think, then, was the reason for their extreme seclusion?' 
ask i. 

'nay, he could not tell, not he. he had heard that the young lady, for 
all as quiet as she seemed, play strange prank at times.' he shook 
his head when i ask him for more particulars, and refuse to give 
them, which made me doubt if he knew any, for he was in general a 
talkative and communicative man. in default of other interests, after 
my uncle left, i set myself to watch these two people. i hover about 
their walks, drawn towards them with a strange fascination, which was 
not diminish by their evident annoyance at so frequent meeting me. 
one day, i had the sudden good fortune to be at hand when they were 
alarm by the attack of a bull, which, in those unenclosed graze 
districts, was a particularly dangerous occurrence. i have other and 
more important things to relate, than to tell of the accident which 
gave me an opportunity of rescue them; it is enough to say, that this 
event was the beginning of an acquaintance, reluctantly acquiesce in 
by them, but eager prosecute by me. i can hardly tell when intense 
curiosity became merge in love, but in less than ten days after my 
uncle's departure i was passionately enamoured of mrs. lucy, as her 
attendant call her; carefully--for this i noted well--avoiding any 
address which appear as if there was an equality of station between 
them. i notice also that mrs. clarke, the elderly woman, after her 
first reluctance to allow me to pay them any attention had been 
overcome, was cheer by my evident attachment to the young girl; it 
seem to lighten her heavy burden of care, and she evidently favoured 
my visit to the farm-house where they lodged. it was not so with lucy. 
a more attractive person i never saw, in spite of her depression of 
manner, and shrink avoidance of me. i felt sure at once, that 
whatever was the source of her grief, it rose from no fault of her own. 
it was difficult to draw her into conversation; but when at times, for 
a moment or two, i beguile her into talk, i could see a rare 
intelligence in her face, and a grave, trust look in the soft, grey 
eyes that were raise for a minute to mine. i made every excuse i 
possibly could for go there. i sought wild flower for lucy's sake; 
i plan walk for lucy's sake; i watch the heaven by night, in 
hope that some unusual beauty of sky would justify me in tempt mrs. 
clarke and lucy forth upon the moors, to gaze at the great purple dome 
above. 

it seem to me that lucy was aware of my love; but that, for some 
motive which i could not guess, she would fain have repel me; but 
then again i saw, or fancy i saw, that her heart spoke in my favour, 
and that there was a struggle go on in her mind, which at times (i 
love so dearly) i could have beg her to spare herself, even though 
the happiness of my whole life should have been the sacrifice; for her 
complexion grew paler, her aspect of sorrow more hopeless, her delicate 
frame yet slighter. during this period i had written, i should say, to 
my uncle, to beg to be allow to prolong my stay at harrogate, not 
give any reason; but such was his tender towards me, that in a 
few days i heard from him, give me a willing permission, and only 
charge me to take care of myself, and not use too much exertion 
during the hot weather. 

one sultry evening i drew near the farm. the window of their parlour 
were open, and i heard voice when i turn the corner of the house, as 
i pass the first window (there were two window in their little 
ground-floor room). i saw lucy distinctly; but when i had knock at 
their door--the house-door stood always ajar--she was gone, and i saw 
only mrs. clarke, turning over the work-things lie on the table, in a 
nervous and purposeless manner. i felt by instinct that a conversation 
of some importance was coming on, in which i should be expect to say 
what was my object in pay these frequent visits. i was glad of the 
opportunity. my uncle had several times allude to the pleasant 
possibility of my bring home a young wife, to cheer and adorn the 
old house in ormond street. he was rich, and i was to succeed him, and 
had, as i knew, a fair reputation for so young a lawyer. so on my side 
i saw no obstacle. it was true that lucy was shroud in mystery; her 
name (i was convinced it was not clarke), birth, parentage, and 
previous life were unknown to me. but i was sure of her goodness and 
sweet innocence, and although i knew that there must be something 
painful to be told, to account for her mournful sadness, yet i was 
willing to bear my share in her grief, whatever it might be. 

mrs. clarke began, as if it was a relief to her to plunge into the 
subject. 

'we have thought, sir--at least i have thought--that you know very 
little of us, nor we of you, indeed; not enough to warrant the intimate 
acquaintance we have fallen into. i beg your pardon, sir,' she went on, 
nervously; 'i am but a plain kind of woman, and i mean to use no 
rudeness; but i must say straight out that i--we--think it would be 
better for you not to come so often to see us. she is very unprotected, 
and----' 

'why should i not come to see you, dear madam?' ask i, eagerly, glad 
of the opportunity of explain myself. 'i come, i own, because i have 
learnt to love mistress lucy, and wish to teach her to love me.' 

mistress clarke shook her head, and sighed. 

'don't, sir--neither love her, nor, for the sake of all you hold 
sacred, teach her to love you! if i am too late, and you love her 
already, forget her,--forget these last few weeks. o! i should never 
have allow you to come!' she went on, passionately; 'but what am i to 
do? we are forsaken by all, except the great god, and even he permit a 
strange and evil power to afflict us--what am i to do? where is it to 
end?' she wrung her hand in her distress; then she turn to me: 'go 
away, sir; go away, before you learn to care any more for her. i ask it 
for your own sake--i implore. you have been good and kind to us, and we 
shall always recollect you with gratitude; but go away now, and never 
come back to cross our fatal path!' 

'indeed, madam,' said i, 'i shall do no such thing. you urge it for my 
own sake. i have no fear, so urged--nor wish, except to hear more--all. 
i cannot have seen mistress lucy in all the intimacy of this last 
fortnight, without acknowledge her goodness and innocence; and 
without seeing--pardon me, madam--that for some reason you are two very 
lonely women, in some mysterious sorrow and distress. now, though i am 
not powerful myself, yet i have friends who are so wise and kind, that 
they may be said to possess power. tell me some particulars. why are 
you in grief--what is your secret--why are you here? i declare solemn 
that nothing you have said has daunt me in my wish to become lucy's 
husband; nor will i shrink from any difficulty that, as such an 
aspirant, i may have to encounter. you say you are friendless--why cast 
away an honest friend? i will tell you of people to whom you may write, 
and who will answer any question as to my character and prospects. i 
do not shun inquiry.' 

she shook her head again. 'you had better go away, sir. you know 
nothing about us.' 

'i know your names,' said i, 'and i have heard you allude to the part 
of the country from which you came, which i happen to know as a wild 
and lonely place. there are so few people living in it that, if i chose 
to go there, i could easily ascertain all about you; but i would rather 
hear it from yourself.' you see i want to pique her into telling me 
something definite. 

'you do not know our true names, sir,' said she, hastily. 

'well, i may have conjecture as much. but tell me, then, i conjure 
you. give me your reason for distrust my willing to stand by 
what i have said with regard to mistress lucy.' 

'oh, what can i do?' exclaim she. 'if i am turning away a true friend 
as he says?--stay!' coming to a sudden decision--'i will tell you 
something--i cannot tell you all--you would not believe it. but, 
perhaps, i can tell you enough to prevent your go on in your 
hopeless attachment. i am not lucy's mother.' 

'so i conjectured,' i said. 'go on.' 

'i do not even know whether she is the legitimate or illegitimate child 
of her father. but he is cruel turn against her; and her mother is 
long dead; and, for a terrible reason, she has no other creature to 
keep constant to her but me. she--only two years ago--such a darling 
and such a pride in her father's house! why, sir, there is a mystery 
that might happen in connection with her any moment; and then you would 
go away like all the rest; and, when you next heard her name, you would 
loathe her. others, who have love her longer, have done so before now. 
my poor child, whom neither god nor man has mercy upon--or, surely, she 
would die!' 

the good woman was stop by her crying. i confess, i was a little 
stun by her last words; but only for a moment. at any rate, till i 
knew definitely what was this mysterious stain upon one so simple and 
pure, as lucy seemed, i would not desert her, and so i said; and she 
made answer: 

'if you are daring in your heart to think harm of my child, sir, after 
knowing her as you have done, you are no good man yourself; but i am so 
foolish and helpless in my great sorrow, that i would fain hope to find 
a friend in you. i cannot help trust that, although you may no 
long feel towards her as a lover, you will have pity upon us; and 
perhaps, by your learning, you can tell us where to go for aid.' 

'i implore you to tell me what this mystery is,' i cried, almost 
madden by this suspense. 

'i cannot,' said she, solemnly. 'i am under a deep vow of secrecy. if 
you are to be told, it must be by her.' she left the room, and i 
remain to ponder over this strange interview. i mechanical turn 
over the few books, and with eyes that saw nothing at the time, 
examine the token of lucy's frequent presence in that room. 

when i got home at night, i remember how all these trifle spoke of a 
pure and tender heart and innocent life. mistress clarke returned; she 
had been crying sadly. 

'yes,' said she, 'it is as i feared: she love you so much that she is 
willing to run the fearful risk of telling you all herself--she 
acknowledge it is but a poor chance; but your sympathy will be a balm, 
if you give it. to-morrow, come here at ten in the morning; and as you 
hope for pity in your hour of agony, repress all show of fear or 
repugnance you may feel towards one so grievous afflicted.' 

i half smiled. 'have no fear,' i said. it seem too absurd to imagine 
my feeling dislike to lucy. 

'her father love her well,' said she, gravely, 'yet he drove her out 
like some monstrous thing.' 

just at this moment came a peal of ring laughter from the garden. it 
was lucy's voice; it sound as if she were standing just on one side 
of the open casement--and as though she were sudden stir to 
merriment--merriment verge on boisterousness, by the doings or 
saying of some other person. i can scarcely say why, but the sound 
jar on me inexpressibly. she knew the subject of our conversation, 
and must have been at least aware of the state of agitation her friend 
was in: she herself usually so gentle and quiet. i half rose to go to 
the window, and satisfy my instinctive curiosity as to what had 
provoke this burst of ill-timed laughter; but mrs. clarke threw her 
whole weight and power upon the hand with which she pressed and kept me 
down. 

'for god's sake!' she said, white and tremble all over, 'sit still; 
be quiet. oh! be patient. to-morrow you will know all. leave us, for we 
are all sorely afflicted. do not seek to know more about us.' 

again that laugh--so musical in sound, yet so discordant to my heart. 
she held me tight--tighter; without positive violence i could not have 
risen. i was sitting with my back to the window, but i felt a shadow 
pass between the sun's warmth and me, and a strange shudder ran through 
my frame. in a minute or two she release me. 

'go,' repeated she. 'be warned, i ask you once more. i do not think you 
can stand this knowledge that you seek. if i had had my own way, lucy 
should never have yielded, and promise to tell you all. who know what 
may come of it?' 

'i am firm in my wish to know all. i return at ten to-morrow morning, 
and then expect to see mistress lucy herself.' 

i turn away; have my own suspicions, i confess, as to mistress 
clarke's sanity. 

conjecture as to the meaning of her hints, and uncomfortable thought 
connected with that strange laughter, fill my mind. i could hardly 
sleep. i rose early; and long before the hour i had appointed, i was on 
the path over the common that led to the old farm-house where they 
lodged. i suppose that lucy had pass no better a night than i; for 
there she was also, slow pace with her even step, her eyes bent 
down, her whole look most saintly and pure. she start when i came 
close to her, and grew pale as i remind her of my appointment, and 
spoke with something of the impatience of obstacle that, seeing her 
once more, had call up afresh in my mind. all strange and terrible 
hints, and giddy merriment were forgotten. my heart gave forth words of 
fire, and my tongue utter them. her colour went and came, as she 
listened; but, when i had end my passionate speeches, she lift her 
soft eyes to me, and said: 

'but you know that you have something to learn about me yet. i only 
want to say this: i shall not think less of you--less well of you, i 
mean--if you, too, fall away from me when you know all. stop!' said 
she, as if fear another burst of mad words. 'listen to me. my father 
is a man of great wealth. i never knew my mother; she must have die 
when i was very young. when first i remember anything, i was living in 
a great, lonely house, with my dear and faithful mistress clarke. my 
father, even, was not there; he was--he is--a soldier, and his duty 
lie abroad. but he came, from time to time, and every time i think he 
love me more and more. he brought me rarity from foreign lands, 
which prove to me now how much he must have thought of me during his 
absences. i can sit down and measure the depth of his lost love now, by 
such standard as these. i never thought whether he love me or not, 
then; it was so natural, that it was like the air i breathed. yet he 
was an angry man at times, even then; but never with me. he was very 
reckless, too; and, once or twice, i heard a whisper among the servant 
that a doom was over him, and that he knew it, and try to drown his 
knowledge in wild activity, and even sometimes, sir, in wine. so i grew 
up in this grand mansion, in that lonely place. everything around me 
seem at my disposal, and i think every one love me; i am sure love 
them. till about two years ago--i remember it well--my father had come 
to england, to us; and he seem so proud and so pleased with me and 
all i had done. and one day his tongue seem loosen with wine, and 
he told me much that i had not known till then,--how dearly he had 
love my mother, yet how his wilful usage had cause her death; and 
then he went on to say how he love me better than any creature on 
earth, and how, some day, he hope to take me to foreign places, for 
that he could hardly bear these long absence from his only child. then 
he seem to change suddenly, and said, in a strange, wild way, that i 
was not to believe what he said; that there was many a thing he love 
better--his horse--his dog--i know not what. 

'and 'twas only the next morning that, when i came into his room to ask 
his blessing as was my wont, he received me with fierce and angry 
words. 'why had i,' so he asked, 'been delight myself in such wanton 
mischief--dancing over the tender plant in the flower-beds, all set 
with the famous dutch bulb he had brought from holland?' i had never 
been out of door that morning, sir, and i could not conceive what he 
meant, and so i said; and then he swore at me for a liar, and said i 
was of no true blood, for he had seen me do all that mischief 
himself--with his own eyes. what could i say? he would not listen to 
me, and even my tear seem only to irritate him. that day was the 
beginning of my great sorrows. not long after, he reproach me for my 
undue familiarity--all unbecome a gentlewoman--with his grooms. i had 
been in the stable-yard, laugh and talking, he said. now, sir, i am 
something of a coward by nature, and i had always dread horses; 
besides that, my father's servants--those whom he brought with him from 
foreign parts--were wild fellows, whom i had always avoided, and to 
whom i had never spoken, except as a lady must needs from time to time 
speak to her father's people. yet my father call me by name of which 
i hardly know the meaning, but my heart told me they were such as shame 
any modest woman; and from that day he turn quite against me;--nay, 
sir, not many week after that, he came in with a riding-whip in his 
hand; and, accuse me harsh of evil doings, of which i knew no more 
than you, sir, he was about to strike me, and i, all in bewilder 
tears, was ready to take his stripe as great kindness compare to his 
hard words, when sudden he stop his arm mid-way, gasp and 
staggered, crying out, 'the curse--the curse!' i look up in terror. 
in the great mirror opposite i saw myself, and, right behind, another 
wicked, fearful self, so like me that my soul seem to quiver within 
me, as though not knowing to which similitude of body it belonged. my 
father saw my double at the same moment, either in its dreadful 
reality, whatever that might be, or in the scarcely less terrible 
reflection in the mirror; but what came of it at that moment i cannot 
say, for i sudden swoon away; and when i came to myself i was lie 
in my bed, and my faithful clarke sitting by me. i was in my bed for 
days; and even while i lay there my double was seen by all, flit 
about the house and gardens, always about some mischievous or 
detest work. what wonder that every one shrank from me in 
dread--that my father drove me forth at length, when the disgrace of 
which i was the cause was past his patience to bear. mistress clarke 
came with me; and here we try to live such a life of piety and prayer 
as may in time set me free from the curse.' 

all the time she had been speaking, i had been weigh her story in my 
mind. i had hitherto put case of witchcraft on one side, as mere 
superstitions; and my uncle and i had had many an argument, he 
support himself by the opinion of his good friend sir matthew hale. 
yet this sound like the tale of one bewitched; or was it merely the 
effect of a life of extreme seclusion telling on the nerves of a 
sensitive girl? my scepticism inclined me to the latter belief, and 
when she pause i said: 

'i fancy that some physician could have disabuse your father of his 
belief in visions----' 

just at that instant, standing as i was opposite to her in the full and 
perfect morning light, i saw behind her another figure--a ghastly 
resemblance, complete in likeness, so far as form and feature and 
minutest touch of dress could go, but with a loathsome demon soul 
look out of the grey eyes, that were in turn mock and 
voluptuous. my heart stood still within me; every hair rose up erect; 
my flesh crept with horror. i could not see the grave and tender 
lucy--my eyes were fascinate by the creature beyond. i know not why, 
but i put out my hand to clutch it; i grasp nothing but empty air, 
and my whole blood curdle to ice. for a moment i could not see; then 
my sight came back, and i saw lucy standing before me, alone, deathly 
pale, and, i could have fancied, almost, shrunk in size. 

'it has been near me?' she said, as if ask a question. 

the sound seem taken out of her voice; it was husky as the note on 
an old harpsichord when the strings have cease to vibrate. she read 
her answer in my face, i suppose, for i could not speak. her look was 
one of intense fear, but that die away into an aspect of most humble 
patience. at length she seem to force herself to face behind and 
around her: she saw the purple moors, the blue distant hills, quiver 
in the sunlight, but nothing else. 

'will you take me home?' she said, meekly. 

i took her by the hand, and led her silent through the budding 
heather--we dare not speak; for we could not tell but that the dread 
creature was listening, although unseen,--but that it might appear and 
push us asunder. i never love her more fondly than now when--and that 
was the unspeakable misery--the idea of her was becoming so 
inextricable blend with the shudder thought of it. she seem to 
understand what i must be feeling. she let go my hand, which she had 
kept clasp until then, when we reach the garden gate, and went 
forward to meet her anxious friend, who was standing by the window 
look for her. i could not enter the house: i need silence, 
society, leisure, change--i knew not what--to shake off the sensation 
of that creature's presence. yet i linger about the garden--i hardly 
know why; i partly suppose, because i fear to encounter the 
resemblance again on the solitary common, where it had vanished, and 
partly from a feeling of inexpressible compassion for lucy. in a few 
minutes mistress clarke came forth and join me. we walk some pace 
in silence. 

'you know all now,' said she, solemnly. 

'i saw it,' said i, below my breath. 

'and you shrink from us, now,' she said, with a hopeless which 
stir up all that was brave or good in me. 

'not a whit,' said i. 'human flesh shrink from encounter with the 
powers of darkness: and, for some reason unknown to me, the pure and 
holy lucy is their victim.' 

'the sin of the father shall be visit upon the children,' she said. 

'who is her father?' ask i. 'knowing as much as i do, i may surely 
know more--know all. tell me, i entreat you, madam, all that you can 
conjecture respecting this demoniac persecution of one so good.' 

'i will; but not now. i must go to lucy now. come this afternoon, i 
will see you alone; and oh, sir! i will trust that you may yet find 
some way to help us in our sore trouble!' 

i was miserably exhaust by the swoon affright which had taken 
possession of me. when i reach the inn, i stagger in like one 
overcome by wine. i went to my own private room. it was some time 
before i saw that the weekly post had come in, and brought me my 
letters. there was one from my uncle, one from my home in devonshire, 
and one, re-directed over the first address, seal with a great coat 
of arms. it was from sir philip tempest: my letter of inquiry 
respecting mary fitzgerald had reach him at liège, where it so 
happen that the count de la tour d'auvergne was quarter at the very 
time. he remember his wife's beautiful attendant; she had had high 
words with the deceased countess, respecting her intercourse with an 
english gentleman of good standing, who was also in the foreign 
service. the countess augur evil of his intentions; while mary, proud 
and vehement, assert that he would soon marry her, and resent her 
mistress's warning as an insult. the consequence was, that she had 
left madame de la tour d'auvergne's service, and, as the count 
believed, had gone to live with the englishman; whether he had married 
her, or not, he could not say. 'but,' add sir philip tempest, 'you 
may easily hear what particulars you wish to know respecting mary 
fitzgerald from the englishman himself, if, as i suspect, he is no 
other than my neighbour and former acquaintance, mr. gisborne, of 
skipford hall, in the west riding. i am led to the belief that he is no 
other by several small particulars, none of which are in themselves 
conclusive, but which, taken together, make a mass of presumptive 
evidence. as far as i could make out from the count's foreign 
pronunciation, gisborne was the name of the englishman: i know that 
gisborne of skipford was abroad and in the foreign service at that 
time--he was a likely fellow enough for such an exploit, and, above 
all, certain expression recur to my mind which he use in reference to 
old bridget fitzgerald, of coldholme, whom he once encounter while 
stay with me at starkey manor-house. i remember that the meeting 
seem to have produce some extraordinary effect upon his mind, as 
though he had sudden discover some connection which she might have 
had with his previous life. i beg you to let me know if i can be of any 
further service to you. your uncle once render me a good turn, and i 
will gladly repay it, so far as in me lies, to his nephew.' 

i was now apparently close on the discovery which i had striven so many 
month to attain. but success had lost its zest. i put my letters down, 
and seem to forget them all in thinking of the morning i had pass 
that very day. nothing was real but the unreal presence, which had come 
like an evil blast across my bodily eyes, and burnt itself down upon my 
brain. dinner came, and went away untouched. early in the afternoon i 
walk to the farm-house. i found mistress clarke alone, and i was glad 
and relieved. she was evidently prepared to tell me all i might wish to 
hear. 

'you ask me for mistress lucy's true name; it is gisborne,' she 
began. 

'not gisborne of skipford?' i exclaimed, breathless with anticipation. 

'the same,' said she, quietly, not regarding my manner. 'her father is 
a man of note; although, being a roman catholic, he cannot take that 
rank in this country to which his station entitle him. the consequence 
is that he lives much abroad--has been a soldier, i am told.' 

'and lucy's mother?' i asked. 

she shook her head. 'i never knew her,' said she. 'lucy was about three 
years old when i was engaged to take charge of her. her mother was 
dead.' 

'but you know her name?--you can tell if it was mary fitzgerald?' 

she look astonished. 'that was her name. but, sir, how came you to be 
so well acquaint with it? it was a mystery to the whole household at 
skipford court. she was some beautiful young woman whom he lure away 
from her protector while he was abroad. i have heard said he practised 
some terrible deceit upon her, and when she came to know it, she was 
neither to have nor to hold, but rush off from his very arms, and 
threw herself into a rapid stream and was drowned. it stung him deep 
with remorse, but i use to think the remembrance of the mother's cruel 
death made him love the child yet dearer.' 

i told her, as brief as might be, of my research after the 
descendant and heir of the fitzgerald of kildoon, and added--something 
of my old lawyer spirit return into me for the moment--that i had no 
doubt but that we should prove lucy to be by right possessed of large 
estate in ireland. 

no flush came over her grey face; no light into her eyes. 'and what is 
all the wealth in the whole world to that poor girl?' she said. 'it 
will not free her from the ghastly bewitch which persecute her. as 
for money, what a pitiful thing it is; it cannot touch her.' 

'no more can the evil creature harm her,' i said. 'her holy nature 
dwell apart, and cannot be defile or stain by all the devilish arts 
in the whole world.' 

'true! but it is a cruel fate to know that all shrink from her, soon 
or later, as from one possessed--accursed.' 

'how came it to pass?' i asked. 

'nay, i know not. old rumour there are, that were bruit through the 
household at skipford.' 

'tell me,' i demanded. 

'they came from servants, who would fain account for everything. they 
say that, many years ago, mr. gisborne kill a dog belong to an old 
witch at coldholme; that she cursed, with a dreadful and mysterious 
curse, the creature, whatever it might be, that he should love best; 
and that it struck so deep into his heart that for years he kept 
himself aloof from any temptation to love aught. but who could help 
loving lucy?' 

'you never heard the witch's name?' i gasped. 

'yes--they call her bridget; they said he would never go near the 
spot again for terror of her. yet he was a brave man!' 

'listen,' said i, taking hold of her arm, the better to arrest her full 
attention; 'if what i suspect hold true, that man stole bridget's only 
child--the very mary fitzgerald who was lucy's mother; if so, bridget 
cursed him in ignorance of the deep wrong he had done her. to this 
hour she yearn after her lost child, and question the saint whether 
she be living or not. the roots of that curse lie deep than she 
knows: she unwitting ban him for a deep guilt than that of 
killing a dumb beast. the sin of the father are indeed visit upon 
the children.' 

'but,' said mistress clarke, eagerly, 'she would never let evil rest on 
her own grandchild? surely, sir, if what you say be true, there are 
hope for lucy. let us go--go at once, and tell this fearful woman all 
that you suspect, and beseech her to take off the spell she has put 
upon her innocent grandchild.' 

it seem to me, indeed, that something like this was the best course 
we could pursue. but first it was necessary to ascertain more than what 
mere rumour or careless hearsay could tell. my thought turn to my 
uncle--he could advise me wisely--he ought to know all. i resolve to 
go to him without delay; but i did not choose to tell mistress clarke 
of all the visionary plan that flit through my mind. i simply 
declared my intention of proceeding straight to london on lucy's 
affairs. i bade her believe that my interest on the young lady's behalf 
was greater than ever, and that my whole time should be given up to her 
cause. i saw that mistress clarke distrust me, because my mind was 
too full of thought for my words to flow freely. she sigh and shook 
her head, and said, 'well, it is all right!' in such a tone that it was 
an imply reproach. but i was firm and constant in my heart, and i 
took confidence from that. 

i rode to london. i rode long days drawn out into the lovely summer 
nights: i could not rest. i reach london. i told my uncle all, though 
in the stir of the great city the horror had fade away, and i could 
hardly imagine that he would believe the account i gave him of the 
fearful double of lucy which i had seen on the lonely moor-side. but my 
uncle had live many years, and learnt many things; and, in the deep 
secret of family history that had been confide to him, he had heard 
of case of innocent people bewitch and taken possession of by evil 
spirits yet more fearful than lucy's. for, as he said, to judge from 
all i told him, that resemblance had no power over her--she was too 
pure and good to be taint by its evil, haunting presence. it had, in 
all probability, so my uncle conceived, try to suggest wicked 
thought and to tempt to wicked actions; but she, in her saintly 
maidenhood, had pass on undefiled by evil thought or deed. it could 
not touch her soul: but true, it set her apart from all sweet love or 
common human intercourse. my uncle threw himself with an energy more 
like six-and-twenty than sixty into the consideration of the whole 
case. he undertook the prove lucy's descent, and volunteer to go 
and find out mr. gisborne, and obtain, firstly, the legal proof of her 
descent from the fitzgerald of kildoon, and, secondly, to try and hear 
all that he could respecting the working of the curse, and whether any 
and what means had been taken to exorcise that terrible appearance. for 
he told me of instance where, by prayer and long fasting, the evil 
possessor had been driven forth with howling and many cries from the 
body which it had come to inhabit; he spoke of those strange new 
england case which had happen not so long before; of mr. defoe, who 
had written a book, wherein he had name many mode of subdue 
apparitions, and send them back whence they came; and, lastly, he 
spoke low of dreadful ways of compel witch to undo their 
witchcraft. but i could not endure to hear of those torture and 
burnings. i said that bridget was rather a wild and savage woman than a 
malignant witch; and, above all, that lucy was of her kith and kin; and 
that, in putt her to the trial, by water or by fire, we should be 
torturing--it might be to the death--the ancestress of her we sought to 
redeem. 

my uncle thought awhile, and then said, that in this last matter i was 
right--at any rate, it should not be tried, with his consent, till all 
other mode of remedy had failed; and he assent to my proposal that i 
should go myself and see bridget, and tell her all. 

in accordance with this, i went down once more to the wayside inn near 
coldholme. it was late at night when i arrive there; and, while i 
supped, i inquire of the landlord more particulars as to bridget's 
ways. solitary and savage had been her life for many years. wild and 
despotic were her words and manner to those few people who came across 
her path. the country-folk did her imperious bidding, because they 
fear to disobey. if they pleased her, they prospered; if, on the 
contrary, they neglect or traverse her behests, misfortune, small or 
great, fell on them and theirs. it was not detest so much as an 
indefinable terror that she excited. 

in the morning i went to see her. she was standing on the green outside 
her cottage, and received me with the sullen grandeur of a throneless 
queen. i read in her face that she recognise me, and that i was not 
unwelcome; but she stood silent till i had open my errand. 

'i have news of your daughter,' said i, resolve to speak straight to 
all that i knew she felt of love, and not to spare her. 'she is dead!' 

the stern figure scarcely trembled, but her hand sought the support of 
the door-post. 

'i knew that she was dead,' said she, deep and low, and then was silent 
for an instant. 'my tear that should have flow for her were burnt up 
long years ago. young man, tell me about her.' 

'not yet,' said i, have a strange power given me of confront one, 
whom, nevertheless, in my secret soul i dreaded. 

'you had once a little dog,' i continued. the words call out in her 
more show of emotion than the intelligence of her daughter's death. she 
broke in upon my speech: 

'i had! it was hers--the last thing i had of hers--and it was shot for 
wantonness! it die in my arms. the man who kill that dog rue it to 
this day. for that dumb beast's blood, his best-beloved stand 
accursed.' 

her eyes distended, as if she were in a trance and saw the working of 
her curse. again i spoke: 

'o, woman!' i said, 'that best-beloved, standing accursed before men, 
is your dead daughter's child.' 

the life, the energy, the passion came back to the eyes with which she 
pierce through me, to see if i spoke truth; then, without another 
question or word, she threw herself on the ground with fearful 
vehemence, and clutch at the innocent daisy with convulse hands. 

'bone of my bone! flesh of my flesh! have i cursed thee--and art thou 
accursed?' 

so she moaned, as she lay prostrate in her great agony. i stood aghast 
at my own work. she did not hear my broken sentences; she ask no 
more, but the dumb confirmation which my sad looks had given that one 
fact, that her curse rest on her own daughter's child. the fear grew 
on me lest she should die in her strife of body and soul; and then 
might not lucy remain under the spell as long as she lived? 

even at this moment, i saw lucy coming through the woodland path that 
led to bridget's cottage; mistress clarke was with her: i felt at my 
heart that it was she, by the balmy peace which the look of her sent 
over me, as she slow advanced, a glad surprise shining out of her 
soft quiet eyes. that was as her gaze met mine. as her looks fell on 
the woman lie stiff, convulse on the earth, they became full of 
tender pity; and she came forward to try and lift her up. seating 
herself on the turf, she took bridget's head into her lap; and, with 
gentle touches, she arrange the dishevelled grey hair stream thick 
and wild from beneath her mutch. 

'god help her!' murmur lucy. 'how she suffers!' 

at her desire we sought for water; but when we returned, bridget had 
recover her wandering senses, and was kneel with clasp hand 
before lucy, gaze at that sweet sad face as though her trouble 
nature drank in health and peace from every moment's contemplation. a 
faint tinge on lucy's pale cheek show me that she was aware of our 
return; otherwise it appear as if she was conscious of her influence 
for good over the passionate and trouble woman kneel before her, 
and would not willing avert her grave and loving eyes from that 
wrinkle and careworn countenance. 

suddenly--in the twinkling of an eye--the creature appeared, there, 
behind lucy; fearful the same as to outward semblance, but kneel 
exactly as bridget knelt, and clasp her hand in jesting mimicry as 
bridget clasp hers in her ecstasy that was deepen into a prayer. 
mistress clarke cry out--bridget arose slowly, her gaze fixed on the 
creature beyond: drawing her breath with a hiss sound, never moving 
her terrible eyes, that were steady as stone, she made a dart at the 
phantom, and caught, as i had done, a mere handful of empty air. we saw 
no more of the creature--it vanish as sudden as it came, but 
bridget look slow on, as if watch some recede form. lucy sat 
still, white, trembling, drooping--i think she would have swoon if i 
had not been there to uphold her. while i was attend to her, bridget 
pass us, without a word to any one, and, enter her cottage, she 
barred herself in, and left us without. 

all our endeavour were now direct to get lucy back to the house 
where she had tarry the night before. mistress clarke told me that, 
not hearing from me (some letter must have miscarried), she had grown 
impatient and despairing, and had urge lucy to the enterprise of 
coming to seek her grandmother; not telling her, indeed, of the dread 
reputation she possessed, or how we suspect her of have so 
fearful blight that innocent girl; but, at the same time, hope 
much from the mysterious stirring of blood, which mistress clarke 
trust in for the removal of the curse. they had come, by a different 
route from that which i had taken, to a village inn not far from 
coldholme, only the night before. this was the first interview between 
ancestress and descendant. 

all through the sultry noon i wander along the tangle wood-paths of 
the old neglect forest, thinking where to turn for remedy in a matter 
so complicated and mysterious. meeting a countryman, i ask my way to 
the nearest clergyman, and went, hope to obtain some counsel from 
him. but he prove to be a coarse and common-minded man, give no time 
or attention to the intricacy of a case, but dashing out a strong 
opinion involve immediate action. for instance, as soon as i name 
bridget fitzgerald, he exclaimed: 

'the coldholme witch! the ireland papist! i'd have had her duck long 
since but for that other papist, sir philip tempest. he has had to 
threaten honest folk about here over and over again, or they'd have had 
her up before the justice for her black doings. and it's the law of 
the land that witch should be burnt! ay, and of scripture, too, sir! 
yet you see a papist, if he's a rich squire, can overrule both law and 
scripture. i'd carry a fagot myself to rid the country of her!' 

such a one could give me no help. i rather drew back what i had already 
said; and try to make the parson forget it, by treat him to 
several pot of beer, in the village inn, to which we had adjourn for 
our conference at his suggestion. i left him as soon as i could, and 
return to coldholme, shape my way past desert starkey 
manor-house, and coming upon it by the back. at that side were the 
oblong remains of the old moat, the waters of which lay placid and 
motionless under the crimson ray of the setting sun; with the 
forest-trees lie straight along each side, and their deep-green 
foliage mirror to black in the burnish surface of the moat 
below--and the broken sun-dial at the end nearest the hall--and the 
heron, standing on one leg at the water's edge, lazy look down for 
fish--the lonely and desolate house scarce need the broken windows, 
the weeds on the door-sill, the broken shutter soft flap to and 
fro in the twilight breeze, to fill up the picture of desertion and 
decay. i linger about the place until the grow dark warn me 
on. and then i pass along the path, cut by the orders of the last 
lady of starkey manor-house, that led me to bridget's cottage. i 
resolve at once to see her; and, in spite of closed doors--it might be 
of resolve will--she should see me. so i knock at her door, gently, 
loudly, fiercely. i shook it so vehement that at length the old 
hinge gave way, and with a crash it fell inwards, leave me sudden 
face to face with bridget--i, red, heated, agitate with my so 
long-baffled efforts--she, stiff as any stone, standing right facing 
me, her eyes dilate with terror, her ashen lip trembling, but her 
body motionless. in her hand she held her crucifix, as if by that holy 
symbol she sought to oppose my entrance. at sight of me, her whole 
frame relaxed, and she sank back upon a chair. some mighty tension had 
given way. still her eyes look fearful into the gloom of the outer 
air, made more opaque by the glimmer of the lamp inside, which she had 
placed before the picture of the virgin. 

'is she there?' ask bridget, hoarsely. 

'no! who? i am alone. you remember me.' 

'yes,' reply she, still terror-stricken. 'but she--that creature--has 
been look in upon me through that window all day long. i closed it 
up with my shawl; and then i saw her feet below the door, as long as it 
was light, and i knew she heard my very breathing--nay, worse, my very 
prayers; and i could not pray, for her listen choke the words ere 
they rose to my lip. tell me, who is she?--what means that double girl 
i saw this morning? one had a look of my dead mary; but the other 
curdle my blood, and yet it was the same!' 

she had taken hold of my arm, as if to secure herself some human 
companionship. she shook all over with the slight, never-ceasing tremor 
of intense terror. i told her my tale, as i have told it you, sparing 
none of the details. 

how mistress clarke had informed me that the resemblance had driven 
lucy forth from her father's house--how i had disbelieved, until, with 
mine own eyes, i had seen another lucy standing behind my lucy, the 
same in form and feature, but with the demon-soul look out of the 
eyes. i told her all, i say, believe that she--whose curse was 
working so upon the life of her innocent grandchild--was the only 
person who could find the remedy and the redemption. when i had done, 
she sat silent for many minutes. 

'you love mary's child?' she asked. 

'i do, in spite of the fearful working of the curse--i love her. yet i 
shrink from her ever since that day on the moor-side. and men must 
shrink from one so accompanied; friends and lovers must stand afar off. 
oh, bridget fitzgerald! loosen the curse! set her free!' 

'where is she?' 

i eager caught at the idea that her presence was needed, in order 
that, by some strange prayer or exorcism, the spell might be reversed. 

'i will go and bring her to you,' i exclaimed. but bridget tighten 
her hold upon my arm. 

'not so,' said she, in a low, hoarse voice. 'it would kill me to see 
her again as i saw her this morning. and i must live till i have work 
my work. leave me!' said she, suddenly, and again taking up the cross. 
'i defy the demon i have call up. leave me to wrestle with it!' 

she stood up, as if in an ecstasy of inspiration, from which all fear 
was banished. i lingered--why, i can hardly tell--until once more she 
bade me begone. as i went along the forest way, i look back, and saw 
her plant the cross in the empty threshold, where the door had been. 

the next morning lucy and i went to seek her, to bid her join her 
prayer with ours. the cottage stood open and wide to our gaze. no 
human being was there: the cross remain on the threshold, but bridget 
was gone. 




chapter 3 


what was to be done next? was the question that i ask myself. as for 
lucy, she would fain have submit to the doom that lay upon her. her 
gentle and piety, under the pressure of so horrible a life, seem 
over-passive to me. she never complained. mrs. clarke complain more 
than ever. as for me, i was more in love with the real lucy than ever; 
but i shrunk from the false similitude with an intensity proportion 
to my love. i found out by instinct that mrs. clarke had occasional 
temptation to leave lucy. the good lady's nerves were shaken, and, 
from what she said, i could almost have conclude that the object of 
the double was to drive away from lucy this last and almost earliest 
friend. at times, i could scarcely bear to own it, but i myself felt 
inclined to turn recreant; and i would accuse lucy of being too 
patient--too resigned. one after another, she won the little children 
of coldholme. (mrs. clarke and she had resolve to stay there, for was 
it not as good a place as any other to such as they? and did not all 
our faint hope rest on bridget--never seen or heard of now, but still 
we trust to come back, or give some token?) so, as i say, one after 
another, the little children came about my lucy, won by her soft tones, 
and her gentle smiles, and kind actions. alas! one after another they 
fell away, and shrunk from her path with blanch terror; and we too 
surely guess the reason why. it was the last drop. i could bear it no 
longer. i resolve no more to linger around the spot, but to go back to 
my uncle, and among the learned divine of the city of london, seek for 
some power whereby to annul the curse. 

my uncle, meanwhile, had obtain all the requisite testimonial 
relate to lucy's descent and birth, from the ireland lawyers, and from 
mr. gisborne. the latter gentleman had written from abroad (he was 
again serving in the austria army), a letter alternate passionately 
self-reproachful and stoical repellent. it was evident that when he 
thought of mary--her short life--how he had wrong her, and of her 
violent death, he could hardly find words severe enough for his own 
conduct; and from this point of view, the curse that bridget had laid 
upon him and his was regard by him as a prophetic doom, to the 
utterance of which she was move by a higher power, working for the 
fulfilment of a deep vengeance than for the death of the poor dog. 
but then, again, when he came to speak of his daughter, the repugnance 
which the conduct of the demoniac creature had produce in his mind, 
was but ill disguise under a show of profound indifference as to 
lucy's fate. one almost felt as if he would have been as content to put 
her out of existence, as he would have been to destroy some disgust 
reptile that had invade his chamber or his couch. 

the great fitzgerald property was lucy's; and that was all--was 
nothing. 

my uncle and i sat in the gloom of a london november evening, in our 
house in ormond street. _i_ was out of health, and felt as if i were in 
an inextricable coil of misery. lucy and i wrote to each other, but 
that was little; and we dare not see each other for dread of the 
fearful third, who had more than once taken her place at our meetings. 
my uncle had, on the day i speak of, bidden prayer to be put up, on 
the ensue sabbath, in many a church and meeting-house in london, for 
one grievous torment by an evil spirit. he had faith in prayers--i 
had none; i was fast lose faith in all things. so we sat--he try 
to interest me in the old talk of other days, i oppress by one 
thought--when our old servant, anthony, open the door, and, without 
speaking, show in a very gentlemanly and prepossessing man, who had 
something remarkable about his dress, betray his profession to be 
that of the roman catholic priesthood. he glance at my uncle first, 
then at me. it was to me he bowed. 'i did not give my name,' said he, 
'because you would hardly have recognise it; unless, sir, when in the 
north, you heard of father bernard, the chaplain at stoney hurst?' 

i remember afterwards that i had heard of him, but at the time i had 
utterly forgotten it; so i professed myself a complete stranger to him; 
while my ever-hospitable uncle, although hate a papist as much as it 
was in his nature to hate anything, placed a chair for the visitor, and 
bade anthony bring glasses and a fresh jug of claret. 

father bernard received this courtesy with the graceful ease and 
pleasant acknowledgment which belong to the man of the world. then he 
turn to scan me with his keen glance. after some slight conversation, 
enter into on his part, i am certain, with an intention of 
discover on what terms of confidence i stood with my uncle, he 
paused, and said gravely: 

'i am sent here with a message to you, sir, from a woman to whom you 
have shown kindness, and who is one of my penitents, in antwerp--one 
bridget fitzgerald.' 

'bridget fitzgerald!' exclaim i. 'in antwerp? tell me, sir, all that 
you can about her.' 

'there is much to be said,' he replied. 'but may i inquire if this 
gentleman--if your uncle is acquaint with the particulars of which 
you and i stand informed?' 

'all that i know, he knows,' said i, eager lay my hand on my 
uncle's arm, as he made a motion as if to quit the room. 

'then i have to speak before two gentlemen who, however they may differ 
from me in faith, are yet fully impress with the fact, that there are 
evil powers go about continual to take cognizance of our evil 
thoughts; and, if their master give them power, to bring them into 
overt action. such is my theory of the nature of that sin, of which i 
dare not disbelieve--as some sceptic would have us do--the sin of 
witchcraft. of this deadly sin, you and i are aware bridget fitzgerald 
has been guilty. since you saw her last, many prayer have been offer 
in our churches, many masses sung, many penance undergone, in order 
that, if god and the holy saint so will it, her sin might be blot 
out. but it has not been so willed.' 

'explain to me,' said i, 'who you are, and how you come connected with 
bridget. why is she at antwerp? i pray you, sir, tell me more. if i am 
impatient, excuse me; i am ill and feverish, and in consequence 
bewildered.' 

there was something to me inexpressible soothe in the tone of voice 
with which he began to narrate, as it were from the beginning, his 
acquaintance with bridget. 

'i had known mr. and mrs. starkey during their residence abroad, and so 
it fell out naturally that, when i came as chaplain to the sherburne 
at stoney hurst, our acquaintance was renewed; and thus i became the 
confessor of the whole family, isolated as they were from the offices 
of the church, sherburne being their nearest neighbour who professed 
the true faith. of course, you are aware that fact reveal in 
confession are seal as in the grave; but i learnt enough of bridget's 
character to be convinced that i had to do with no common woman; one 
powerful for good as for evil. i believe that i was able to give her 
spiritual assistance from time to time, and that she look upon me as 
a servant of that holy church, which has such wonderful power of moving 
men's hearts, and relieve them of the burden of their sins. i have 
known her cross the moor on the wildest nights of storm, to confess 
and be absolved; and then she would return, calm and subdued, to her 
daily work about her mistress, no one witting where she had been during 
the hour that most pass in sleep upon their beds. after her 
daughter's departure--after mary's mysterious disappearance--i had to 
impose many a long penance, in order to wash away the sin of impatient 
repine that was fast leading her into the deep guilt of blasphemy. 
she set out on that long journey of which you have possibly heard--that 
fruitless journey in search of mary--and during her absence, my 
superior ordered my return to my former duty at antwerp, and for 
many years i heard no more of bridget. 

'not many month ago, as i was passing homewards in the evening, along 
one of the street near st. jacques, leading into the meer straet, i 
saw a woman sitting crouch up under the shrine of the holy mother of 
sorrows. her hood was drawn over her head, so that the shadow cause by 
the light of the lamp above fell deep over her face; her hand were 
clasp round her knees. it was evident that she was some one in 
hopeless trouble, and as such it was my duty to stop and speak. i 
naturally address her first in flemish, believe her to be one of 
the lower class of inhabitants. she shook her head, but did not look 
up. then i try french, and she reply in that language, but speak 
it so indifferently, that i was sure she was either english or irish, 
and consequently spoke to her in my own native tongue. she recognise 
my voice; and, start up, caught at my robes, drag me before the 
blessed shrine, and throw herself down, and force me, as much by 
her evident desire as by her action, to kneel beside her, she 
exclaimed: 

'"o holy virgin! you will never hearken to me again, but hear him; for 
you know him of old, that he do your bidding, and strive to heal 
broken hearts. hear him!" 

'she turn to me. 

'"she will hear you, if you will only pray. she never hear me: she and 
all the saint in heaven cannot hear my prayers, for the evil one 
carry them off, as he carry that first away. o, father bernard, 
pray for me!" 

'i pray for one in sore distress, of what nature i could not say; but 
the holy virgin would know. bridget held me fast, gasp with 
eager at the sound of my words. when i had ended, i rose, and, 
making the sign of the cross over her, i was go to bless her in the 
name of the holy church, when she shrank away like some terrify 
creature, and said: 

'"i am guilty of deadly sin, and am not shriven." 

'"arise, my daughter," said i, "and come with me." and i led the way 
into one of the confessional of st. jacques. 

'she knelt; i listened. no words came. the evil powers had stricken her 
dumb, as i heard afterwards they had many a time before, when she 
approach confession. 

'she was too poor to pay for the necessary form of exorcism; and 
hitherto those priest to whom she had address herself were either so 
ignorant of the meaning of her broken french, or her irish-english, or 
else esteem her to be one crazed--as, indeed, her wild and excited 
manner might easily have led any one to think--that they had neglect 
the sole means of loosen her tongue, so that she might confess her 
deadly sin, and after due penance, obtain absolution. but i knew 
bridget of old, and felt that she was a penitent sent to me. i went 
through those holy offices appoint by our church for the relief of 
such a case. i was the more bound to do this, as i found that she had 
come to antwerp for the sole purpose of discover me, and making 
confession to me. of the nature of that fearful confession i am 
forbidden to speak. much of it you know; possibly all. 

'it now remains for her to free herself from mortal guilt, and to set 
other free from the consequence thereof. no prayer, no masses, will 
ever do it, although they may strengthen her with that strength by 
which alone acts of deepest love and purest self-devotion may be 
performed. her words of passion, and cries for revenge--her unholy 
prayer could never reach the ear of the holy saints! other powers 
intercept them, and wrought so that the curse thrown up to heaven 
have fallen on her own flesh and blood; and so, through her very 
strength of love, have bruise and crush her heart. henceforward her 
former self must be buried,--yea, bury quick, if need be,--but never 
more to make sign, or utter cry on earth! she has become a poor clare, 
in order that, by perpetual penance and constant service of others, she 
may at length so act as to obtain final absolution and rest for her 
soul. until then, the innocent must suffer. it is to plead for the 
innocent that i come to you; not in the name of the witch, bridget 
fitzgerald, but of the penitent and servant of all men, the poor clare, 
sister magdalen.' 

'sir,' said i, 'i listen to your request with respect; only i may tell 
you it is not need to urge me to do all that i can on behalf of one, 
love for whom is part of my very life. if for a time i have absent 
myself from her, it is to think and work for her redemption. i, a 
member of the english church--my uncle, a puritan--pray morning and 
night for her by name: the congregation of london, on the next 
sabbath, will pray for one unknown, that she may be set free from the 
powers of darkness. moreover, i must tell you, sir, that those evil 
one touch not the great calm of her soul. she lives her own pure and 
loving life, unharmed and untainted, though all men fall off from her. 
i would i could have her faith!' 

my uncle now spoke. 

'nephew,' said he, 'it seem to me that this gentleman, although 
profess what i consider an erroneous creed, has touched upon the 
right point in exhort bridget to acts of love and mercy, whereby to 
wipe out her sin of hate and vengeance. let us strive after our 
fashion, by almsgive and visiting of the needy and fatherless, to 
make our prayer acceptable. meanwhile, i myself will go down into the 
north, and take charge of the maiden. i am too old to be daunt by man 
or demon. i will bring her to this house as to a home; and let the 
double come if it will! a company of godly divine shall give it the 
meeting, and we will try issue.' 

the kindly brave old man! but father bernard sat on musing. 

'all hate,' said he, 'cannot be quench in her heart; all christian 
forgiveness cannot have enter into her soul, or the demon would have 
lost its power. you said, i think, that her grandchild was still 
tormented?' 

'still tormented!' i replied, sadly, thinking of mistress clarke's last 
letter. 

he rose to go. we afterwards heard that the occasion of his coming to 
london was a secret politics mission on behalf of the jacobites. 
nevertheless, he was a good and a wise man. 

month and month pass away without any change. lucy entreat my 
uncle to leave her where she was,--dreading, as i learnt, lest if she 
came, with her fearful companion, to dwell in the same house with me, 
that my love could not stand the repeated shock to which i should be 
doomed. and this she thought from no distrust of the strength of my 
affection, but from a kind of pity sympathy for the terror to the 
nerves which she observe that the demoniac visitation cause in all. 

i was restless and miserable. i devoted myself to good works; but i 
perform them from no spirit of love, but solely from the hope of 
reward and payment, and so the reward was never granted. at length, i 
ask my uncle's leave to travel; and i went forth, a wanderer, with no 
distinct end than that of many another wanderer--to get away from 
myself. a strange impulse led me to antwerp, in spite of the war and 
commotion then rage in the low countries--or rather, perhaps, the 
very craving to become interested in something external, led me into 
the thick of the struggle then go on with the austrians. the city 
of flander were all full at that time of civil disturbance and 
rebellions, only kept down by force, and the presence of an austria 
garrison in every place. 

i arrive in antwerp, and made inquiry for father bernard. he was away 
in the country for a day or two. then i ask my way to the convent of 
poor clares; but, being healthy and prosperous, i could only see the 
dim, pent-up, grey walls, shut close in by narrow streets, in the 
lowest part of the town. my landlord told me, that had i been stricken 
by some loathsome disease, or in desperate case of any kind, the poor 
clare would have taken me, and tend me. he spoke of them as an order 
of mercy of the strictest kind, dressing scanty in the coarsest 
materials, go barefoot, living on what the inhabitant of antwerp 
chose to bestow, and share even those fragment and crumb with the 
poor and helpless that swarm all around; receiving no letters or 
communication with the outer world; utterly dead to everything but the 
alleviate of suffering. he smile at my inquiring whether i could get 
speech of one of them; and told me that they were even forbidden to 
speak for the purpose of beg their daily food; while yet they 
lived, and fed other upon what was given in charity. 

'but,' exclaim i, 'supposing all men forgot them! would they quiet 
lie down and die, without making sign of their extremity?' 

'if such were their rule, the poor clare would willing do it; but 
their founder appoint a remedy for such extreme case as you suggest. 
they have a bell--'tis but a small one, as i have heard, and has yet 
never been rung in the memory of man: when the poor clare have been 
without food for twenty-four hours, they may ring this bell, and then 
trust to our good people of antwerp for rush to the rescue of the 
poor clares, who have taken such blessed care of us in all our 
straits.' 

it seem to me that such rescue would be late in the day; but i did 
not say what i thought. i rather turn the conversation, by ask my 
landlord if he knew, or had ever heard, anything of a certain sister 
magdalen. 

'yes,' said he, rather under his breath; 'news will creep out, even 
from a convent of poor clares. sister magdalen is either a great sinner 
or a great saint. she do more, as i have heard, than all the other 
nun put together; yet, when last month they would fain have made her 
mother-superior, she beg rather that they would place her below all 
the rest, and make her the meanest servant of all.' 

'you never saw her?' ask i. 

'never,' he replied. 

i was weary of wait for father bernard, and yet i linger in 
antwerp. the politics state of things became worse than ever, 
increase to its height by the scarcity of food consequent on many 
deficient harvests. i saw group of fierce, squalid men, at every 
corner of the street, glaring out with wolfish eyes at my sleek skin 
and handsome clothes. 

at last father bernard returned. we had a long conversation, in which 
he told me that, curious enough, mr. gisborne, lucy's father, was 
serving in one of the austria regiments, then in garrison at antwerp. 
i ask father bernard if he would make us acquainted; which he 
consent to do. but, a day or two afterwards, he told me that, on 
hearing my name, mr. gisborne had decline respond to any advances 
on my part, saying he had abjure his country, and hate his 
countrymen. 

probably he recollect my name in connection with that of his daughter 
lucy. anyhow, it was clear enough that i had no chance of making his 
acquaintance. father bernard confirmed me in my suspicion of the 
hidden fermentation, for some coming evil, working among the 'blouses' 
of antwerp, and he would fain have had me depart from out the city; but 
i rather crave the excitement of danger, and stubborn refuse to 
leave. 

one day, when i was walking with him in the place verte, he bowed to an 
austria officer, who was crossing towards the cathedral. 

'that is mr. gisborne,' said he, as soon as the gentleman was past. 

i turn to look at the tall, slight figure of the officer. he carry 
himself in a stately manner, although he was past middle age, and from 
his years, might have had some excuse for a slight stoop. as i look 
at the man, he turn round, his eyes met mine, and i saw his face. 
deep lined, sallow, and scathe was that countenance; scar by 
passion as well as by the fortune of war. 'twas but a moment our eyes 
met. we each turn round, and went on our separate way. 

but his whole appearance was not one to be easily forgotten; the 
thorough appointment of the dress, and evident thought bestow on it, 
made but an incongruous whole with the dark, gloomy expression of his 
countenance. because he was lucy's father, i sought instinctive to 
meet him everywhere. at last he must have become aware of my 
pertinacity, for he gave me a haughty scowl whenever i pass him. in 
one of these encounters, however, i chance to be of some service to 
him. he was turning the corner of a street, and came sudden on one of 
the group of discontented fleming of whom i have spoken. some words 
were exchanged, when my gentleman out with his sword, and with a slight 
but skilful cut drew blood from one of those who had insult him, as 
he fancied, though i was too far off to hear the words. they would all 
have fallen upon him had i not rush forward and raise the cry, then 
well known in antwerp, of rally, to the austria soldier who were 
perpetual patrol the streets, and who came in numbers to the 
rescue. i think that neither mr. gisborne nor the mutinous group of 
plebeian owe me much gratitude for my interference. he had plant 
himself against a wall, in a skilful attitude of fence, ready with his 
bright glancing rapier to do battle with all the heavy, fierce, unarmed 
men, some six or seven in number. but when his own soldier came up, he 
sheathe his sword; and, give some careless word of command, sent 
them away again, and continue his saunter all alone down the street, 
the workmen snarl in his rear, and more than half-inclined to fall 
on me for my cry for rescue. i care not if they did, my life seem so 
dreary a burden just then; and, perhaps, it was this daring loiter 
among them that prevent their attack me. instead, they suffer me 
to fall into conversation with them; and i heard some of their 
grievances. sore and heavy to be borne were they, and no wonder the 
sufferer were savage and desperate. 

the man whom gisborne had wound across his face would fain have got 
out of me the name of his aggressor, but i refuse to tell it. another 
of the group heard his inquiry, and made answer: 

'i know the man. he is one gisborne, aide-de-camp to the 
general-commandant. i know him well.' 

he began to tell some story in connection with gisborne in a low and 
mutter voice; and while he was relate a tale, which i saw excited 
their evil blood, and which they evidently wish me not to hear, i 
saunter away and back to my lodgings. 

that night antwerp was in open revolt. the inhabitant rose in 
rebellion against their austria masters. the austrians, holding the 
gate of the city, remain at first pretty quiet in the citadel; only, 
from time to time, the boom of a great cannon swept sullen over the 
town. but, if they expect the disturbance to die away, and spend 
itself in a few hours' fury, they were mistaken. in a day or two, the 
riot held possession of the principal municipal buildings. then the 
austria pour forth in bright flaming array, calm and smiling, as 
they march to the post assigned, as if the fierce mob were no more 
to them than the swarm of buzz summer flies. their practised 
manoeuvres, their well-aimed shot, told with terrible effect; but in 
the place of one slain rioter, three sprang up of his blood to avenge 
his loss. but a deadly foe, a ghastly ally of the austrians, was at 
work. food, scarce and dear for months, was now hardly to be obtain 
at any price. desperate effort were being made to bring provisions 
into the city, for the riot had friends without. close to the city 
port nearest to the scheldt, a great struggle took place. i was there, 
helping the rioters, whose cause i had adopted. we had a savage 
encounter with the austrians. numbers fell on both sides; i saw them 
lie bleeding for a moment; then a volley of smoke obscure them; and 
when it clear away, they were dead--trampled upon or smothered, 
pressed down and hidden by the freshly-wounded whom those last gun had 
brought low. and then a grey-robed and grey-veiled figure came right 
across the flash guns, and stoop over some one, whose life-blood 
was ebb away; sometimes it was to give him drink from can which 
they carry slung at their sides, sometimes i saw the cross held above 
a die man, and rapid prayer were being uttered, unheard by men in 
that hellish din and clangour, but listen to by one above. i saw all 
this as in a dream: the reality of that stern time was battle and 
carnage. but i knew that these grey figures, their bare feet all wet 
with blood, and their face hidden by their veils, were the poor 
clares--sent forth now because dire agony was abroad and imminent 
danger at hand. therefore, they left their cloister shelter, and came 
into that thick and evil mêlée. 

close to me--driven past me by the struggle of many fighters--came the 
antwerp burgess with the scarce-healed scar upon his face; and in an 
instant more, he was thrown by the press upon the austria officer 
gisborne, and ere either had recover the shock, the burgess had 
recognise his opponent. 

'ha! the englishman gisborne!' he cried, and threw himself upon him 
with redouble fury. he had struck him hard--the englishman was down; 
when out of the smoke came a dark-grey figure, and threw herself right 
under the uplift flash sword. the burgess's arm stood arrested. 
neither austria nor anversoi willing harm the poor clares. 

'leave him to me!' said a low stern voice. 'he is mine enemy--mine for 
many years.' 

those words were the last i heard. i myself was struck down by a 
bullet. i remember nothing more for days. when i came to myself, i was 
at the extremity of weakness, and was craving for food to recruit my 
strength. my landlord sat watch me. he, too, look pinched and 
shrunken; he had heard of my wound state, and sought me out. yes! the 
struggle still continued, but the famine was sore; and some, he had 
heard, had die for lack of food. the tear stood in his eyes as he 
spoke. but soon he shook off his weakness, and his natural cheerful 
returned. father bernard had been to see me--no one else. (who should, 
indeed?) father bernard would come back that afternoon--he had 
promised. but father bernard never came, although i was up and dressed, 
and look eager for him. 

my landlord brought me a meal which he had cook himself: of what it 
was compose he would not say, but it was most excellent, and with 
every mouthful i seem to gain strength. the good man sat look at 
my evident enjoyment with a happy smile of sympathy; but, as my 
appetite became satisfied, i began to detect a certain wistful in 
his eyes, as if craving for the food i had so nearly devoured--for, 
indeed, at that time i was hardly aware of the extent of the famine. 
suddenly, there was a sound of many rush feet past our window. my 
landlord open one of the side of it, the better to learn what was 
go on. then we heard a faint, cracked, tinkle bell, coming shrill 
upon clear and distinct from all other sounds. 'holy mother!' exclaim 
my landlord, 'the poor clares!' 

he snatch up the fragment of my meal, and cram them into my 
hands, bidding me follow. down-stairs he ran, clutch at more food, 
as the women of his house eager held it out to him; and in a moment 
we were in the street, moving along with the great current, all tend 
towards the convent of the poor clares. and still, as if piercing our 
ear with its inarticulate cry, came the shrill tinkle of the bell. in 
that strange crowd were old men tremble and sobbing, as they carry 
their little pittance of food; women with the tear running down their 
cheeks, who had snatch up what provisions they had in the vessel in 
which they stood, so that the burden of these was in many case much 
greater than that which they contained; children, with flushed faces, 
grasping tight the morsel of bitten cake or bread, in their eager 
to carry it safe to the help of the poor clares; strong men--yea, both 
anversoi and austrians--pressing onwards with set teeth, and no word 
spoken; and over all, and through all, came that sharp tinkle--that cry 
for help in extremity. 

we met the first torrent of people return with blanch and piteous 
faces: they were issue out of the convent to make way for the 
offering of others. 'haste, haste!' said they. 

'a poor clare is dying! a poor clare is dead for hunger! god forgive 
us, and our city!' 

we pressed on. the stream bore us along where it would. we were carry 
through refectories, bare and crumbless; into cell over whose door 
the conventual name of the occupant was written. thus it was that i, 
with others, was forced into sister magdalen's cell. on her couch lay 
gisborne, pale unto death, but not dead. by his side was a cup of 
water, and a small morsel of mouldy bread, which he had pushed out of 
his reach, and could not move to obtain. over against his bed were 
these words, copy in the english version: 'therefore, if thine enemy 
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink.' 

some of us gave him of our food, and left him eat greedily, like 
some famished wild animal. for now it was no long the sharp tinkle, 
but that one solemn toll, which in all christian country tell of the 
passing of the spirit out of earthly life into eternity; and again a 
murmur gather and grew, as of many people speak with awed breath, 
'a poor clare is dying! a poor clare is dead!' 

borne along once more by the motion of the crowd, we were carry into 
the chapel belong to the poor clares. on a bier before the high 
altar, lay a woman--lay sister magdalen--lay bridget fitzgerald. by her 
side stood father bernard, in his robe of office, and holding the 
crucifix on high while he pronounced the solemn absolution of the 
church, as to one who had newly confessed herself of deadly sin. i 
pushed on with passionate force, till i stood close to the die woman, 
as she received extreme unction amid the breathless and awed hush of 
the multitude around. her eyes were glazing, her limb were stiffening; 
but when the rite was over and finished, she raise her gaunt figure 
slow up, and her eyes brighten to a strange intensity of joy, as, 
with the gesture of her finger and the trance-like gleam of her eye, 
she seem like one who watch the disappearance of some loathe and 
fearful creature. 

'she is free from the curse!' said she, as she fell back dead. 

* * * * * 

now, of all our party who had first listen to my lady ludlow, mr. 
preston was the only one who had not told us something, either of 
information, tradition, history, or legend. we naturally turn to him; 
but we did not like ask him directly for his contribution, for he 
was a grave, reserved, and silent man. 

he understood us, however, and, rousing himself as it were, he said: 

'i know you wish me to tell you, in my turn, of something which i have 
learnt or heard during my life. i could tell you something of my own 
life, and of a life dear still to my memory; but i have shrunk from 
narrate anything so purely personal. yet, shrink as i will, no other 
but those sad recollection will present themselves to my mind. i call 
them sad when i think of the end of it all. however i am not go to 
moralize. if my dear brother's life and death do not speak for 
itself, no words of mine will teach you what may be learnt from it.' 




loi the witch 

chapter 1 


in the year 1691, loi barclay stood on a little wooden pier, steady 
herself on the stable land, in much the same manner as, eight or nine 
week ago, she had try to steady herself on the deck of the rock 
ship which had carry her across from old to new england. it seem as 
strange now to be on solid earth as it had been, not long ago, to be 
rock by the sea, both by day and by night; and the aspect of the land 
was equally strange. the forest which show in the distance all 
round, and which, in truth, were not very far from the wooden house 
form the town of boston, were of different shades of green, and 
different, too, in shape of outline to those which loi barclay knew 
well in her old home in warwickshire. her heart sank a little as she 
stood alone, wait for the captain of the good ship redemption, the 
kind rough old sailor, who was her only known friend in this unknown 
continent. captain holdernesse was busy, however, as she saw, and it 
would probably be some time before he would be ready to attend, to her; 
so loi sat down on one of the cask that lay about, and wrap her 
grey duffle cloak tight around her, and sheltered herself under her 
hood, as well as might be, from the piercing wind, which seem to 
follow those whom it had tyrannize over at sea with a dogged wish of 
still torment them on land. very patient did loi sit there, 
although she was weary, and shiver with cold; for the day was severe 
for may, and the redemption, with store of necessaries and comfort for 
the puritan colonist of new england, was the earliest ship that had 
venture across the seas. 

how could loi help thinking of the past, and speculate on the 
future, as she sat on boston pier, at this breathing-time of her life? 
in the dim sea-mist which she gaze upon with ache eyes (filled, 
against her will, with tears, from time to time), there rose the little 
village church of barford (not three mile from warwick--you may see it 
yet), where her father had preach ever since 1661, long before she 
was born. he and her mother both lay dead in barford churchyard; and 
the old low grey church could hardly come before her vision without her 
seeing the old parsonage too, the cottage cover with austria roses, 
and yellow jessamine, where she had been born, sole child of parent 
already long past the prime of youth. she saw the path, not a hundred 
yard long, from the parsonage to the vestry door: that path which her 
father trod daily; for the vestry was his study, and the sanctum, where 
he pore over the ponderous tome of the father, and compare their 
precept with those of the authority of the anglican church of that 
day--the day of the later stuarts; for barford parsonage at that time 
scarcely exceed in size and dignity the cottage by which it was 
surrounded: it only contained three rooms on a floor, and was but two 
story high. on the first, or ground floor, were the parlour, kitchen, 
and back or working kitchen; up-stairs, mr. and mrs. barclay's room, 
that belong to lois, and the maid-servant's room. if a guest came, 
loi left her own chamber, and share old clemence's bed. but those 
days were over. never more should loi see father or mother on earth; 
they slept, calm and still, in barford churchyard, careless of what 
became of their orphan child, as far as earthly manifestation of care 
or love went. and clemence lay there too, bound down in her grassy bed 
by withe of the briar-rose, which loi had train over those three 
precious grave before leave england for ever. 

there were some who would fain have kept her there; one who swore in 
his heart a great oath unto the lord that he would seek her soon or 
later, if she was still upon the earth. but he was the rich heir and 
only son of the miller lucy, whose mill stood by the avon-side in the 
grassy barford meadows, and his father look higher for him than the 
penniless daughter of parson barclay (so low were clergymen esteem in 
those days!); and the very suspicion of hugh lucy's attachment to loi 
barclay made his parent think it more prudent not to offer the orphan 
a home, although none other of the parishioner had the means, even if 
they had the will, to do so. 

so loi swallow her tear down till the time came for crying, and 
act upon her mother's words: 

'lois, thy father is dead of this terrible fever, and i am dying. nay, 
it is so, though i am easy from pain for these few hours, the lord be 
praised! the cruel men of the commonwealth have left thee very 
friendless. thy father's only brother was shot down at edgehill. i, 
too, have a brother, though thou hast never heard me speak of him, for 
he was a schismatic; and thy father and he had words, and he left for 
that new country beyond the seas, without ever saying farewell to us. 
but ralph was a kind lad until he took up these new-fangled notions, 
and for the old days' sake he will take thee in, and love thee as a 
child, and place thee among his children. blood is thick than water. 
write to him as soon as i am gone--for lois, i am going--and i bless 
the lord that has letten me join my husband again so soon.' such was 
the selfish of conjugal love; she thought little of lois's 
desolate in comparison with her rejoicing over her speedy reunion 
with her dead husband! 'write to thine uncle, ralph hickson, salem, new 
england (put it down, child, on thy tablets), and say that i, henrietta 
barclay, charge him, for the sake of all he hold dear in heaven or on 
earth,--for his salvation's sake, as well as for the sake of the old 
home at lester-bridge,--for the sake of the father and mother that gave 
us birth, as well as for the sake of the six little children who lie 
dead between him and me,--that he take thee into his home as if thou 
wert his own flesh and blood, as indeed thou art. he has a wife and 
children of his own, and no one need fear have thee, my lois, my 
darling, my baby, among his household. oh, lois, would that thou wert 
die with me! the thought of thee make death sore!' loi comfort 
her mother more than herself, poor child, by promise to obey her die 
wish to the letter, and by express hope she dare not feel of her 
uncle's kindness. 

'promise me'--the die woman's breath came hard and harder--'that 
thou wilt go at once. the money our goods will bring--the letter thy 
father wrote to captain holdernesse, his old schoolfellow--thou knowest 
all i would say--my lois, god bless thee!' 

solemn did loi promise; strict she kept her word. it was all the 
more easy, for hugh lucy met her, and told her, in one great burst of 
love, of his passionate attachment, his vehement struggle with his 
father, his impotence at present, his hope and resolve for the future. 
and, intermingle with all this, came such outrageous threat and 
expression of uncontroll vehemence, that loi felt that in barford 
she must not linger to be a cause of desperate quarrel between father 
and son, while her absence might soften down matters, so that either 
the rich old miller might relent, or--and her heart ache to think of 
the other possibility--hugh's love might cool, and the dear play-fellow 
of her childhood learn to forget. if not--if hugh were to be trust in 
one tithe of what he said--god might permit him to fulfil his resolve 
of coming to seek her out before many years were over. it was all in 
god's hands, and that was best, thought loi barclay. 

she was rouse out of her trance of recollection by captain 
holdernesse, who, have done all that was necessary in the way of 
orders and directions to his mate, now came up to her, and, praise 
her for her quiet patience, told her that he would now take her to the 
widow smith's, a decent kind of house, where he and many other sailor 
of the better order were in the habit of lodging, during their stay on 
the new england shores. widow smith, he said, had a parlour for herself 
and her daughters, in which loi might sit, while he went about the 
business that, as he had told her, would detain him in boston for a day 
or two, before he could accompany her to her uncle's at salem. all this 
had been to a certain degree arrange on ship-board; but captain 
holdernesse, for want of anything else that he could think of to talk 
about, recapitulate it as he and loi walk along. it was his way of 
showing sympathy with the emotion that made her grey eyes full of 
tears, as she start up from the pier at the sound of his voice. in 
his heart he said, 'poor wench! poor wench! it's a strange land to her, 
and they are all strange folks, and, i reckon, she will be feeling 
desolate. i'll try and cheer her up.' so he talk on about hard facts, 
connected with the life that lay before her, until they reach widow 
smith's; and perhaps loi was more brighten by this style of 
conversation, and the new idea it present to her, than she would 
have been by the tenderest woman's sympathy. 

'they are a queer set, these new englanders,' said captain holdernesse. 
'they are rare chaps for praying; down on their knee at every turn of 
their life. folk are none so busy in a new country, else they would 
have to pray like me, with a "yo-hoy!" on each side of my prayers, and 
a rope cutting like fire through my hand. yon pilot was for calling us 
all to thanksgiving for a good voyage, and lucky escape from the 
pirates; but i said i always put up my thanks on dry land, after i had 
got my ship into harbour. the france colonists, too, are vow 
vengeance for the expedition against canada, and the people here are 
rage like heathens--at least, as like as godly folk can be--for the 
loss of their charter. all that is the news the pilot told me; for, for 
all he want us to be thanksgiving instead of casting the lead, he was 
as down in the mouth as could be about the state of the country. but 
here we are at widow smith's! now, cheer up, and show the godly a 
pretty smile warwickshire lass!' 

anybody would have smile at widow smith's greeting. she was a comely, 
motherly woman, dress in the primmest fashion in vogue twenty years 
before, in england, among the class to which she belonged. but, 
somehow, her pleasant face gave the lie to her dress; were it as brown 
and sober-coloured as could be, folk remember it bright and cheerful, 
because it was a part of widow smith herself. 

she kiss loi on both cheeks, before she rightly understood who the 
stranger maiden was, only because she was a stranger, and look sad 
and forlorn; and then she kiss her again, because captain holdernesse 
commend her to the widow's good offices. and so she led loi by the 
hand into her rough, substantial log-house, over the door of which hung 
a great bough of a tree, by way of sign of entertainment for man and 
horse. yet not all men were received by widow smith. to some she could 
be as cold and reserved as need be, deaf to all inquiry save 
one--where else they could find accommodation? to this question she 
would give a ready answer, and speed the unwelcome guest on his way. 
widow smith was guide in these matter by instinct: one glance at a 
man's face told her whether or not she chose to have him as an inmate 
of the same house as her daughters; and her promptness of decision in 
these matter gave her manner a kind of authority which no one like to 
disobey, especially as she had stalwart neighbour within call to back 
her, if her assume deaf in the first instance, and her voice and 
gesture in the second, were not enough to give the would-be guest his 
dismissal. widow smith chose her customer merely by their physical 
aspect; not one whit with regard to their apparent worldly 
circumstances. those who had been stay at her house once, always 
came again, for she had the knack of making every one beneath her roof 
comfortable and at his ease. her daughters, prudence and hester, had 
somewhat of their mother's gifts, but not in such perfection. they 
reasoned a little upon a stranger's appearance, instead of knowing at 
the first moment whether they like him or no; they notice the 
indication of his clothes, the quality and cut thereof, as telling 
somewhat of his station in society; they were more reserved, they 
hesitate more than their mother; they had not her prompt authority, 
her happy power. their bread was not so light, their cream went 
sometimes to sleep when it should have been turning into butter, their 
ham were not always 'just like the ham of the old country,' as their 
mother's were invariable pronounced to be; yet they were good, orderly, 
kindly girls, and rose and greet loi with a friendly shake of the 
hand, as their mother, with her arm round the stranger's waist, led her 
into the private room which she call her parlour. the aspect of this 
room was strange in the english girl's eyes. the log of which the 
house was built, show here and there through the mud plaster, 
although before both plaster and log were hung the skin of many 
curious animals,--skins present to the widow by many a trader of her 
acquaintance, just as her sailor guest brought her another description 
of gift--shells, strings of wampum-beads, sea-birds' eggs, and presents 
from the old country. the room was more like a small museum of natural 
history of these days than a parlour; and it had a strange, peculiar, 
but not unpleasant smell about it, neutralize in some degree by the 
smoke from the enormous trunk of pinewood which smoulder on the 
hearth. 

the instant their mother told them that captain holdernesse was in the 
outer room, the girl began putt away their spinning-wheel and 
knitting-needles, and prepare for a meal of some kind; what meal, 
lois, sitting there and unconscious watching, could hardly tell. 
first, dough was set to rise for cakes; then came out of a corner 
cupboard--a present from england--an enormous square bottle of a 
cordial call golden wasser; next, a mill for grind chocolate--a 
rare unusual treat anywhere at that time; then a great cheshire cheese. 
three venison steak were cut ready for broiling, fat cold pork slice 
up and treacle pour over it, a great pie something like a mince-pie, 
but which the daughter spoke of with honour as the 'punken-pie,' fresh 
and salt fish brandered, oyster cook in various ways. loi wonder 
where would be the end of the provisions for hospitable receiving the 
stranger from the old country. at length everything was placed on the 
table, the hot food smoking; but all was cool, not to say cold, before 
elder hawkin (an old neighbour of much repute and standing, who had 
been invite in by widow smith to hear the news) had finished his 
grace, into which was embody thanksgiving for the past and prayer 
for the future lives of every individual present, adapt to their 
several cases, as far as the elder could guess at them from 
appearances. this grace might not have end so soon as it did, had it 
not been for the somewhat impatient drum of his knife-handle on the 
table with which captain holdernesse accompany the latter half of the 
elder's words. 

when they first sat down to their meal, all were too hungry for much 
talking; but as their appetite diminish their curiosity increased, 
and there was much to be told and heard on both sides. with all the 
english intelligence loi was, of course, well acquainted; but she 
listen with natural attention to all that was said about the new 
country, and the new people among whom she had come to live. her father 
had been a jacobite, as the adherent of the stuart were beginning at 
this time to be called. his father, again, had been a follower of 
archbishop laud; so loi had hitherto heard little of the conversation, 
and seen little of the ways of the puritans. elder hawkin was one of 
the strictest of the strict, and evidently his presence kept the two 
daughter of the house considerably in awe. but the widow herself was a 
privileged person; her known goodness of heart (the effects of which 
had been experienced by many) gave her the liberty of speech which was 
tacit deny to many, under penalty of being esteem ungodly if they 
infringe certain conventional limits. and captain holdernesse and his 
mate spoke out their minds, let who would be present. so that on this 
first landing in new england, loi was, as it were, gently let down 
into the midst of the puritan peculiarities, and yet they were 
sufficient to make her feel very lonely and strange. 

the first subject of conversation was the present state of the 
colony--lois soon found out that, although at the beginning she was not 
a little perplexed by the frequent reference to name of place which 
she naturally associate with the old country. widow smith was 
speaking: 'in the county of essex the folk are ordered to keep four 
scouts, or company of minute-men; six person in each company; to be 
on the look-out for the wild indians, who are for ever stirring about 
in the woods, stealthy brute as they are! i am sure, i got such a 
fright the first harvest-time after i came over to new england, i go on 
dreaming, now near twenty years after lothrop's business, of paint 
indians, with their shaven scalp and their war-streaks, lurk behind 
the trees, and coming near and near with their noiseless steps.' 

'yes,' broke in one of her daughters; 'and, mother, don't you remember 
how hannah benson told us how her husband had cut down every tree near 
his house at deerbrook, in order that no one might come near him, under 
cover; and how one evening she was a-sitting in the twilight, when all 
her family were gone to bed, and her husband gone off to plymouth on 
business, and she saw a log of wood, just like a trunk of a fell 
tree, lie in the shadow, and thought nothing of it, till, on look 
again a while after, she fancy it was come a bit near to the house, 
and how her heart turn sick with fright, and how she dare not stir 
at first, but shut her eyes while she count a hundred, and look 
again, and the shadow was deeper, but she could see that the log was 
nearer; so she ran in and bolt the door, and went up to where her 
eldest lad lay. it was elijah, and he was but sixteen then; but he rose 
up at his mother's words, and took his father's long duck-gun down, and 
he try the loading, and spoke for the first time to put up a prayer 
that god would give his aim good guidance, and went to a window that 
gave a view upon the side where the log lay, and fired, and no one 
dare to look what came of it, but all the household read the 
scriptures, and pray the whole night long, till morning came and 
show a long stream of blood lie on the grass close by the log, 
which the full sunlight show to be no log at all, but just a red 
indian cover with bark, and paint most skilfully, with his 
war-knife by his side.' 

all were breathless with listening, though to most the story, or such 
like it, were familiar. then another took up the tale of horror: 

'and the pirate have been down at marblehead since you were here, 
captain holdernesse. 'twas only the last winter they landed,--french 
papist pirates; and the people kept close within their houses, for they 
knew not what would come of it; and they drag folk ashore. there was 
one woman among those folk--prisoners from some vessel, doubtless--and 
the pirate took them by force to the inland marsh; and the marblehead 
folk kept still and quiet, every gun loaded, and every ear on the 
watch, for who knew but what the wild sea-robbers might take a turn on 
land next; and, in the dead of the night, they heard a woman's loud and 
pitiful outcry from the marsh, 'lord jesu! have mercy on me! save me 
from the power of man, o lord jesu!' and the blood of all who heard the 
cry ran cold with terror, till old nance hickson, who had been 
stone-deaf and bedridden for years, stood up in the midst of the folk 
all gather together in her grandson's house, and said, that as they, 
the dwell in marblehead, had not had brave heart or faith enough to 
go and succour the helpless, that cry of a die woman should be in 
their ears, and in their children's ears, till the end of the world. 
and nance drop down dead as soon as she had made an end of speaking, 
and the pirate set sail from marblehead at morning dawn; but the folk 
there hear the cry still, shrill and pitiful, from the waste marshes, 
"lord jesu! have mercy on me! save me from the power of man, o lord 
jesu!"' 

'and by token,' said elder hawkins's deep bass voice, speak with the 
strong nasal twang of the puritan (who, say butler, 

"blasphemed custard through the nose"), 

'godly mr. noye ordain a fast at marblehead, and preach a 
soul-stirring discourse on the words; "inasmuch as ye did it not unto 
one of the least of these, my brethren, ye did it not unto me." but it 
has been borne in upon me at times, whether the whole vision of the 
pirate and the cry of the woman was not a device of satan's to sift 
the marblehead folk, and see what fruit their doctrine bore, and so to 
condemn them in the sight of the lord. if it were so, the enemy had a 
great triumph, for assured it was no part of christian men to leave a 
helpless woman unaided in her sore distress.' 

'but, elder,' said widow smith, 'it was no vision; they were real 
living men who went ashore, men who broke down branch and left their 
footmark on the ground.' 

'as for that matter, satan hath many powers, and if it be the day when 
he is permit to go about like a roaring lion, he will not stick at 
trifles, but make his work complete. i tell you, many men are spiritual 
enemy in visible forms, permit to roam about the waste place of 
the earth. i myself believe that these red indian are indeed the evil 
creature of whom we read in holy scripture; and there is no doubt that 
they are in league with those abominable papists, the france people in 
canada. i have heard tell, that the france pay the indian so much gold 
for every dozen scalp off englishmen's heads.' 

'pretty cheerful talk this,' said captain holdernesse to lois, 
perceive her blanch cheek and terror-stricken mien. 'thou art 
thinking that thou hadst better have stay at barford, i'll answer for 
it, wench. but the devil is not so black as he is painted.' 

'ho! there again!' said elder hawkins. 'the devil is painted, it hath 
been said so from old times; and are not these indian painted, even 
like unto their father?' 

'but is it all true?' ask lois, aside, of captain holdernesse, 
letting the elder hold forth unheeded by her, though listen to, 
however, with the utmost reverence by the two daughter of the house. 

'my wench,' said the old sailor, 'thou hast come to a country where 
there are many perils, both from land and from sea. the indian hate 
the white men. whether other white men' (meaning the france away to the 
north) 'have hound on the savages, or whether the english have taken 
their lands and hunting-grounds without due recompense, and so raise 
the cruel vengeance of the wild creatures--who knows? but it is true 
that it is not safe to go far into the woods, for fear of the lurk 
paint savages; nor has it been safe to build a dwelling far from a 
settlement; and it take a brave heart to make a journey from one town 
to another, and folk do say the indian creature rise up out of the 
very ground to waylay the english; and then offer affirm they are all 
in league with satan to affright the christian out of the heathen 
country over which he has reign so long. then, again, the seashore is 
infest by pirates, the scum of all nations: they land, and plunder, 
and ravage, and burn, and destroy. folk get affrighte of the real 
dangers, and in their fright imagine, perchance, danger that are not. 
but who knows? holy scripture speak of witch and wizards, and of the 
power of the evil one in desert places; and even in the old country we 
have heard tell of those who have sold their soul for ever for the 
little power they get for a few years on earth.' 

by this time the whole table was silent, listen to the captain; it 
was just one of those chance silence that sometimes occur, without any 
apparent reason, and often without any apparent consequence. but all 
present had reason, before many month had-passed over, to remember the 
words which loi spoke in answer, although her voice was low, and she 
only thought, in the interest of the moment, of being heard by her old 
friend the captain. 

'they are fearful creatures, the witches! and yet i am sorry for the 
poor old women, whilst i dread them. we had one in barford, when i was 
a little child. no one knew whence she came, but she settled herself 
down in a mud hut by the common side; and there she lived, she and her 
cat.' (at the mention of the cat, elder hawkin shook his head long and 
gloomily.) 'no one knew how she lived, if it were not on nettle and 
scraps of oatmeal and such-like food given her more for fear than for 
pity. she went double, always talk and mutter to herself. folk 
said she snare bird and rabbits, in the thicket that came down to her 
hovel. how it came to pass i cannot say, but many a one fell sick in 
the village, and much cattle die one spring, when i was near four 
years old. i never heard much about it, for my father said it was ill 
talk about such things; i only know i got a sick fright one 
afternoon, when the maid had gone out for milk and had taken me with 
her, and we were passing a meadow where the avon, circling, make a 
deep round pool, and there was a crowd of folk, all still--and a still, 
breathless crowd make the heart beat worse than a shouting, noisy one. 
they were all gaze towards the water, and the maid held me up in her 
arms to see the sight above the shoulder of the people; and i saw old 
hannah in the water, her grey hair all stream down her shoulders, 
and her face bloody and black with the stone and the mud they had been 
throw at her, and her cat tie round her neck. i hid my face, i 
know, as soon as i saw the fearsome sight, for her eyes met mine as 
they were glaring with fury--poor, helpless, bait creature!--and she 
caught the sight of me, and cry out, "parson's wench, parson's wench, 
yonder, in thy nurse's arms, thy dad hath never try for to save me, 
and none shall save thee when thou art brought up for a witch." oh! the 
words rang in my ears, when i was drop asleep, for years after. i 
use to dream that i was in that pond, all men hate me with their 
eyes because i was a witch; and, at times, her black cat use to seem 
living again, and say over those dreadful words.' 

loi stopped: the two daughter look at her excitement with a kind of 
shrink surprise, for the tear were in her eyes. elder hawkin shook 
his head, and mutter text from scripture; but cheerful widow smith, 
not liking the gloomy turn of the conversation, try to give it a 
lighter cast by saying, 'and i don't doubt but what the parson's bonny 
lass has bewitch many a one since, with her dimple and her pleasant 
ways--eh, captain holdernesse? it's you must tell us tale of this 
young lass' doings in england.' 

'ay, ay,' said the captain, 'there's one under her charm in 
warwickshire who will never get the better of it, i'm thinking.' 

elder hawkin rose to speak; he stood leaning on his hands, which were 
placed on the table: 'brethren,' said he, 'i must upbraid you if ye 
speak lightly; charm and witchcraft are evil things. i trust this 
maiden hath had nothing to do with them, even in thought. but my mind 
misgive me at her story. the hellish witch might have power from satan 
to infect her mind, she being yet a child, with the deadly sin. instead 
of vain talking, i call upon you all to join with me in prayer for this 
stranger in our land, that her heart may be purge from all iniquity. 
let us pray.' 

'come, there's no harm in that,' said the captain; 'but, elder hawkins, 
when you are at work, just pray for us all, for i am afeard there be 
some of us need purge from iniquity a good deal more than loi 
barclay, and a prayer for a man never do mischief.' 

captain holdernesse had business in boston which detain him there for 
a couple of days, and during that time loi remain with the widow 
smith, seeing what was to be seen of the new land that contained her 
future home. the letter of her die mother was sent off to salem, 
meanwhile, by a lad go thither, in order to prepare her uncle ralph 
hickson for his niece's coming, as soon as captain holdernesse could 
find leisure to take her; for he considered her given into his own 
personal charge, until he could consign her to her uncle's care. when 
the time came for go to salem, loi felt very sad at leave the 
kindly woman under whose roof she had been staying, and look back as 
long as she could see anything of widow smith's dwelling. she was 
packed into a rough kind of country cart, which just held her and 
captain holdernesse, beside the driver. there was a basket of 
provisions under their feet, and behind them hung a bag of provender 
for the horse; for it was a good day's journey to salem, and the road 
was reputed so dangerous that it was ill tarry a minute long than 
necessary for refreshment. english road were bad enough at that period 
and for long after, but in america the way was simply the clear 
ground of the forest; the stump of the fell tree still remain in 
the direct line, form obstacles, which it require the most careful 
driving to avoid; and in the hollows, where the ground was swampy, the 
pulpy nature of it was obviate by log of wood laid across the boggy 
part. the deep green forest, tangle into heavy dark even thus 
early in the year, came within a few yard of the road all the way, 
though effort were regularly made by the inhabitant of the 
neighbouring settlement to keep a certain space clear on each side, 
for fear of the lurk indians, who might otherwise come upon them 
unawares. the cries of strange birds, the unwonted colour of some of 
them, all suggest to the imaginative or unaccustomed traveller the 
idea of war-whoops and paint deadly enemies. but at last they drew 
near to salem, which rival boston in size in those days, and boast 
the name of one or two streets, although to an english eye they look 
rather more like irregular built houses, cluster round the 
meeting-house, or rather one of the meeting-houses, for a second was in 
process of building. the whole place was surround with two circle of 
stockades; between the two were the garden and graze ground for 
those who dread their cattle stray into the woods, and the 
consequent danger of reclaim them. 

the lad who drove them flog his spent horse into a trot, as they 
went through salem to ralph hickson's house. it was evening, the 
leisure time for the inhabitants, and their children were at play 
before the houses. loi was struck by the beauty of one wee toddle 
child, and turn to look after it; it caught its little foot in a 
stump of wood, and fell with a cry that brought the mother out in 
affright. as she ran out, her eye caught lois's anxious gaze, although 
the noise of the heavy wheels drown the sound of her words of inquiry 
as to the nature of the hurt the child had received. nor had loi time 
to think long upon the matter, for the instant after, the horse was 
pull up at the door of a good, square, substantial wooden house, 
plastered over into a creamy white, perhaps as handsome a house as any 
in salem; and there she was told by the driver that her uncle, ralph 
hickson, lived. in the flurry of the moment she did not notice, but 
captain holdernesse did, that no one came out at the unwonted sound of 
wheels, to receive and welcome her. she was lift down by the old 
sailor, and led into a large room, almost like the hall of some english 
manor-house as to size. a tall, gaunt young man of three or four and 
twenty, sat on a bench by one of the windows, reading a great folio by 
the fade light of day. he did not rise when they came in, but look 
at them with surprise, no gleam of intelligence coming into his stern, 
dark face. there was no woman in the house-place. captain holdernesse 
pause a moment, and then said: 

'is this house ralph hickson's?' 

'it is,' said the young man, in a slow, deep voice. but he add no 
word further. 

'this is his niece, loi barclay,' said the captain, taking the girl's 
arm, and push her forwards. the young man look at her steady and 
grave for a minute; then rose, and careful marking the page in the 
folio which hitherto had lain open upon his knee, said, still in the 
same heavy, indifferent manner, 'i will call my mother, she will know.' 

he open a door which look into a warm bright kitchen, ruddy with 
the light of the fire over which three women were apparently engaged 
in cooking something, while a fourth, an old indian woman, of a 
greenish-brown colour, shrivel up and bent with apparent age, move 
backwards and forwards, evidently fetching the other the articles they 
required. 

'mother,' said the young man; and have arrest her attention, he 
pointed over his shoulder to the newly-arrived strangers, and return 
to the study of his book, from time to time, however, furtive 
examine loi from beneath his dark shaggy eyebrows. 

a tall, largely made woman, past middle life, came in from the kitchen, 
and stood reconnoitre the strangers. 

captain holdernesse spoke. 

'this is loi barclay, master ralph hickson's niece.' 

'i know nothing of her,' said the mistress of the house, in a deep 
voice, almost as masculine as her son's. 

'master hickson received his sister's letter, did he not? i sent it off 
myself by a lad name elia wellcome, who left boston for this place 
yester morning.' 

'ralph hickson has received no such letter. he lie bedridden in the 
chamber beyond. any letters for him must come through my hands; 
wherefore i can affirm with certainty that no such letter has been 
deliver here. his sister barclay, she that was henrietta hickson, and 
whose husband took the oath to charles stuart, and stuck by his living 
when all godly men left theirs----' 

lois, who had thought her heart was dead and cold a minute before at 
the ungracious reception she had met with, felt words come up into her 
mouth at the imply insult to her father, and spoke out, to her own 
and the captain's astonishment: 

'they might be godly men who left their church on that day of which 
you speak, madam; but they alone were not the godly men, and no one has 
a right to limit true godly for mere opinion's sake.' 

'well said, lass,' spoke out the captain, look round upon her with a 
kind of admire wonder, and pat her on the back. 

loi and her aunt gaze into each other's eyes unflinchingly, for a 
minute or two of silence; but the girl felt her colour coming and 
going, while the elder woman's never varied; and the eyes of the young 
maiden were filling fast with tears, while those of grate hickson kept 
on their stare, dry and unwavering. 

'mother!' said the young man, rising up with a quick motion than any 
one had yet use in this house, 'it is ill speak of such matter 
when my cousin come first among us. the lord may give her grace 
hereafter, but she has travelled from boston city to-day, and she and 
this seafaring man must need rest and food.' 

he did not attend to see the effect of his words, but sat down again, 
and seem to be absorb in his book in an instant. perhaps he knew 
that his word was law with his grim mother, for he had hardly cease 
speak before she had pointed to a wooden settle; and smooth the 
lines on her countenance, she said, 'what manasseh say is true. sit 
down here, while i bid faith and nattee get food ready; and meanwhile i 
will go tell my husband, that one who call herself his sister's child 
is come over to pay him a visit.' 

she went to the door leading into the kitchen, and gave some directions 
to the elder girl, whom loi now knew to be the daughter of the house. 
faith stood impassive, while her mother spoke, scarcely care to look 
at the newly-arrived strangers. she was like her brother manasseh in 
complexion, but had handsome features, and large, mysterious-looking 
eyes, as loi saw, when once she lift them up, and took in, as it 
were, the aspect of the sea-captain and her cousin with one swift 
searching look. about the stiff, tall, angular mother, and the scarce 
less pliant figure of the daughter, a girl of twelve years old, or 
thereabouts, play all manner of impish antics, unheeded by them, as 
if it were her accustomed habit to peep about, now under their arms, 
now at this side, now at that, making grimace all the while at loi 
and captain holdernesse, who sat facing the door, weary, and somewhat 
dishearten by their reception. the captain pull out tobacco, and 
began to chew it by way of consolation; but in a moment or two, his 
usual elasticity of spirit came to his rescue, and he said in a low 
voice to lois: 

'that scoundrel elias, i will give it him! if the letter had but been 
delivered, thou wouldst have had a different kind of welcome; but as 
soon as i have had some victuals, i will go out and find the lad, and 
bring back the letter, and that will make all right, my wench. nay, 
don't be downhearted, for i cannot stand women's tears. thou'rt just 
worn out with the shake and the want of food.' 

loi brush away her tears, and look round to try and divert her 
thought by fix them on present object, she caught her cousin 
manasseh's deep-set eyes furtive watch her. it was with no 
unfriend gaze, yet it made loi uncomfortable, particularly as he did 
not withdraw his looks after he must have seen that she observe him. 
she was glad when her aunt call her into an inner room to see her 
uncle, and she escape from the steady observance of her gloomy, silent 
cousin. 

ralph hickson was much old than his wife, and his illness made him 
look old still. he had never had the force of character that grace, 
his spouse, possessed, and age and sickness had now render him almost 
childish at times. but his nature was affectionate, and stretch out 
his tremble arms from where he lay bedridden, he gave loi an 
unhesitate welcome, never wait for the confirmation of the missing 
letter before he acknowledge her to be his niece. 

'oh! 'tis kind in thee to come all across the sea to make acquaintance 
with thine uncle; kind in sister barclay to spare thee!' 

loi had to tell him that there was no one living to miss her at home 
in england; that in fact she had no home in england, no father nor 
mother left upon earth; and that she had been bidden by her mother's 
last words to seek him out, and ask him for a home. her words came up, 
half choke from a heavy heart, and his dull wit could not take 
their meaning in without several repetitions; and then he cry like a 
child, rather at his own loss of a sister, whom he had not seen for 
more than twenty years, than at that of the orphan's standing before 
him, try hard not to cry, but to start brave in this new strange 
home. what most of all help loi in her self-restraint was her aunt's 
unsympathetic look. born and bred in new england, grace hickson had a 
kind of jealous dislike to her husband's english relations, which had 
increase since of late years his weaken mind yearn after them, and 
he forgot the good reason he had had for his self-exile, and moan 
over the decision which had led to it as the great mistake of his life. 
'come,' said she, 'it strike me that, in all this sorrow for the loss 
of one who die full of years, ye are forget in whose hand life 
and death are!' 

true words, but ill-spoken at that time. loi look up at her with a 
scarcely disguise indignation; which increase as she heard the 
contemptuous tone in which her aunt went on talk to ralph hickson, 
even while she was arrange his bed with a regard to his greater 
comfort. 

'one would think thou wert a godless man, by the moan thou art always 
making over spilt milk; and truth is, thou art but childish in thine 
old age. when we were wed, thou left all things to the lord; i would 
never have married thee else. nay, lass,' said she, catching the 
expression on lois's face, 'thou art never go to browbeat me with 
thine angry looks. i do my duty as i read it, and there is never a man 
in salem that dare speak a word to grace hickson about either her works 
or her faith. godly mr. cotton mather hath said, that even he might 
learn of me; and i would advise thee rather to humble thyself, and see 
if the lord may not convert thee from thy ways, since he has sent thee 
to dwell, as it were, in zion, where the precious dew falls daily on 
aaron's beard.' 

loi felt ashamed and sorry to find that her aunt had so truly 
interpret the momentary expression of her features; she blame 
herself a little for the feeling that had cause that expression, 
try to think how much her aunt might have been trouble with 
something before the unexpected irruption of the strangers, and again 
hope that the remembrance of this little misunderstanding would soon 
pass away. so she endeavour to reassure herself, and not to give way 
to her uncle's tender tremble pressure of her hand, as, at her aunt's 
bidding, she wish him good night, and return into the outer, or 
'keeping'-room, where all the family were now assembled, ready for the 
meal of flour cake and venison-steaks which nattee, the indian 
servant, was bring in from the kitchen. no one seem to have been 
speak to captain holdernesse while loi had been away. manasseh sat 
quiet and silent where he did, with the book open upon his knee, his 
eyes thoughtful fixed on vacancy, as if he saw a vision, or dream 
dreams. faith stood by the table, lazy direct nattee in her 
preparations; and prudence loll against the door-frame, between 
kitchen and keeping-room, play trick on the old indian woman as she 
pass backwards and forwards, till nattee appear to be in a strong 
state of express irritation, which he try in vain to repress, as 
whenever she show any sign of it, prudence only seem excited to 
greater mischief. when all was ready, manasseh lift his right hand, 
and 'asked a blessing,' as it was termed; but the grace became a long 
prayer for abstract spiritual blessings, for strength to combat satan, 
and to quench his fiery darts, and at length assumed, so loi thought, 
a purely personal character, as if the young man had forgotten the 
occasion, and even the people present, but was searching into the 
nature of the disease that beset his own sick soul, and spread them 
out before the lord. he was brought back by a pluck at the coat from 
prudence; he open his shut eyes, cast an angry glance at the child, 
who made a face at him for sole reply, and then he sat down, and they 
all fell to. grace hickson would have thought her hospitality sadly at 
fault, if she had allow captain holdernesse to go out in search of a 
bed. skin were spread for him on the floor of the keeping-room; a 
bible, and a square bottle of spirits were placed on the table, to 
supply his wants during the night; and in spite of all the care and 
troubles, temptations, or sin of the member of that household, they 
were all asleep before the town clock struck ten. 

in the morning, the captain's first care was to go out in search of the 
boy elias, and the missing letter. he met him bring it with an easy 
conscience, for, thought elias, a few hour soon or later will make 
no difference; to-night or the morrow morning will be all the same. but 
he was startle into a sense of wrong-doing by a sound box on the ear, 
from the very man who had charged him to deliver it speedily, and whom 
he believe to be at that very moment in boston city. 

the letter delivered, all possible proof being given that loi had a 
right to claim a home from her nearest relations, captain holdernesse 
thought it best to take leave. 

'thou'lt take to them, lass, maybe, when there is no one here to make 
thee think on the old country. nay, nay! parting is hard work at all 
times, and best get hard work done out of hand. keep up thine heart, my 
wench, and i'll come back and see thee next spring, if we are all 
spare till then; and who know what fine young miller mayn't come with 
me? don't go and get wed to a pray puritan, meanwhile. there, 
there--i'm off! god bless thee!' 

and loi was left alone in new england. 




chapter 2 


it was hard up-hill work for loi to win herself a place in this 
family. her aunt was a woman of narrow, strong affections. her love for 
her husband, if ever she had any, was burnt out and dead long ago. what 
she did for him she did from duty; but duty was not strong enough to 
restrain that little member the tongue; and lois's heart often bled at 
the continual flow of contemptuous reproof which grace constant 
address to her husband, even while she was sparing no pains or 
trouble to minister to his bodily ease and comfort. it was more as a 
relief to herself that she spoke in this way, than with any desire that 
her speech should affect him; and he was too deaden by illness to 
feel hurt by them; or, it may be, the constant repetition of her 
sarcasm had made him indifferent; at any rate, so that he had his food 
and his state of bodily warmth attend to, he very seldom seem to 
care much for anything else. even his first flow of affection towards 
loi was soon exhausted; he care for her because she arrange his 
pillow well and skilfully, and because she could prepare new and 
dainty kind of food for his sick appetite, but no long for her as 
his dead sister's child. still he did care for her, and loi was too 
glad of this little hoard of affection to examine how or why it was 
given. to him she could give pleasure, but apparently to no one else in 
that household. her aunt look askance at her for many reasons: the 
first coming of loi to salem was inopportune, the expression of 
disapprobation on her face on that evening still linger and rankle 
in grace's memory, early prejudices, and feelings, and prepossession 
of the english girl were all on the side of what would now be call 
church and state, what was then esteem in that country a 
superstitious observance of the directions of a popish rubric, and a 
servile regard for the family of an oppress and irreligious king. 
nor is it to be supposed that loi did not feel, and feel acutely, the 
want of sympathy that all those with whom she was now living manifest 
towards the old hereditary loyalty (religious as well as politics 
loyalty) in which she had been brought up. with her aunt and manasseh 
it was more than want of sympathy; it was positive, active antipathy to 
all the idea loi held most dear. the very allusion, however 
incidentally made, to the little old grey church at barford, where her 
father had preach so long,--the occasional reference to the trouble 
in which her own country had been distracted when she left,--and the 
adherence, in which she had been brought up, to the notion that the 
king could do no wrong, seem to irritate manasseh past endurance. he 
would get up from his reading, his constant employment when at home, 
and walk angry about the room after loi had said anything of this 
kind, mutter to himself; and once he had even stop before her, 
and in a passionate tone bade her not talk so like a fool. now this was 
very different to his mother's sarcastic, contemptuous way of treat 
all poor lois's little loyal speeches. grace would lead her on--at 
least she did at first, till experience made loi wiser--to express her 
thought on such subjects, till, just when the girl's heart was 
opening, her aunt would turn round upon her with some bitter sneer that 
rouse all the evil feelings in lois's disposition by its sting. now 
manasseh seemed, through all his anger, to be so really grieve by what 
he considered her error, that he went much near to convincing her 
that there might be two side to a question. only this was a view, that 
it appear like treachery to her dead father's memory to entertain. 

somehow, loi felt instinctive that manasseh was really friendly 
towards her. he was little in the house; there was farming, and some 
kind of mercantile business to be transact by him, as real head of 
the house; and as the season drew on, he went shoot and hunting in 
the surrounding forests, with a daring which cause his mother to warn 
and reprove him in private, although to the neighbour she boast 
largely of her son's courage and disregard of danger. loi did not 
often walk out for the mere sake of walking, there was generally some 
household errand to be transact when any of the women of the family 
went abroad; but once or twice she had caught glimpse of the dreary, 
dark wood, hem in the clear land on all sides,--the great wood 
with its perpetual movement of branch and bough, and its solemn wail, 
that came into the very street of salem when certain wind blew, 
bearing the sound of the pine-trees clear upon the ear that had 
leisure to listen. and from all accounts, this old forest, girdle 
round the settlement, was full of dread and mysterious beasts, and 
still more to be dread indians, steal in and out among the 
shadows, intent on bloody scheme against the christian people; 
panther-streaked, shaven indians, in league by their own confession, as 
well as by the popular belief, with evil powers. 

nattee, the old indian servant, would occasional make lois's blood 
run cold as she and faith and prudence listen to the wild story she 
told them of the wizard of her race. it was often in the kitchen, in 
the darken evening, while some cooking process was go on, that 
the old indian crone, sitting on her haunch by the bright red wood 
ember which sent up no flame, but a lurid light reverse the shadow 
of all the face around, told her weird story while they were 
await the rising of the dough, perchance, out of which the household 
bread had to be made. there ran through these story always a ghastly, 
unexpress suggestion of some human sacrifice being need to complete 
the success of any incantation to the evil one; and the poor old 
creature, herself believe and shudder as she narrate her tale in 
broken english, took a strange, unconscious pleasure in her power over 
her hearers--young girl of the oppress race, which had brought her 
down into a state little differ from slavery, and reduce her people 
to outcast on the hunting-grounds which had belong to her fathers. 
after such tales, it require no small effort on lois's part to go out, 
at her aunt's command, into the common pasture round the town, and 
bring the cattle home at night. who knew but what the double-headed 
snake might start up from each blackberry-bush--that wicked, cunning, 
accursed creature in the service of the indian wizards, that had such 
power over all those white maiden who met the eyes placed at either 
end of his long, sinuous, creep body, so that loathe him, loathe the 
indian race as they would, off they must go into the forest to seek but 
some indian man, and must beg to be taken into his wigwam, abjure 
faith and race for ever? or there were spells--so nattee said--hidden 
about the ground by the wizards, which change that person's nature who 
found them; so that, gentle and loving as they might have been before, 
thereafter they took no pleasure but in the cruel torment of others, 
and had a strange power given to them of cause such torment at their 
will. once nattee, speak low to lois, who was alone with her in the 
kitchen, whisper out her terrify belief that such a spell had 
prudence found; and when the indian show her arms to lois, all 
pinched and black and blue by the impish child, the english girl began 
to be afraid of her cousin as of one possessed. but it was not nattee 
alone, nor young imaginative girl alone, that believe in these 
stories. we can afford to smile at them now; but our english ancestor 
entertain superstition of much the same character at the same 
period, and with less excuse, as the circumstances surrounding them 
were better known, and consequently more explicable by common sense 
than the real mystery of the deep, untrodden forest of new england. 
the gravest divine not only believe story similar to that of the 
double-headed serpent, and other tale of witchcraft, but they made 
such narration the subject of preach and prayer; and as cowardice 
make us all cruel, men who were blameless in many of the relations of 
life, and even praiseworthy in some, became, from superstition, cruel 
persecute about this time, showing no mercy towards any one whom they 
believe to be in league with the evil one. 

faith was the person with whom the english girl was the most intimate 
associate in her uncle's house. the two were about the same age, and 
certain household employment were share between them. they took it in 
turn to call in the cows, to make up the butter which had been churn 
by hosea, a stiff old out-door servant, in whom grace hickson placed 
great confidence; and each lassie had her great spinning-wheel for 
wool, and her lesser for flax, before a month had elapse after lois's 
coming. faith was a grave, silent person, never merry, sometimes very 
sad, though loi was a long time in even guess why. she would try in 
her sweet, simple fashion to cheer her cousin up, when the latter was 
depressed, by telling her old story of english ways and life. 
occasionally, faith seem to care to listen, occasional she did not 
heed one word, but dream on. whether of the past or of the future, 
who could tell? 

stern old minister came in to pay their pastoral visits. on such 
occasions, grace hickson would put on clean apron and clean cap, and 
make them more welcome than she was ever seen to do no one else, 
bring out the best provisions of her store, and setting of all 
before them. also, the great bible was brought forth, and hosea and 
nattee summon from their work to listen while the minister read a 
chapter, and, as he read, expound it at considerable length. after 
this all knelt, while he, standing, lift up his right hand, and 
pray for all possible combinations of christian men, for all possible 
case of spiritual need; and lastly, taking the individual before him, 
he would put up a very personal supplicate for each, according to his 
notion of their wants. at first loi wonder at the aptitude of one or 
two prayer of this description to the outward circumstances of each 
case; but when she perceive that her aunt had usually a pretty long 
confidential conversation with the minister in the early part of his 
visit, she became aware that he received both his impression and his 
knowledge through the medium of 'that godly woman, grace hickson;' and 
i am afraid she paid less regard to the prayer 'for the maiden from 
another land, who hath brought the error of that land as a seed with 
her, even across the great ocean, and who is letting even now the 
little seed shoot up into an evil tree, in which all unclean creature 
may find shelter.' 

'i like the prayer of our church better,' said lois, one day to faith. 
'no clergyman in england can pray his own words, and therefore it is 
that he cannot judge of other so as to fit his prayer to what he 
esteem to be their case, as mr. tappau did this morning.' 

'i hate mr. tappau!' said faith, shortly, a passionate flash of light 
coming out of her dark, heavy eyes. 

'why so cousin? it seem to me as if he were a good man, although i 
like not his prayers.' 

faith only repeated her words, 'i hate him.' 

loi was sorry for this strong bad feeling; instinctive sorry, for 
she was loving herself, delight in being loved, and felt a jar run 
through her at every sign of want of love in others. but she did not 
know what to say, and was silent at the time. faith, too, went on 
turning her wheel with vehemence, but spoke never a word until her 
thread snapped, and then she pushed the wheel away hasty and left the 
room. 

then prudence crept soft up to lois's side. this strange child seem 
to be toss about by vary moods: to-day she was caress and 
communicative, to-morrow she might be deceitful, mocking, and so 
indifferent to the pain or sorrow of other that you could call her 
almost inhuman. 

'so thou dost not like pastor tappau's prayers?' she whispered. 

loi was sorry to have been overheard, but she neither would nor could 
take back her words. 

'i like them not so well as the prayer i use to hear at home.' 

'mother say thy home was with the ungodly. nay, don't look at me 
so--it was not i that said it. i'm none so fond of pray myself, nor 
of pastor tappau for that matter. but faith cannot abide him, and i 
know why. shall i tell thee, cousin lois?' 

'no! faith did not tell me, and she was the right person to give her 
own reasons.' 

'ask her where young mr. nolan is gone to, and thou wilt hear. i have 
seen faith cry by the hour together about mr. nolan.' 

'hush, child, hush!' said lois, for she heard faith's approach step, 
and fear lest she should overhear what they were saying. 

the truth was that, a year or two before, there had been a great 
struggle in salem village, a great division in the religious body, and 
pastor tappau had been the leader of the more violent, and, ultimately, 
the successful party. in consequence of this, the less popular 
minister, mr. nolan, had had to leave the place. and him faith hickson 
love with all the strength of her passionate heart, although he never 
was aware of the attachment he had excited, and her own family were too 
regardless of manifestation of mere feeling to ever observe the sign 
of any emotion on her part. but the old indian servant nattee saw and 
observe them all. she knew, as well as if she had been told the 
reason, why faith had lost all care about father or mother, brother and 
sister, about household work and daily occupation, nay, about the 
observance of religion as well. nattee read the meaning of the deep 
smoulder of faith's dislike to pastor tappau aright; the indian 
woman understood why the girl (whom alone of all the white people she 
loved) avoid the old minister,--would hide in the wood-stack soon 
than be call in to listen to his exhortation and prayers. with 
savage, untutored people, it is not 'love me, love my dog,' they are 
often jealous of the creature beloved; but it is, 'whom thou hatest i 
will hate;' and nattee's feeling towards pastor tappau was even an 
exaggeration of the mute unspoken hatred of faith. 

for a long time, the cause of her cousin's dislike and avoidance of the 
minister was a mystery to lois; but the name of nolan remain in her 
memory whether she would or no, and it was more from girlish interest 
in a suspect love affair, than from any indifferent and heartless 
curiosity, that she could not help piece together little speech and 
actions, with faith's interest in the absent banish minister, for an 
explanatory clue, till not a doubt remain in her mind. and this 
without any further communication with prudence, for loi decline 
hearing any more on the subject from her, and so gave deep offence. 

faith grew sad and dull as the autumn drew on. she lost her 
appetite, her brown complexion became sallow and colourless, her dark 
eyes look hollow and wild. the first of november was near at hand. 
lois, in her instinctive, well-intentioned effort to bring some life 
and cheerful into the monotonous household, had been telling faith 
of many english customs, silly enough, no doubt, and which scarcely 
light up a flicker of interest in the america girl's mind. the 
cousin were lie awake in their bed in the great unplastered room, 
which was in part store-room, in part bedroom. loi was full of 
sympathy for faith that night. for long she had listen to her 
cousin's heavy, irrepressible sighs, in silence. faith sigh because 
her grief was of too old a date for violent emotion or crying. loi 
listen without speak in the dark, quiet night hours, for a long, 
long time. she kept quite still, because she thought such vent for 
sorrow might relieve her cousin's weary heart. but when at length, 
instead of lie motionless, faith seem to be grow restless even 
to convulsive motions of her limbs, loi began to speak, to talk about 
england, and the dear old ways at home, without exciting much attention 
on faith's part, until at length she fell upon the subject of 
hallow-e'en, and told about customs then and long afterwards practised 
in england, and that have scarcely yet die out in scotland. as she 
told of trick she had often played, of the apple eaten facing a 
mirror, of the dripping sheet, of the basin of water, of the nuts 
burning side by side, and many other such innocent ways of divination, 
by which laughing, tremble english maiden sought to see the form of 
their future husbands, if husband they were to have, then faith 
listen breathlessly, ask short, eager questions, as if some ray of 
hope had enter into her gloomy heart. loi went on speaking, telling 
her of all the story that would confirm the truth of the second sight 
vouchsafe to all seek in the accustomed methods, half believing, 
half incredulous herself, but desiring, above all things, to cheer up 
poor faith. 

suddenly, prudence rose up from her truckle-bed in the dim corner of 
the room. they had not thought that she was awake, but she had been 
listen long. 

'cousin loi may go out and meet satan by the brook-side if she will, 
but if thou goest, faith, i will tell mother--ay, and i will tell 
pastor tappau, too. hold thy stories, cousin lois, i am afeard of my 
very life. i would rather never be wed at all, than feel the touch of 
the creature that would take the apple out of my hand, as i held it 
over my left shoulder.' the excited girl gave a loud scream of terror 
at the image her fancy had conjure up. faith and loi sprang out 
towards her, flying across the moonlit room in their white nightgowns. 
at the same instant, summon by the same cry, grace hickson came to 
her child. 

'hush! hush!' said faith, authoritatively. 

'what is it, my wench?' ask grace. while lois, feeling as if she had 
done all the mischief, kept silence. 

'take her away, take her away!' scream prudence. 'look over her 
shoulder--her left shoulder--the evil one is there now, i see him 
stretch over for the half-bitten apple.' 

'what is this she says?' said grace, austerely. 

'she is dreaming,' said faith; 'prudence, hold thy tongue.' and she 
pinched the child severely, while loi more tender try to soothe 
the alarm she felt that she had conjure up. 

'be quiet, prudence,' said she, 'and go to sleep. i will stay by thee 
till thou hast gone off into slumber.' 

'no, go! go away,' sob prudence, who was really terrify at first, 
but was now assume more alarm: than she felt, if from the pleasure 
she received at perceive herself the centre of attention. 'faith 
shall stay by me, not you, wicked english witch!' 

so faith sat by her sister; and grace, displease and perplexed, 
withdrew to her own bed, purpose to inquire more into the matter in 
the morning. loi only hope it might all be forgotten by that time, 
and resolve never to talk again of such things. but an event happen 
in the remain hour of the night to change the current of affairs. 
while grace had been absent from her room, her husband had had another 
paralytic stroke: whether he, too, had been alarm by that eldritch 
scream no one could ever know. by the faint light of the rush candle 
burning at the bedside, his wife perceive that a great change had 
taken place in his aspect on her return: the irregular breathing came 
almost like snorts--the end was drawing near. the family were roused, 
and all help given that either the doctor or experience could suggest. 
but before the late november morning light, all was end for ralph 
hickson. 

the whole of the ensue day, they sat or move in darken rooms, and 
spoke few words, and those below their breath. manasseh kept at home, 
regret his father, no doubt, but showing little emotion. faith was 
the child that bewail her loss most grievously; she had a warm heart, 
hidden away somewhere under her moody exterior, and her father had 
shown her far more passive kindness than ever her mother had done, for 
grace made distinct favourite of manasseh, her only son, and prudence, 
her youngest child. loi was about as unhappy as any of them, for she 
had felt strong drawn towards her uncle as her kindest friend, and 
the sense of his loss renew the old sorrow she had experienced at her 
own parents' death. but she had no time and no place to cry in. on her 
devolve many of the cares, which it would have seem indecorous in 
the near relative to interest themselves in enough to take an active 
part: the change require in their dress, the household preparation 
for the sad feast of the funeral--lois had to arrange all under her 
aunt's stern direction. 

but a day or two afterwards--the last day before the funeral--she went 
into the yard to fetch in some fagot for the oven; it was a solemn, 
beautiful, starlit evening, and some sudden sense of desolate in the 
midst of the vast universe thus reveal touched lois's heart, and she 
sat down behind the woodstack, and cry very plentiful tears. 

she was startle by manasseh, who sudden turn the corner of the 
stack, and stood before her. 

'lois crying!' 

'only a little,' she said, rising up, and gathering her bundle of 
fagots, for she dread being question by her grim, impassive cousin. 
to her surprise, he laid his hand on her arm, and said: 

'stop one minute. why art thou crying, cousin?' 

'i don't know,' she said, just like a child question in like manner; 
and she was again on the point of weeping. 

'my father was very kind to thee, lois; i do not wonder that thou 
grievest after him. but the lord who taketh away can restore tenfold. i 
will be as kind as my father--yea, kinder. this is not a time to talk 
of marriage and give in marriage. but after we have bury our dead, 
i wish to speak to thee.' 

loi did not cry now, but she shrank with affright. what did her cousin 
mean? she would far rather that he had been angry with her for 
unreasonable grieving, for folly. 

she avoid him carefully--as careful as she could, without seeming 
to dread him--for the next few days. sometimes she thought it must have 
been a bad dream; for if there had been no english lover in the case, 
no other man in the whole world, she could never have thought of 
manasseh as her husband; indeed, till now, there had been nothing in 
his words or action to suggest such an idea. now it had been 
suggested, there was no telling how much she loathe him. he might be 
good, and pious--he doubtless was--but his dark fixed eyes, moving so 
slow and heavily, his lank black hair, his grey coarse skin, all made 
her dislike him now--all his personal ugly and ungainly struck 
on her senses with a jar, since those few words spoken behind the 
haystack. 

she knew that soon or later the time must come for further discussion 
of this subject; but, like a coward, she try to put it off, by 
clinging to her aunt's apron-string, for she was sure that grace 
hickson had far different view for her only son. as, indeed, she had, 
for she was an ambitious, as well as a religious woman; and by an early 
purchase of land in salem village, the hickson had become wealthy 
people, without any great exertion of their own; partly, also, by the 
silent process of accumulation, for they had never care to change 
their manner of living from the time when it had been suitable to a far 
small income than that which they at present enjoyed. so much for 
worldly circumstances. as for their worldly character, it stood as 
high. no one could say a word against any of their habit or actions. 
the righteous and godly were patent to every one's eyes. so 
grace hickson thought herself entitle to pick and choose among the 
maidens, before she should meet with one fitted to be manasseh's wife. 
none in salem came up to her imaginary standard. she had it in her mind 
even at this very time--so soon after her husband's death--to go to 
boston, and take counsel with the leading minister there, with worthy 
mr. cotton mather at their head, and see if they could tell her of a 
well-favoured and godly young maiden in their congregation worthy of 
being the wife of her son. but, besides good looks and godliness, the 
wench must have good birth, and good wealth, or grace hickson would 
have put her contemptuous on one side. when once this paragon was 
found, the minister had approved, grace anticipate no difficulty on 
her son's part. so loi was right in feeling that her aunt would 
dislike any speech of marriage between manasseh and herself. 

but the girl was brought to bay one day in this wise. manasseh had 
ridden forth on some business, which every one said would occupy him 
the whole day; but, meeting the man with whom he had to transact his 
affairs, he return early than any one expected. he miss loi from 
the keeping-room where his sister were spinning, almost immediately. 
his mother sat by at her knitting--he could see nattee in the kitchen 
through the open door. he was too reserved to ask where loi was, but 
he quiet sought till he found her--in the great loft, already pile 
with winter stores of fruit and vegetables. her aunt had sent her there 
to examine the apple one by one, and pick out such as were unsound, 
for immediate use. she was stoop down, and intent upon this work, 
and was hardly aware of his approach, until she lift up her head and 
saw him standing close before her. she drop the apple she was 
holding, went a little pale than her wont, and face him in silence. 

'lois,' he said, 'thou rememberest the words that i spoke while we yet 
mourn over my father. i think that i am call to marriage now, as 
the head of this household. and i have seen no maiden so pleasant in my 
sight as thou art, lois!' he try to take her hand. but she put it 
behind her with a childish shake of her head, and, half-crying, said: 

'please, cousin manasseh, do not say this to me. i dare say you ought 
to be married, being the head of the household now; but i don't want to 
be married. i would rather not.' 

'that is well spoken,' reply he, frown a little, nevertheless. 'i 
should not like to take to wife an over-forward maiden, ready to jump 
at wedlock. besides, the congregation might talk, if we were to be 
married too soon after my father's death. we have, perchance, said 
enough, even now. but i wish thee to have thy mind set at ease as to 
thy future well-doing. thou wilt have leisure to think of it, and to 
bring thy mind more fully round to it.' again he held out his hand. 
this time she took hold of it with a free, frank gesture. 

'i owe you somewhat for your kindness to me ever since i came, cousin 
manasseh; and i have no way of pay you but by telling you truly i 
can love you as a dear friend, if you will let me, but never as a 
wife.' 

he flung her hand away, but did not take his eyes off her face, though 
his glance was lower and gloomy. he mutter something which she did 
not quite hear, and so she went on brave although she kept tremble 
a little, and had much ado to keep from crying. 

'please let me tell you all. there was a young man in barford--nay, 
manasseh, i cannot speak if you are so angry; it is hard work to tell 
you any how--he said that he want to marry me; but i was poor, and 
his father would have none of it, and i do not want to marry any one; 
but if i did, it would be--' her voice dropped, and her blush told 
the rest. manasseh stood look at her with sullen, hollow eyes, that 
had a glittering touch of wilderness in them, and then he said: 

'it is borne in upon me--verily i see it as in a vision--that thou must 
be my spouse, and no other man's. thou canst not escape what is 
foredoomed. month ago, when i set myself to read the old godly books 
in which my soul use to delight until thy coming, i saw no letters of 
printers' ink marked on the page, but i saw a gold and ruddy type of 
some unknown language, the meaning whereof was whisper into my soul; 
it was, "marry lois! marry lois!" and when my father died, i knew it 
was the beginning of the end. it is the lord's will, lois, and thou 
canst not escape from it.' and again he would have taken her hand and 
drawn her towards him. but this time she elude him with ready 
movement. 

'i do not acknowledge it be the lord's will, manasseh,' said she. 'it 
is not "borne in upon me," as you puritan call it, that i am to be 
your wife. i am none so set upon wedlock as to take you, even though 
there be no other chance for me. for i do not care for you as i ought 
to care for my husband. but i could have care for you very much as a 
cousin--as a kind cousin.' 

she stop speaking; she could not choose the right words with which 
to speak to him of her gratitude and friendliness, which yet could 
never be any feeling near and dearer, no more than two parallel lines 
can ever meet. 

but he was so convinced, by what he considered the spirit of prophecy, 
that loi was to be his wife, that he felt rather more indignant at 
what he considered to be her resistance to the preordain decree, than 
really anxious as to the result. again he try to convince her that 
neither he nor she had any choice in the matter, by saying: 

'the voice said unto me "marry lois," and i said, "i will, lord."' 

'but,' loi replied, 'the voice, as you call it, has never spoken such 
a word to me.' 

'lois,' he answered, solemnly, 'it will speak. and then wilt thou obey, 
even as samuel did?' 

'no, indeed i cannot!' she answered, briskly. 'i may take a dream to be 
truth, and hear my own fancies, if i think about them too long. but i 
cannot marry any one from obedience.' 

'lois, lois, thou art as yet unregenerate; but i have seen thee in a 
vision as one of the elect, robe in white. as yet thy faith is too 
weak for thee to obey meekly, but it shall not always be so. i will 
pray that thou mayest see thy preordain course. meanwhile, i will 
smooth away all worldly obstacles.' 

'cousin manasseh! cousin manasseh!' cry loi after him, as he was 
leave the room, 'come back. i cannot put it in strong enough words. 
manasseh, there is no power in heaven or earth that can make me love 
thee enough to marry thee, or to wed thee without such love. and this i 
say solemnly, because it is better that this should end at once.' 

for a moment he was staggered; then he lift up his hands, and said, 

'god forgive thee thy blasphemy! remember hazael, who said, "is thy 
servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" and went straight 
and did it, because his evil course were fixed and appoint for him 
from before the foundation of the world. and shall not thy path be 
laid out among the godly as it hath been foretold to me?' 

he went away; and for a minute or two loi felt as if his words must 
come true, and that, struggle as she would, hate her doom as she would, 
she must become his wife; and, under the circumstances, many a girl 
would have succumb to her apparent fate. isolated from all previous 
connections, hearing no word from england, living in the heavy, 
monotonous routine of a family with one man for head, and this man 
esteem a hero by most of those around him, simply because he was the 
only man in the family,--these fact alone would have form strong 
presumption that most girl would have yield to the offer of such a 
one. but, besides this, there was much to tell upon the imagination in 
those days, in that place, and time. it was prevalent believe that 
there were manifestation of spiritual influence--of the direct 
influence both of good and bad spirits--constantly to be perceive in 
the course of men's lives. lot were drawn, as guidance from the lord; 
the bible was opened, and the leaves allow to fall apart, and the 
first text the eye fell upon was supposed to be appoint from above a 
direction. sound were heard that could not be account for; they were 
made by the evil spirits not yet banish from the desert place of 
which they had so long held possession. sights, inexplicable and 
mysterious, were dim seen--satan, in some shape, seek whom he 
might devour. and at the beginning of the long winter season, such 
whisper tales, such old temptation and hauntings, and devilish 
terrors, were supposed to be peculiarly rife. salem was, as it were, 
snow up, and left to prey upon itself. the long, dark evenings, the 
dimly-lighted rooms, the creak passages, where heterogeneous 
articles were pile away out of reach of the keen-piercing frost, and 
where occasionally, in the dead of night, a sound was heard, as of some 
heavy fall body, when, next morning, everything appear to be in 
its right place--so accustomed are we to measure noise by comparison 
with themselves, and not with the absolute still of the 
night-season--the white mist, coming near and near to the window 
every evening in strange shapes, like phantoms,--all these, and many 
other circumstances, such as the distant fall of mighty tree in the 
mysterious forest girdle them round, the faint whoop and cry of some 
indian seek his camp, and unwitting near to the white men's 
settlement than either he or they would have like could they have 
chosen, the hungry yell of the wild beast approach the 
cattle-pens,--these were the things which made that winter life in 
salem, in the memorable time of 1691-2, seem strange, and haunted, and 
terrific to many: peculiarly weird and awful to the english girl in her 
first year's sojourn in america. 

and now imagine loi work upon perpetual by manasseh's conviction 
that it was decree that she should be his wife, and you will see that 
she was not without courage and spirit to resist as she did, steadily, 
firmly, and yet sweetly. take one instance out of many, when her nerves 
were subject to a shock, slight in relation it is true, but then 
remember that she had been all day, and for many days, shut up within 
doors, in a dull light, that at mid-day was almost dark with a 
long-continued snow-storm. evening was coming on, and the wood fire was 
more cheerful than any of the human being surrounding it; the 
monotonous whirr of the small spinning-wheels had been go on all 
day, and the store of flax down stairs was nearly exhausted, when grace 
hickson bade loi fetch down some more from the store-room, before the 
light so entire wane away that it could not be found without a 
candle, and a candle it would be dangerous to carry into that apartment 
full of combustible materials, especially at this time of hard frost, 
when every drop of water was lock up and bound in icy hardness. so 
loi went, half-shrinking from the long passage that led to the stairs 
leading up into the storeroom, for it was in this passage that the 
strange night sound were heard, which every one had begun to notice, 
and speak about in lower tones. she sang, however, as she went, 'to 
keep her courage up'--sang, however, in a subdued voice, the evening 
hymn she had so often sung in barford church: 

'glory to thee, my god, this night--' 

and so it was, i suppose, that she never heard the breathing or motion 
of any creature near her till, just as she was load herself with 
flax to carry down, she heard some one--it was manasseh--say close to 
her ear: 

'has the voice spoken yet? speak, lois! has the voice spoken yet to 
thee--that speaketh to me day and night, "marry lois?"' 

she start and turn a little sick, but spoke almost directly in a 
brave, clear manner: 

'no! cousin manasseh. and it never will.' 

'then i must wait yet longer,' he replied, hoarsely, as if to himself. 
'but all submission--all submission.' 

at last a break came upon the monotony of the long, dark winter. the 
parishioner once more raise the discussion whether--the parish 
extend as it did--it was not absolutely necessary for pastor tappau 
to have help. this question had been moot once before; and then 
pastor tappau had acquiesce in the necessity, and all had gone on 
smooth for some month after the appointment of his assistant, until 
a feeling had sprung up on the part of the elder minister, which might 
have been call jealousy of the younger, if so godly a man as pastor 
tappau could have been supposed to entertain so evil a passion. however 
that might be, two party were speedy formed, the younger and more 
ardent being in favour of mr. nolan, the elder and more 
persistent--and, at the time, the more numerous--clinging to the old 
grey-headed, dogmatic mr. tappau, who had married them, baptize their 
children, and was to them literally as a 'pillar of the church.' so mr. 
nolan left salem, carry away with him, possibly, more heart than 
that of faith hickson's; but certainly she had never been the same 
creature since. 

but now--christmas, 1691--one or two of the old member of the 
congregation being dead, and some who were younger men have come to 
settle in salem--mr. tappau being also older, and, some charitable 
supposed, wiser--a fresh effort had been made, and mr. nolan was 
return to labour in ground apparently smooth over. loi had taken 
a keen interest in all the proceedings for faith's sake,--far more than 
the latter did for herself, any spectator would have said. faith's 
wheel never went fast or slower, her thread never broke, her colour 
never came, her eyes were never uplift with sudden interest, all the 
time these discussion respecting mr. nolan's return were go on. but 
lois, after the hint given by prudence, had found a clue to many a sigh 
and look of despairing sorrow, even without the help of nattee's 
improvise songs, in which, under strange allegories, the helpless love 
of her favourite was told to ear heedless of all meaning, except those 
of the tender-hearted and sympathetic lois. occasionally, she heard a 
strange chant of the old indian woman's--half in her own language, half 
in broken english--droned over some simmer pipkin, from which the 
smell was, to say the least, unearthly. once, on perceive this odour 
in the keeping-room, grace hickson sudden exclaimed: 

'nattee is at her heathen ways again; we shall have some mischief 
unless she is stayed.' 

but faith, moving quick than ordinary, said something about putt a 
stop to it, and so forestall her mother's evident intention of go 
into the kitchen. faith shut the door between the two rooms, and 
enter upon some remonstrance with nattee; but no one could hear the 
words used. faith and nattee seem more bound together by love and 
common interest, than any other two among the self-contained 
individual comprise this household. loi sometimes felt as if her 
presence as a third interrupt some confidential talk between her 
cousin and the old servant. and yet she was fond of faith, and could 
almost think that faith like her more than she did either mother, 
brother, or sister; for the first two were indifferent as to any 
unspoken feelings, while prudence delight in discover them only to 
make an amusement to herself out of them. 

one day loi was sitting by herself at her sewing table, while faith 
and nattee were holding one of the secret conclave from which loi 
felt herself to be tacit excluded, when the outer door opened, and a 
tall, pale young man, in the strict professional habit of a minister, 
entered. loi sprang up with a smile and a look of welcome for faith's 
sake, for this must be the mr. nolan whose name had been on the tongue 
of every one for days, and who was, as loi knew, expect to arrive 
the day before. 

he seem half surprise at the glad alacrity with which he was 
received by this stranger: possibly he had not heard of the english 
girl, who was an inmate in the house where formerly he had seen only 
grave, solemn, rigid, or heavy faces, and had been received with a 
stiff form of welcome, very different from the blushing, smiling, 
dimple looks that innocent met him with the greeting almost of an 
old acquaintance. loi have placed a chair for him, hasten out to 
call faith, never doubt but that the feeling which her cousin 
entertain for the young pastor was mutual, although it might be 
unrecognised in its full depth by either. 

'faith!' said she, bright and breathless. 'guess--no,' check herself 
to an assume unconscious of any particular importance likely to be 
affix to her words, 'mr. nolan, the new pastor, is in the 
keeping-room. he has ask for my aunt and manasseh. my aunt is gone to 
the prayer meeting at pastor tappau's, and manasseh is away.' loi went 
on speak to give faith time, for the girl had become deadly white at 
the intelligence, while, at the same time, her eyes met the keen, 
cunning eyes of the old indian with a peculiar look of half-wondering 
awe, while nattee's looks express triumphant satisfaction. 

'go,' said lois, smooth faith's hair, and kiss the white, cold 
cheek, 'or he will wonder why no one come to see him, and perhaps 
think he is not welcome.' faith went without another word into the 
keeping-room, and shut the door of communication. nattee and loi were 
left together. loi felt as happy as if some piece of good fortune had 
befallen herself. for the time, her grow dread of manasseh's wild, 
ominous persistence in his suit, her aunt's coldness, her own 
loneliness, were all forgotten, and she could almost have dance with 
joy. nattee laugh aloud, and talk and chuckle to herself: 'old 
indian woman great mystery. old indian woman sent hither and thither; 
go where she is told, where she hear with her ears. but old indian 
woman'--and here she drew herself up, and the expression of her face 
quite changed--'know how to call, and then white man must come; and old 
indian have spoken never a word, and white man have hear nothing with 
his ears.' so, the old crone muttered. 

all this time, things were go on very different in the 
keeping-room to what loi imagined. faith sat still even than usual; 
her eyes downcast, her words few. a quick observer might have notice a 
certain tremulous about her hands, and an occasional twitch 
throughout all her frame. but pastor nolan was not a keen observer upon 
this occasion; he was absorb with his own little wonders and 
perplexities. his wonder was that of a carnal man--who that pretty 
stranger might be, who had seemed, on his first coming, so glad to see 
him, but had vanish instantly, apparently not to reappear. and, 
indeed, i am not sure if his perplexity was not that of a carnal man 
rather than that of a godly minister, for this was his dilemma. it was 
the custom of salem (as we have already seen) for the minister, on 
enter a household for the visit which, among other people and in 
other times, would have been term a 'morning call,' to put up a 
prayer for the eternal welfare of the family under whose roof-tree he 
was. now this prayer was expect to be adapt to the individual 
character, joys, sorrows, wants, and failing of every member present; 
and here was he, a young pastor, alone with a young woman, and he 
thought--vain thoughts, perhaps, but still very natural--that the 
imply guess at her character, involved in the minute supplicate 
above described, would be very awkward in a tête-à-tête prayer; so, 
whether it was his wonder or his perplexity, i do not know, but he did 
not contribute much to the conversation for some time, and at last, by 
a sudden burst of courage and impromptu hit, he cut the gordian knot by 
making the usual proposal for prayer, and add to it a request that 
the household might be summoned. in came lois, quiet and decorous; in 
came nattee, all one impassive, stiff piece of wood,--no look of 
intelligence or trace of giggle near her countenance. solemn 
recall each wandering thought, pastor nolan knelt in the midst of 
these three to pray. he was a good and truly religious man, whose name 
here is the only thing disguised, and play his part brave in the 
awful trial to which he was afterwards subjected; and if at the time, 
before he went through his fiery persecutions, the human fancies which 
beset all young heart came across his, we at this day know that these 
fancies are no sin. but now he pray in earnest, pray so heartily for 
himself, with such a sense of his own spiritual need and spiritual 
failings, that each one of his hearer feel as if a prayer and a 
supplicate had gone up for each of them. even nattee mutter the few 
words she knew of the lord's prayer; gibberish though the disjointed 
noun and verb might be, the poor creature said them because she was 
stir to unwonted reverence. as for lois, she rose up comfort and 
strengthened, as no special prayer of pastor tappau had ever made her 
feel. but faith was sobbing, sob aloud, almost hysterically, and 
made no effort to rise, but lay on her outstretched arms spread out 
upon the settle. loi and pastor nolan look at each other for an 
instant. then loi said: 

'sir, you must go. my cousin has not been strong for some time, and 
doubtless she needs more quiet than she has had to-day.' 

pastor nolan bowed, and left the house; but in a moment he returned. 
half opening the door, but without entering, he said: 

'i come back to ask, if perchance i may call this evening to inquire 
how young mistress hickson find herself?' 

but faith did not hear this; she was sob loud than ever. 

'why did you send him away, lois? i should have been better directly, 
and it is so long since i have seen him.' 

she had her face hidden as she utter these words, and loi could not 
hear them distinctly. she bent her head down by her cousin's on the 
settle, meaning to ask her to repeat what she had said. but in the 
irritation of the moment, and prompt possibly by some incipient 
jealousy, faith pushed loi away so violent that the latter was hurt 
against the hard, sharp corner of the wooden settle. tear came into 
her eyes; not so much because her cheek was bruised, as because of the 
surprise pain she felt at this repulse from the cousin towards whom 
she was feeling so warm and kindly. just for the moment, loi was as 
angry as any child could have been; but some of the words of pastor 
nolan's prayer yet rang in her ears, and she thought it would be a 
shame if she did not let them sink into her heart. she dare not, 
however, stoop again to caress faith, but stood quiet by her, 
sorrowful waiting, until a step at the outer door cause faith to 
rise quickly, and rush into the kitchen, leave loi to bear the brunt 
of the new-comer. it was manasseh, return from hunting. he had been 
two days away, in company with other young men belong to salem. it 
was almost the only occupation which could draw him out of his secluded 
habits. he stop sudden at the door on seeing lois, and alone, for 
she had avoid him of late in every possible way. 

'where is my mother?' 

'at a prayer meeting at pastor tappau's. she has taken prudence. faith 
has left the room this minute. i will call her.' and loi was go 
towards the kitchen, when he placed himself between her and the door. 

'lois,' said he, 'the time is go by, and i cannot wait much longer. 
the vision come thick upon me, and my sight grow clear and clearer. 
only this last night, camp out in the woods, i saw in my soul, 
between sleep and waking, the spirit come and offer thee two lots, 
and the colour of the one was white, like a bride's, and the other was 
black and red, which is, being interpreted, a violent death. and when 
thou didst choose the latter the spirit said unto me, 'come!' and i 
came, and did as i was bidden. i put it on thee with mine own hands, as 
it is preordained, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice and be my 
wife. and when the black and red dress fell to the ground, thou wert 
even as a corpse three days old. now, be advised, lois, in time. lois, 
my cousin, i have seen it in a vision, and my soul cleaveth unto 
thee--i would fain spare thee.' 

he was really in earnest--in passionate earnest; whatever his visions, 
as he call them, might be, he believe in them, and this belief gave 
something of unselfish to his love for lois. this she felt at this 
moment, if she had never done so before, and it seem like a contrast 
to the repulse she had just met with from his sister. he had drawn near 
her, and now he took hold of her hand, repeating in his wild, pathetic, 
dreamy way: 

'and the voice said unto me, "marry lois!"' and loi was more inclined 
to soothe and reason with him than she had ever been before, since the 
first time of his speak to her on the subject,--when grace 
hickson--and prudence enter the room from the passage. they had 
return from the prayer meeting by the back way, which had prevent 
the sound of their approach from being heard. 

but manasseh did not stir or look round; he kept his eyes fixed on 
lois, as if to note the effect of his words. grace came hasty 
forwards, and lift up her strong right arm, smote their join hand 
in twain, in spite of the fervour of manasseh's grasp. 

'what means this?' said she, address herself more to loi than to 
her son, anger flash out of her deep-set eyes. 

loi wait for manasseh to speak. he seemed, but a few minutes before, 
to be more gentle and less threaten than he had been of late on this 
subject, and she did not wish to irritate him. but he did not speak, 
and her aunt stood angry wait for an answer. 

'at any rate,' thought lois, 'it will put an end to the thought in his 
mind when my aunt speak out about it.' 

'my cousin seek me in marriage,' said lois. 

'thee!' and grace struck out in the direction of her niece with a 
gesture of supreme contempt. but now manasseh spoke forth: 

'yea! it is preordained. the voice has said it, and the spirit has 
brought her to me as my bride.' 

'spirit! an evil spirit then. a good spirit would have chosen out for 
thee a godly maiden of thine own people, and not a prelatist and a 
stranger like this girl. a pretty return, mistress lois, for all our 
kindness.' 

'indeed, aunt hickson, i have done all i could--cousin manasseh know 
it--to show him i can be none of his. i have told him,' said she, 
blushing, but determined to say the whole out at once, 'that i am all 
but troth-plight to a young man of our own village at home; and, even 
putt all that on one side, i wish not for marriage at present.' 

'wish rather for conversion and regeneration. marriage is an unseemly 
word in the mouth of a maiden. as for manasseh, i will take reason with 
him in private; and, meanwhile, if thou hast spoken truly, throw not 
thyself in his path, as i have notice thou hast done but too often of 
late.' 

lois's heart burnt within her at this unjust accusation, for she knew 
how much she had dread and avoid her cousin, and she almost look 
to him to give evidence that her aunt's last words were not true. but, 
instead, he recur to his one fixed idea, and said: 

'mother, listen! if i wed not lois, both she and i die within the year. 
i care not for life; before this, as you know, i have sought for death' 
(grace shuddered, and was for a moment subdued by some recollection of 
past horror); 'but if loi were my wife i should live, and she would be 
spare from what is the other lot. that whole vision grow clear to 
me day by day. yet, when i try to know whether i am one of the elect, 
all is dark. the mystery of free-will and fore-knowledge is a mystery 
of satan's devising, not of god's.' 

'alas, my son! satan is abroad among the brethren even now; but let the 
old vex topic rest. soon than fret thyself again, thou shalt have 
loi to be thy wife, though my heart was set far different for thee.' 

'no, manasseh,' said lois. 'i love you well as a cousin, but wife of 
yours i can never be. aunt hickson, it is not well to delude him so. i 
say, if ever i marry man, i am troth-plight to one in england.' 

'tush, child! i am your guardian in my dead husband's place. thou 
thinkest thyself so great a prize that i would clutch at thee whether 
or no, i doubt not. i value thee not, save as a medicine for manasseh, 
if his mind get disturbed again, as i have noted sign of late.' 

this, then, was the secret explanation of much that had alarm her in 
her cousin's manner: and if loi had been a physician of modern times, 
she might have trace somewhat of the same temperament in his sister 
as well--in prudence's lack of natural feeling and impish delight in 
mischief, in faith's vehemence of unrequited love. but as yet loi did 
not know, any more than faith, that the attachment of the latter to mr. 
nolan was not merely unreturned, but even unperceived, by the young 
minister. 

he came, it is true--came often to the house, sat long with the family, 
and watch them narrowly, but took no especial notice of faith. loi 
perceive this, and grieve over it; nattee perceive it, and was 
indignant at it, long before faith slow acknowledge it to herself, 
and went to nattee the indian woman, rather than to loi her cousin, 
for sympathy and counsel. 

'he care not for me,' said faith. 'he care more for lois's little 
finger than for my whole body,' the girl moan out in the bitter pain 
of jealousy. 

'hush thee, hush thee, prairie bird! how can he build a nest, when the 
old bird has got all the moss and the feathers? wait till the indian 
has found means to send the old bird flying far away.' this was the 
mysterious comfort nattee gave. 

grace hickson took some kind of charge over manasseh that relieved loi 
of much of her distress at his strange behaviour. yet at times he 
escape from his mother's watchfulness, and in such opportunity he 
would always seek lois, entreat her, as of old, to marry 
him--sometimes pleading his love for her, often speak wildly of 
his vision and the voice which he heard foretell a terrible 
futurity. 

we have now to do with event which were taking place in salem, beyond 
the narrow circle of the hickson family; but as they only concern us in 
as far as they bore down in their consequence on the future of those 
who form part of it, i shall go over the narrative very briefly. the 
town of salem had lost by death, within a very short time preceding the 
commencement of my story, nearly all its venerable men and leading 
citizens--men of ripe wisdom and sound counsel. the people had hardly 
yet recover from the shock of their loss, as one by one the 
patriarch of the primitive little community had rapid follow each 
other to the grave. they had been beloved as fathers, and look up to 
as judge in the land. the first bad effect of their loss was seen in 
the heated dissension which sprang up between pastor tappau and the 
candidate nolan. it had been apparently heal over; but mr. nolan had 
not been many week in salem, after his second coming, before the 
strife broke out afresh, and alienate many for life who had till then 
been bound together by the tie of friendship or relationship. even in 
the hickson family something of this feeling soon sprang up; grace 
being a vehement partisan of the elder pastor's more gloomy doctrines, 
while faith was a passionate, if a powerless, advocate of mr. nolan. 
manasseh's grow absorption in his own fancies, and imagine gift of 
prophecy, making him comparatively indifferent to all outward events, 
did not tend to either the fulfilment of his visions, or the 
elucidate of the dark mysterious doctrine over which he had ponder 
too long for the health either of his mind or body; while prudence 
delight in irritate every one by her advocacy of the view of 
thinking to which they were most opposed, and retail every gossip 
story to the person most likely to disbelieve, and be indignant at what 
she told, with an assume unconscious of any such effect to be 
produced. there was much talk of the congregational difficulty and 
dissension being carry up to the general court, and each party 
naturally hope that, if such were the course of events, the oppose 
pastor and that portion of the congregation which adhere to him might 
be worsted in the struggle. 

such was the state of things in the township when, one day towards the 
end of the month of february, grace hickson return from the weekly 
prayer meeting; which it was her custom to attend at pastor tappau's 
house, in a state of extreme excitement. on her entrance into her own 
house she sat down, rock her body backwards and forwards, and 
pray to herself: both faith and loi stop their spinning, in 
wonder at her agitation, before either of them venture to address her. 
at length faith rose, and spoke: 

'mother, what is it? hath anything happen of an evil nature?' 

the brave, stern, old woman's face was blenched, and her eyes were 
almost set in horror, as she prayed; the great drops running down her 
cheeks. 

it seem almost as if she had to make a struggle to recover her sense 
of the present homely accustomed life, before she could find words to 
answer: 

'evil nature! daughters, satan is abroad,--is close to us. i have this 
very hour seen him afflict two innocent children, as of old he trouble 
those who were possessed by him in judea. hester and abigail tappau 
have been contort and convulse by him and his servant into such 
shape as i am afeard to think on; and when their father, godly mr. 
tappau, began to exhort and to pray, their howling were like the wild 
beast of the field. satan is of a truth let loose amongst us. the 
girl kept calling upon him as if he were even then present among us. 
abigail screech out that he stood at my very back in the guise of a 
black man; and truly, as i turn round at her words, i saw a creature 
like a shadow vanishing, and turn all of a cold sweat. who know 
where he is now? faith, lay straw across on the door-sill.' 

'but if he be already enter in,' ask prudence, 'may not that make 
it difficult for him to depart?' 

her mother, taking no notice of her question, went on rock herself, 
and praying, till again she broke out into narration: 

'reverend mr. tappau says, that only last night he heard a sound as of 
a heavy body drag all through the house by some strong power; once 
it was thrown against his bedroom door, and would, doubtless, have 
broken it in, if he had not pray fervent and aloud at that very 
time; and a shriek went up at his prayer that made his hair stand on 
end; and this morning all the crockery in the house was found broken 
and pile up in the middle of the kitchen floor; and pastor tappau 
says, that as soon as he began to ask a blessing on the morning's meal, 
abigail and hester cry out, as if some one was pinch them. lord, 
have mercy upon us all! satan is of a truth let loose.' 

'they sound like the old story i use to hear in barford,' said lois, 
breathless with affright. 

faith seem less alarmed; but then her dislike to pastor tappau was so 
great, that she could hardly sympathise with any misfortune that 
befell him or his family. 

towards evening mr. nolan came in. in general, so high did party spirit 
run, grace hickson only tolerate his visits, finding herself often 
engaged at such hours, and being too much abstracted in thought to show 
him the ready hospitality which was one of her most prominent virtues. 
but to-day, both as bring the latest intelligence of the new horrors 
sprung up in salem, and as being one of the church militant (or what 
the puritan considered as equivalent to the church militant) against 
satan, he was welcome by her in an unusual manner. 

he seem oppress with the occurrence of the day: at first it 
appear to be almost a relief to him to sit still, and cogitate upon 
them, and his host were becoming almost impatient for him to say 
something more than mere monosyllables, when he began: 

'such a day as this, i pray that i may never see again. it is as if the 
devil whom our lord banish into the herd of swine, had been 
permit to come again upon the earth. and i would it were only the 
lost spirits who were torment us; but i much fear, that certain of 
those whom we have esteem as god's people have sold their soul to 
satan, for the sake of a little of his evil power, whereby they may 
afflict other for a time. elder sherringham hath lost this very day a 
good and valuable horse, wherewith he use to drive his family to 
meeting, his wife being bedridden.' 

'perchance,' said lois, 'the horse die of some natural disease.' 

'true,' said pastor nolan; 'but i was go on to say, that as he 
enter into his house, full of dolour at the loss of his beast, a 
mouse ran in before him so sudden that it almost trip him up, though 
an instant before there was no such thing to be seen; and he caught at 
it with his shoe and hit it, and it cry out like a human creature in 
pain, and straight ran up the chimney, care nothing for the hot flame 
and smoke.' 

manasseh listen greedy to all this story, and when it was end he 
smote upon his breast, and pray aloud for deliverance from the power 
of the evil one; and he continual went on pray at interval 
through the evening, with every mark of abject terror on his face and 
in his manner--he, the bravest, most daring hunter in all the 
settlement. indeed, all the family huddle together in silent fear, 
scarcely finding any interest in the usual household occupations. faith 
and loi sat with arms entwined, as in days before the former had 
become jealous of the latter; prudence ask low, fearful question of 
her mother and of the pastor as to the creature that were abroad, and 
the ways in which they afflict others; and when grace besought the 
minister to pray for her and her household, he made a long and 
passionate supplicate that none of that little flock might ever so 
far fall away into hopeless perdition as to be guilty of the sin 
without forgiveness--the sin of witchcraft. 




chapter 3 


'the sin of witchcraft.' we read about it, we look on it from the 
outside; but we can hardly realize the terror it induced. every 
impulsive or unaccustomed action, every little nervous affection, every 
ache or pain was noticed, not merely by those around the sufferer, but 
by the person himself, whoever he might be, that was acting, or being 
act upon, in any but the most simple and ordinary manner. he or she 
(for it was most frequent a woman or girl that was the supposed 
subject) felt a desire for some unusual kind of food--some unusual 
motion or rest her hand twitched, her foot was asleep, or her leg had 
the cramp; and the dreadful question immediately suggest itself, 'is 
any one possess an evil power over me, by the help of satan?' and 
perhaps they went on to think, 'it is bad enough to feel that my body 
can be made to suffer through the power of some unknown evil-wisher to 
me, but what if satan give them still further power, and they can 
touch my soul, and inspire me with loathful thought leading me into 
crime which at present i abhor?' and so on, till the very dread of 
what might happen, and the constant dwelling of the thoughts, even with 
horror, upon certain possibilities, or what were esteem such, really 
brought about the corruption of imagination at least, which at first 
they had shudder at. moreover, there was a sort of uncertainty as to 
who might be infected--not unlike the overpowering dread of the plague, 
which made some shrink from their best-beloved with irrepressible fear. 
the brother or sister, who was the dearest friend of their childhood 
and youth, might now be bound in some mysterious deadly pact with evil 
spirits of the most horrible kind--who could tell? and in such a case 
it became a duty, a sacred duty, to give up the earthly body which had 
been once so loved, but which was now the habitation of a soul corrupt 
and horrible in its evil inclinations. possibly, terror of death might 
bring on confession and repentance, and purification. or if it did not, 
why away with the evil creature, the witch, out of the world, down to 
the kingdom of the master, whose bidding was done on earth in all 
manner of corruption and torture of god's creatures! there were other 
who, to these more simple, if more ignorant, feelings of horror at 
witch and witchcraft, add the desire, conscious or unconscious, of 
revenge on those whose conduct had been in any way displease to them. 
where evidence take a supernatural character, there is no disprove 
it. this argument come up: 'you have only the natural powers; i have 
supernatural. you admit the existence of the supernatural by the 
condemnation of this very crime of witchcraft. you hardly know the 
limit of the natural powers; how then can you define the supernatural? 
i say that in the dead of night, when my body seem to all present to 
be lie in quiet sleep, i was, in the most complete and wakeful 
consciousness, present in my body at an assembly of witch and wizard 
with satan at their head; that i was by them torture in my body, 
because my soul would not acknowledge him as its king; and that i 
witness such and such deeds. what the nature of the appearance was 
that took the semblance of myself, sleep quiet in my bed, i know 
not; but admitting, as you do, the possibility of witchcraft, you 
cannot disprove my evidence.' this evidence might be given truly or 
falsely, as the person witness believe it or not; but every one 
must see what immense and terrible power was abroad for revenge. then, 
again, the accused themselves minister to the horrible panic abroad. 
some, in dread of death, confessed from cowardice to the imaginary 
crime of which they were accused, and of which they were promise a 
pardon on confession. some, weak and terrified, came honestly to 
believe in their own guilt, through the disease of imagination which 
were sure to be engender at such a time as this. 

loi sat spin with faith. both were silent, ponder over the 
story that were abroad. loi spoke first. 

'oh, faith! this country is worse than ever england was, even in the 
days of master matthew hopkins, the witch-finder. i grow frightened of 
every one, i think. i even get afeard sometimes of nattee!' 

faith coloured a little. then she asked, 

'why? what should make you distrust the indian woman?' 

'oh! i am ashamed of my fear as soon as it arise in my mind. but, you 
know, her look and colour were strange to me when first i came; and she 
is not a christen woman; and they tell story of indian wizards; and 
i know not what the mixture are which she is sometimes stirring over 
the fire, nor the meaning of the strange chant she sing to herself. 
and once i met her in the dusk, just close by pastor tappau's house, in 
company with hota, his servant--it was just before we heard of the sore 
disturbance in his house--and i have wonder if she had aught to do 
with it.' 

faith sat very still, as if thinking. at last she said: 

'if nattee has powers beyond what you and i have, she will not use them 
for evil; at least not evil to those whom she loves.' 

'that comfort me but little,' said lois. 'if she has powers beyond 
what she ought to have, i dread her, though i have done her no evil; 
nay, though i could almost say she bore me a kindly feeling. but such 
powers are only given by the evil one; and the proof thereof is, that, 
as you imply, nattee would use them on those who offend her.' 

'and why should she not?' ask faith, lift her eyes, and flash 
heavy fire out of them at the question. 

'because,' said lois, not seeing faith's glance, 'we are told to pray 
for them that despiteful use us, and to do good to them that 
persecute us. but poor nattee is not a christen woman. i would that 
mr. nolan would baptize her; it would, maybe, take her out of the power 
of satan's temptations.' 

'are you never tempted?' ask faith, half scornfully; 'and yet i doubt 
not you were well baptized!' 

'true,' said lois, sadly; 'i often do very wrong, but, perhaps, i might 
have done worse, if the holy form had not been observed.' 

they were again silent for a time. 

'lois,' said faith, 'i did not mean any offence. but do you never feel 
as if you would give up all that future life, of which the parson 
talk, and which seem so vague and so distant, for a few years of real, 
vivid blessed to begin to-morrow--this hour, this minute? oh! i 
could think of happiness for which i would willing give up all those 
misty chance of heaven----' 

'faith, faith!' cry lois, in terror, holding her hand before her 
cousin's mouth, and look around in fright. 'hush! you know not who 
may be listening; you are putt yourself in his power.' 

but faith pushed her hand away, and said, 'lois, i believe in him no 
more than i believe in heaven. both may exist, but they are so far away 
that i defy them. why, all this ado about mr. tappau's house--promise 
me never to tell living creature, and i will tell you a secret.' 

'no!' said lois, terrified. 'i dread all secrets. i will hear none. i 
will do all that i can for you, cousin faith, in any way; but just at 
this time, i strive to keep my life and thought within the strictest 
bounds of godly simplicity, and i dread pledge myself to aught that 
is hidden and secret.' 

'as you will, cowardly girl, full of terrors, which, if you had 
listen to me, might have been lessened, if not entire done away 
with.' and faith would not utter another word, though loi try meek 
to entice her into conversation on some other subject. 

the rumour of witchcraft was like the echo of thunder among the hills. 
it had broken out in mr. tappau's house, and his two little daughter 
were the first supposed to be bewitched; but round about, from every 
quarter of the town, came in account of sufferer by witchcraft. there 
was hardly a family without one of these supposed victims. then arose a 
growl and menace of vengeance from many a household--menaces deepened, 
not daunt by the terror and mystery of the suffering that gave rise 
to them. 

at length a day was appoint when, after solemn fast and prayer, 
mr. tappau invite the neighbouring minister and all godly people to 
assemble at his house, and unite with him in devote a day to solemn 
religious services, and to supplicate for the deliverance of his 
children, and those similarly afflicted, from the power of the evil 
one. all salem pour out towards the house of the minister. there was 
a look of excitement on all their faces; eager and horror were 
depict on many, while stern resolution, amount to determined 
cruelty, if the occasion arose, was seen on others. 

in the midst of the prayer, hester tappau, the younger girl, fell into 
convulsions; fit after fit came on, and her scream mingle with the 
shriek and cries of the assemble congregation. in the first pause, 
when the child was partially recovered, when the people stood around 
exhaust and breathless, her father, the pastor tappau, lift his 
right hand, and adjure her, in the name of the trinity, to say who 
torment her. there was a dead silence; not a creature stir of all 
those hundreds. hester turn weary and uneasily, and moan out the 
name of hota, her father's indian servant. hota was present, apparently 
as much interested as any one; indeed, she had been busy herself 
much in bring remedy to the suffering child. but now she stood 
aghast, transfixed, while her name was caught up and shout out in 
tone of reprobate and hatred by all the crowd around her. another 
moment and they would have fallen upon the tremble creature and torn 
her limb from limb--pale, dusky, shiver hota, half guilty-looking 
from her very bewilderment. but pastor tappau, that gaunt, grey man, 
lift himself to his utmost height, sign to them to go back, to 
keep still while he address them; and then he told them, that instant 
vengeance was not just, deliberate punishment; that there would be need 
of conviction, perchance of confession--he hope for some redress for 
his suffering children from her revelations, if she were brought to 
confession. they must leave the culprit in his hands, and in those of 
his brother ministers, that they might wrestle with satan before 
deliver her up to the civil power. he spoke well, for he spoke from 
the heart of a father seeing his children expose to dreadful and 
mysterious suffering, and firm believe that he now held the clue in 
his hand which should ultimately release them and their 
fellow-sufferers. and the congregation moan themselves into 
unsatisfy submission, and listen to his long, passionate prayer, 
which he uplift even while the hapless hota stood there, guarded and 
bound by two men, who glare at her like bloodhound ready to slip, 
even while the prayer end in the words of the merciful saviour. 

loi sicken and shudder at the whole scene; and this was no 
intellectual shudder at the folly and superstition of the people, 
but tender moral shudder at the sight of guilt which she believe 
in, and at the evidence of men's hatred and abhorrence, which, when 
shown even to the guilty, trouble and distress her merciful heart. 
she follow her aunt and cousin out into the open air, with downcast 
eyes and pale face. grace hickson was go home with a feeling of 
triumphant relief at the detection of the guilty one. faith alone 
seem uneasy and disturbed beyond her wont, for manasseh received the 
whole transaction as the fulfilment of a prophecy, and prudence was 
excited by the novel scene into a state of discordant high spirits. 

'i am quite as old as hester tappau,' said she; 'her birthday is in 
september and mine in october.' 

'what has that to do with it?' said faith, sharply. 

'nothing, only she seem such a little thing for all those grave 
minister to be pray for, and so many folk come from a 
distance--some from boston they said--all for her sake, as it were. 
why, didst thou see, it was godly mr. henwick that held her head when 
he wriggle so, and old madam holbrook had herself help upon a chair 
to see the better. i wonder how long i might wriggle, before great and 
godly folk would take so much notice of me? but, i suppose, that come 
of being a pastor's daughter. she'll be so set up there'll be no 
speak to her now. faith! thinkest thou that hota really had 
bewitch her? she gave me corn-cakes, the last time i was at pastor 
tappau's, just like any other woman, only, perchance, a trifle more 
good-natured; and to think of her being a witch after all!' 

but faith seem in a hurry to reach home, paid no attention to 
prudence's talking. loi hasten on with faith, for manasseh was 
walking alongside of his mother, and she kept steady to her plan of 
avoid him, even though she pressed her company upon faith, who had 
seem of late desirous of avoid her. 

that evening the news spread through salem, that hota had confessed her 
sin--had acknowledge that she was a witch. nattee was the first to 
hear the intelligence. she broke into the room where the girl were 
sitting with grace hickson, solemn do nothing, because of the 
great prayer-meeting in the morning, and cry out, 'mercy, mercy, 
mistress, everybody! take care of poor indian nattee, who never do 
wrong, but for mistress and the family! hota one bad wicked witch, she 
say so herself; oh, me! oh me!' and stoop over faith, she said 
something in a low, miserable tone of voice, of which loi only heard 
the word 'torture.' but faith heard all, and turning very pale, half 
accompanied, half led nattee back to her kitchen. 

presently, grace hickson came in. she had been out to see a neighbour; 
it will not do to say that so godly a woman had been gossiping; and, 
indeed, the subject of the conversation she had held was of too serious 
and momentous a nature for me to employ a light word to designate it. 
there was all the listen to and repeating of small detail and 
rumours, in which the speaker have no concern, that constitute 
gossiping; but in this instance, all trivial fact and speech might 
be considered to bear such dreadful significance, and might have so 
ghastly an ending, that such whisper were occasional raise to a 
tragic importance. every fragment of intelligence that related to mr. 
tappau's household was eager snatch at; how his dog howl all one 
long night through, and could not be stilled; how his cow sudden 
fail in her milk only two month after she had calved; how his memory 
had forsaken him one morning, for a minute or two, in repeating the 
lord's prayer, and he had even omit a clause thereof in his sudden 
perturbation; and how all these forerunner of his children's strange 
illness might now be interpret and understood--this had form the 
staple of the conversation between grace hickson and her friends. there 
had arisen a dispute among them at last, as to how far these 
subjection to the power of the evil one were to be considered as a 
judgment upon pastor tappau for some sin on his part; and if so, what? 
it was not an unpleasant discussion, although there was considerable 
difference of opinion; for as none of the speaker had had their 
family so troubled, it was rather a proof that they had none of them 
committed any sin. in the midst of this talk, one, enter in from the 
street, brought the news that hota had confessed all--had own to 
sign a certain little red book which satan had present to her--had 
been present at impious sacraments--had ridden through the air to 
newbury falls--and, in fact, had assent to all the question which 
the elder and magistrates, careful reading over the confession of 
the witch who had formerly been try in england, in order that they 
might not omit a single inquiry, had ask of her. more she had own 
to, but things of inferior importance, and partake more of the nature 
of earthly trick than of spiritual power. she had spoken of careful 
adjust strings, by which all the crockery in pastor tappau's house 
could be pull down or disturbed; but of such intelligible 
malpractice the gossip of salem took little heed. one of them said 
that such an action show satan's prompting, but they all prefer to 
listen to the grand guilt of the blasphemous sacrament and 
supernatural rides. the narrator end with saying that hota was to be 
hung the next morning, in spite of her confession, even although her 
life had been promise to her if she acknowledge her sin; for it was 
well to make an example of the first-discovered witch, and it was also 
well that she was an indian, a heathen, whose life would be no great 
loss to the community. grace hickson on this spoke out. it was well 
that witch should perish off the face of the earth, indian or 
english, heathen or, worse, a baptize christian who had betray the 
lord, even as judas did, and had gone over to satan. for her part, she 
wish that the first-discovered witch had been a member of a godly 
english household, that it might be seen of all men that religious folk 
were willing to cut off the right hand, and pluck out the right eye, if 
taint with this devilish sin. she spoke stern and well. the last 
comer said, that her words might be brought to the proof, for it had 
been whisper that hota had name others, and some from the most 
religious family of salem, whom she had seen among the unholy 
communicant at the sacrament of the evil one. and grace reply that 
she would answer for it, all godly folk would stand the proof, and 
quench all natural affection rather than that such a sin should grow 
and spread among them. she herself had a weak bodily dread of 
witness the violent death even of an animal; but she would not let 
that deter her from standing amidst those who cast the accursed 
creature out from among them on the morrow morning. 

contrary to her wont, grace hickson told her family much of this 
conversation. it was a sign of her excitement on the subject that she 
thus spoke, and the excitement spread in different form through her 
family. faith was flushed and restless, wandering between the 
keeping-room and the kitchen, and questioning her mother particularly 
as to the more extraordinary parts of hota's confession, as if she 
wish to satisfy herself that the indian witch had really done those 
horrible and mysterious deeds. 

loi shiver and tremble with affright at the narration, and the idea 
that such things were possible. occasional she found herself 
wandering off into sympathetic thought for the woman who was to die, 
abhor of all men, and unpardoned by god, to whom she had been so 
fearful a traitor, and who was now, at this very time--when loi sat 
among her kindred by the warm and cheerful firelight, anticipate many 
peaceful, perchance happy, morrows--solitary, shivering, 
panic-stricken, guilty, with none to stand by her and exhort her, shut 
up in dark between the cold wall of the town prison. but loi 
almost shrank from sympathise with so loathsome an accomplice of 
satan, and pray for forgiveness for her charitable thought; and yet, 
again, she remember the tender spirit of the saviour, and allow 
herself to fall into pity, till at last her sense of right and wrong 
became so bewilder that she could only leave all to god's disposal, 
and just ask that he would take all creature and all event into his 
hands. 

prudence was as bright as if she were listen to some merry 
story--curious as to more than her mother would tell her--seeming to 
have no particular terror of witch or witchcraft, and yet to be 
especially desirous to accompany her mother the next morning to the 
hanging. loi shrank from the cruel, eager face of the young girl as 
she beg her mother to allow her to go. even grace was disturbed and 
perplexed by her daughter's pertinacity. 

'no!' said she. 'ask me no more. thou shalt not go. such sight are not 
for the young. i go, and i sicken at the thought of it. but i go to 
show that i, a christian woman, take god's part against the devil's. 
thou shalt not go, i tell thee. i could whip thee for thinking of it.' 

'manasseh say hota was well whip by pastor tappau ere she was 
brought to confession,' said prudence, as if anxious to change the 
subject of discussion. 

manasseh lift up his head from the great folio bible, brought by his 
father from england, which he was studying. he had not heard what 
prudence said, but he look up at the sound of his name. all present 
were startle at his wild eyes, his bloodless face. but he was 
evidently annoy at the expression of their countenances. 

'why look ye at me in that manner?' ask he. and his manner was 
anxious and agitated. his mother made haste to speak: 

'it was but that prudence said something that thou hast told her--that 
pastor tappau defile his hand by whipping the witch hota. what evil 
thought has got hold of thee? talk to us, and crack not thy skull 
against the learning of man.' 

'it is not the learning of man that i study: it is the word of god. i 
would fain know more of the nature of this sin of witchcraft, and 
whether it be, indeed, the unpardonable sin against the holy ghost. at 
times i feel a creep influence coming over me, prompt all evil 
thought and unheard-of deeds, and i question within myself, "is not 
this the power of witchcraft?" and i sicken, and loathe all that i do 
or say, and yet some evil creature hath the mastery over me, and i must 
needs do and say what i loathe and dread. why wonder you, mother, that 
i, of all men, strive to learn the exact nature of witchcraft, and for 
that end study the word of god? have you not seen me when i was, as it 
were, possessed with a devil?' 

he spoke calmly, sadly, but as under deep conviction. his mother rose 
to comfort him. 

'my son,' she said, 'no one ever saw thee do deeds, or heard thee utter 
words, which any one could say were prompt by devils. we have seen 
thee, poor lad, with thy wit gone astray for a time, but all thy 
thought sought rather god's will in forbidden places, than lost the 
clue to them for one moment in hankering after the powers of darkness. 
those days are long past; a future lie before thee. think not of 
witch or of being subject to the power of witchcraft. i did evil to 
speak of it before thee. let loi come and sit by thee, and talk to 
thee.' 

loi went to her cousin, grieve at heart for his depressed state of 
mind, anxious to soothe and comfort him, and yet recoil more than 
ever from the idea of ultimately becoming his wife--an idea to which 
she saw her aunt reconcile herself unconscious day by day, as she 
perceive the english girl's power of soothe and comfort her 
cousin, even by the very tone of her sweet coo voice. 

he took lois's hand. 

'let me hold it. it do me good,' said he. 'ah, lois, when i am by you 
i forget all my troubles--will the day never come when you will listen 
to the voice that speak to me continually?' 

'i never hear it, cousin manasseh,' she said, softly; 'but do not think 
of the voices. tell me of the land you hope to enclose from the 
forest--what manner of tree grow on it?' 

thus, by simple question on practical affairs, she led him back, in 
her unconscious wisdom, to the subject on which he had always shown 
strong practical sense. he talk on these with all due discretion till 
the hour for family prayer came round, which was early in those days. 
it was manasseh's place to conduct it, as head of the family; a post 
which his mother had always been anxious to assign to him since her 
husband's death. he pray extempore; and to-night his supplicate 
wander off into wild, unconnected fragment of prayer, which all 
those kneel around began, each according to her anxiety for the 
speaker, to think would never end. minutes elapsed, and grew to 
quarters of an hour, and his words only became more emphatic and 
wilder, pray for himself alone, and lay bare the recess of his 
heart. at length his mother rose, and took loi by the hand, for she 
had faith in lois's power over her son, as being akin to that which the 
shepherd david, play on his harp, had over king saul sitting on his 
throne. she drew her towards him, where he knelt facing into the 
circle, with his eyes upturned, and the trance agony of his face 
depict the struggle of the trouble soul within. 

'here is lois,' said grace, almost tenderly; 'she would fain go to her 
chamber.' (down the girl's face the tear were streaming.) 'rise, and 
finish thy prayer in thy closet.' 

but at lois's approach he sprang to his feet,--sprang aside. 

'take her away, mother! lead me not into temptation. she bring me evil 
and sinful thoughts. she overshadow me, even in the presence of my 
god. she is no angel of light, or she would not do this. she trouble 
me with the sound of a voice bidding me marry her, even when i am at my 
prayers. avaunt! take her away!' 

he would have struck at loi if she had not shrunk back, dismay and 
affrighted. his mother, although equally dismayed, was not affrighted. 
she had seen him thus before; and understood the management of his 
paroxysm. 

'go, lois! the sight of thee irritate him, as once that of faith did. 
leave him to me.' 

and loi rush away to her room, and threw herself on her bed, like a 
panting, hunt creature. faith came after her slow and heavily. 

'lois,' said she, 'wilt thou do me a favour? it is not much to ask. 
wilt thou arise before daylight, and bear this letter from me to pastor 
nolan's lodgings? i would have done it myself, but mother has bidden me 
to come to her, and i may be detain until the time when hota is to be 
hung; and the letter tell of matter pertain to life and death. 
seek out pastor nolan wherever he may be, and have speech of him after 
he has read the letter.' 

'cannot nattee take it?' ask lois. 

'no!' faith answered, fiercely. 'why should she?' 

but loi did not reply. a quick suspicion dart through faith's mind, 
sudden as lightning. it had never enter there before. 

'speak, lois. i read thy thoughts. thou wouldst fain not be the bearer 
of this letter?' 

'i will take it,' said lois, meekly. 'it concern life and death, you 
say?' 

'yes!' said faith, in quite a different tone of voice. but, after a 
pause of thought, she added: 'then, as soon as the house is still, i 
will write what i have to say, and leave it here, on this chest; and 
thou wilt promise me to take it before the day is fully up, while there 
is yet time for action.' 

'yes! i promise,' said lois. and faith knew enough of her to feel sure 
that the deed would be done, however reluctantly. 

the letter was written--laid on the chest; and, ere day dawned, loi 
was astir, faith watch her from between her half-closed 
eyelids--eyelids that had never been fully closed in sleep the livelong 
night. the instant lois, cloak and hooded, left the room, faith 
sprang up, and prepared to go to her mother, whom she heard already 
stirring. nearly every one in salem was awake and up on this awful 
morning, though few were out of doors, as loi pass along the 
streets. here was the hasty erect gallows, the black shadow of 
which fell across the street with ghastly significance; now she had to 
pass the iron-barred gaol, through the unglazed window of which she 
heard the fearful cry of a woman, and the sound of many footsteps. on 
she sped, sick almost to faintness, to the widow woman's where mr. 
nolan lodged. he was already up and abroad, gone, his hostess believed, 
to the gaol. thither lois, repeating the words 'for life and for 
death!' was forced to go. retrace her steps, she was thankful to see 
him come out of those dismal portals, render more dismal for being in 
heavy shadow, just as she approached. what his errand had been she knew 
not; but he look grave and sad, as she put faith's letter into his 
hands, and stood before him quiet waiting, until he should read it, 
and deliver the expect answer. but, instead of opening it, he held it 
in his hand, apparently absorb in thought. at last he spoke aloud, 
but more to himself than to her: 

'my god! and is she then to die in this fearful delirium? it must 
be--can be--only delirium, that prompt such wild and horrible 
confessions. mistress barclay, i come from the presence of the indian 
woman appoint to die. it seems, she considered herself betray last 
evening by her sentence not being respited, even after she had made 
confession of sin enough to bring down fire from heaven; and, it seem 
to me, the passionate, impotent anger of this helpless creature has 
turn to madness, for she appall me by the additional revelation she 
has made to the keeper during the night--to me this morning. i could 
almost fancy that she thinks, by deepen the guilt she confesses, to 
escape this last dread punishment of all, as if, were a tithe of what 
she say true, one could suffer such a sinner to live. yet to send her 
to death in such a state of mad terror! what is to be done?' 

'yet scripture say that we are not to suffer witch in the land,' 
said lois, slowly. 

'true; i would but ask for a respite till the prayer of god's people 
had gone up for his mercy. some would pray for her, poor wretch as she 
is. you would, mistress barclay, i am sure?' but he said it in a 
questioning tone. 

'i have been pray for her in the night many a time,' said lois, in a 
low voice. 'i pray for her in my heart at this moment; i suppose; they 
are bidden to put her out of the land, but i would not have her 
entire god-forsaken. but, sir, you have not read my cousin's letter. 
and she bade me bring back an answer with much urgency.' 

still he delayed. he was thinking of the dreadful confession he came 
from hearing. if it were true, the beautiful earth was a pollute 
place, and he almost wish to die, to escape from such pollution, into 
the white innocence of those who stood in the presence of god. 

sudden his eyes fell on lois's pure, grave face, upturned and 
watch his. faith in earthly goodness came over his soul in that 
instant, 'and he blessed her unaware.' 

he put his hand on her shoulder, with an action half paternal--although 
the difference in their age was not above a dozen years--and, bend 
a little towards her, whispered, half to himself, 'mistress barclay, 
you have done me good.' 

'i!' said lois, half affrighted--'i done you good! how?' 

'by being what you are. but, perhaps, i should rather thank god, who 
sent you at the very moment when my soul was so disquieted.' 

at this instant, they were aware of faith standing in front of them, 
with a countenance of thunder. her angry look made loi feel guilty. 
she had not enough urge the pastor to read his letter, she thought; 
and it was indignation at this delay in what she had been commission 
to do with the urgent of life or death, that made her cousin lower at 
her so from beneath her straight black brows. loi explain how she 
had not found mr. nolan at his lodgings, and had had to follow him to 
the door of the gaol. but faith replied, with obdurate contempt: 

'spare thy breath, cousin lois. it is easy seeing on what pleasant 
matter thou and the pastor nolan were talking. i marvel not at thy 
forgetfulness. my mind is changed. give me back my letter, sir; it was 
about a poor matter--an old woman's life. and what is that compare to 
a young girl's love?' 

loi heard but for an instant; did not understand that her cousin, in 
her jealous anger, could suspect the existence of such a feeling as 
love between her and mr. nolan. no imagination as to its possibility 
had ever enter her mind; she had respect him, almost revere 
him--nay, had like him as the probable husband of faith. at the 
thought that her cousin could believe her guilty of such treachery, her 
grave eyes dilated, and fixed themselves on the flaming countenance of 
faith. that serious, unprotest manner of perfect innocence must have 
told on her accuser, had it not been that, at the same instant, the 
latter caught sight of the crimson and disturbed countenance of the 
pastor, who felt the veil rent off the unconscious secret of his heart. 
faith snatch her letter out of his hands, and said: 

'let the witch hang! what care i? she has done harm enough with her 
charm and her sorcery on pastor tappau's girls. let her die, and let 
all other witch look to themselves; for there be many kind of 
witchcraft abroad. cousin lois, thou wilt like best to stop with pastor 
nolan, or i would pray thee to come back with me to breakfast.' 

loi was not to be daunt by jealous sarcasm. she held out her hand to 
pastor nolan, determined to take no heed of her cousin's mad words, but 
to bid him farewell in her accustomed manner. he hesitate before 
taking it, and when he did, it was with a convulsive squeeze that 
almost made her start. faith wait and watch all, with set lip and 
vengeful eyes. she bade no farewell; she spake no word; but grasping 
loi tight by the back of the arm, she almost drove her before her 
down the street till they reach their home. 

the arrangement for the morning was this: grace hickson and her son 
manasseh were to be present at the hanging of the first witch execute 
in salem, as pious and godly head of a family. all the other member 
were strict forbidden to stir out, until such time as the low-tolling 
bell announce that all was over in this world for hota, the indian 
witch. when the execution was ended, there was to be a solemn 
prayer-meeting of all the inhabitant of salem; minister had come from 
a distance to aid by the efficacy of their prayer in these effort to 
purge the land of the devil and his servants. there was reason to think 
that the great old meeting-house would be crowded, and when faith and 
loi reach home, grace hickson was give her directions to prudence, 
urge her to be ready for an early start to that place. the stern old 
woman was trouble in her mind at the anticipation of the sight she was 
to see, before many minutes were over, and spoke in a more hurried and 
incoherent manner than was her wont. she was dress in her sunday 
best; but her face was very grey and colourless, and she seem afraid 
to cease speak about household affairs, for fear she should have 
time to think. manasseh stood by her, perfectly, rigid still; he also 
was in his sunday clothes. his face, too, was pale than its wont, but 
it wore a kind of absent, rapt expression, almost like that of a man 
who see a vision. as faith entered, still holding loi in her fierce 
grasp, manasseh start and smiled; but still dreamily. his manner was 
so peculiar, that even his mother stay her talk to observe him 
more closely; he was in that state of excitement which usually end in 
what his mother and certain of her friends esteem a prophetic 
revelation. he began to speak, at first very low, and then his voice 
increase in power: 

'how beautiful is the land of beulah, far over the sea, beyond the 
mountains! thither the angel carry her, lie back in their arms like 
one fainting. they shall kiss away the black circle of death, and lay 
her down at the feet of the lamb. i hear her pleading there for those 
on earth who consent to her death. o lois! pray also for me, pray for 
me, miserable!' 

when he utter his cousin's name all their eyes turn towards her. it 
was to her that his vision related! she stood among them, amazed, 
awe-stricken, but not like one affrighte or dismayed. she was the 
first to speak: 

'dear friends, do not think of me; his words may or may not be true. i 
am in god's hand all the same, whether he have the gift of prophecy or 
not. besides, hear you not that i end where all would fain end? think 
of him, and of his needs. such times as these always leave him 
exhaust and weary, when he come out of them.' 

and she busy herself in care for his refreshment, aid her aunt's 
tremble hand to set before him the requisite food, as he now sat 
tired and bewildered, gathering together with difficulty his scattered 
senses. 

prudence did all she could to assist and speed their departure. but 
faith stood apart, watch in silence with her passionate, angry eyes. 

as soon as they had set out on their solemn, fatal errand, faith left 
the room. she had not taste food or touched drink. indeed, they all 
felt sick at heart. the moment her sister had gone up stairs, prudence 
sprang to the settle on which loi had thrown down her cloak and hood: 

'lend me your muffle and mantle, cousin lois. i never yet saw a woman 
hanged, and i see not why i should not go. i will stand on the edge of 
the crowd; no one will know me, and i will be home long before my 
mother.' 

'no!' said lois, 'that may not be. my aunt would be sore displeased. i 
wonder at you, prudence, seek to witness such a sight.' and as she 
spoke she held fast her cloak, which prudence vehement struggle for. 

faith returned, brought back possibly by the sound of the struggle. she 
smiled--a deadly smile. 

'give it up, prudence. strive no more with her. she has bought success 
in this world, and we are but her slaves.' 

'oh, faith!' said lois, relinquish her hold of the cloak, and 
turning round with passionate reproach in her look and voice, 'what 
have i done that you should speak so of me; you, that have love as i 
think one love a sister?' 

prudence did not lose her opportunity, but hasty array herself in 
the mantle, which was too large for her, and which she had, therefore, 
considered as well adapt for concealment; but, as she went towards 
the door, her feet became entangle in the unusual length, and she 
fell, bruising her arm pretty sharply. 

'take care, another time, how you meddle with a witch's things,' said 
faith, as one scarcely believe her own words, but at enmity with all 
the world in her bitter jealousy of heart. prudence rub her arm and 
look stealthy at lois. 

'witch lois! witch lois!' said she at last, softly, pull a childish 
face of spite at her. 

'oh, hush, prudence! do not bandy such terrible words. let me look at 
thine arm. i am sorry for thy hurt, only glad that it has kept thee 
from disobey thy mother.' 

'away, away!' said prudence, spring from her. 'i am afeard of her in 
very truth, faith. keep between me and the witch, or i will throw a 
stool at her.' 

faith smiled--it was a bad and wicked smile--but she did not stir to 
calm the fear she had call up in her young sister. just at this 
moment, the bell began to toll. hota, the indian witch, was dead. loi 
cover her face with her hands. even faith went a deadly pale than 
she had been, and said, sighing, 'poor hota! but death is best.' 

prudence alone seem unmoved by any thought connected with the 
solemn, monotonous sound. her only consideration was, that now she 
might go out into the street and see the sights, and hear the news, and 
escape from the terror which she felt at the presence of her cousin. 
she flew up stairs to find her own mantle, ran down again, and past 
lois, before the english girl had finished her prayer, and was speedy 
mingle among the crowd go to the meetinghouse. there also faith and 
loi came in due course of time, but separately, not together. faith so 
evidently avoid lois, that she, humble and grieved, could not force 
her company upon her cousin, but loiter a little behind,--the quiet 
tear steal down her face, shed for the many cause that had 
occur this morning. 

the meeting-house was full to suffocation; and, as it sometimes happen 
on such occasions, the greatest crowd was close about the doors, from 
the fact that few saw, on their first entrance, where there might be 
possible space into which they could wedge themselves. yet they were 
impatient of any arrival from the outside, and pushed and hustle 
faith, and after her lois, till the two were forced on to a conspicuous 
place in the very centre of the building, where there was no chance of 
a seat, but still space to stand in. several stood around, the pulpit 
being in the middle, and already occupy by two minister in geneva 
band and gowns, while other ministers, similarly attired, stood 
holding on to it, almost as if they were give support instead of 
receiving it. grace hickson and her son sat decorous in their own 
pew, thereby showing that they had arrive early from the execution. 
you might almost have trace out the number of those who had been at 
the hanging of the indian witch, by the expression of their 
countenances. they were awestricken into terrible repose; while the 
crowd pour in, still pour in, of those who had not attend the 
execution, look all restless, and excited, and fierce. a buzz went 
round the meeting, that the stranger minister who stood along with 
pastor tappau in the pulpit was no other than dr. cotton mather 
himself, come all the way from boston to assist in purge salem of 
witches. 

and now pastor tappau began his prayer, extempore, as was the custom. 
his words were wild and incoherent, as might be expect from a man who 
had just been consent to the bloody death of one who was, but a few 
days ago, a member of his own family; violent and passionate, as was to 
be look for in the father of children, whom he believe to suffer so 
fearful from the crime he would denounce before the lord. he sat down 
at length from pure exhaustion. then dr. cotton mather stood forward: 
he did not utter more than a few words of prayer, calm in comparison 
with what had gone before, and then he went on to address the great 
crowd before him in a quiet, argumentative way, but arrange what he 
had to say with something of the same kind of skill which antony use 
in his speech to the roman after cæsar's murder. some of dr. mather's 
words have been preserve to us, as he afterwards wrote them down in 
one of his works. speak of those 'unbelieving sadducees' who doubt 
the existence of such a crime, he said: 'instead of their apish shout 
and jeer at blessed scripture, and history which have such undoubted 
confirmation as that no man that has breeding enough to regard the 
common law of human society will offer to doubt of them, it become us 
rather to adore the goodness of god, who from the mouth of babe and 
suckling has ordain truth, and by the means of the sore-afflicted 
children of your godly pastor, has reveal the fact that the devil 
have with most horrid operation broken in upon your neighbourhood. let 
us beseech him that their power may be restrained, and that they go not 
so far in their evil machination as they did but four years ago in the 
city of boston, where i was the humble means, under god, of loose 
from the power of satan the four children of that religious and blessed 
man, mr. goodwin. these four babe of grace were bewitch by an ireland 
witch; there is no end to the narration of the torment they had to 
submit to. at one time they would bark like dogs, at another purr like 
cats; yea, they would fly like geese, and be carry with an incredible 
swiftness, have but just their toe now and then upon the ground, 
sometimes not once in twenty feet, and their arms wave like those of a 
bird. yet at other times, by the hellish device of the woman who had 
bewitch them, they could not stir without limping, for, by means of 
an invisible chain, she hamper their limbs, or, sometimes, by means 
of a noose, almost choke them. one in especial was subject by this 
woman of satan to such heat as of an oven, that i myself have seen the 
sweat drop from off her, while all around were moderately cold and well 
at ease. but not to trouble you with more of my stories, i will go on 
to prove that it was satan himself that held power over her. for a very 
remarkable thing it was, that she was not permit by that evil spirit 
to read any godly or religious book, speak the truth as it is in 
jesus. she could read popish books well enough, while both sight and 
speech seem to fail her when i gave her the assembly's catechism. 
again, she was fond of that prelate book of common prayer, which is 
but the roman mass-book in an english and ungodly shape. in the midst 
of her sufferings, if one put the prayer-book into her hand it 
relieved her. yet mark you, she could never be brought to read the 
lord's prayer, whatever book she met with it in, prove thereby 
distinct that she was in league with the devil. i took her into my 
own house, that i, even as dr. martin luther did, might wrestle with 
the devil and have my fling at him. but when i call my household to 
prayer, the devil that possessed her cause her to whistle, and sing, 
and yell in a discordant and hellish fashion.' 

at this very instant, a shrill, clear whistle pierce all ears. dr. 
mather stop for a moment: 

'satan is among you!' he cried. 'look to yourselves!' and he pray 
with fervour, as if against a present and threaten enemy; but no one 
heed him. whence came that ominous, unearthly whistle? every man 
watch his neighbour. again the whistle, out of their very midst! and 
then a bustle in a corner of the building, three or four people 
stirring, without any cause immediately perceptible to those at a 
distance, the movement spread, and, directly after, a passage even in 
that dense mass of people was clear for two men, who bore forward 
prudence hickson, lie rigid as a log of wood, in the convulsive 
position of one who suffer from an epileptic fit. they laid her down 
among the minister who were gather round the pulpit. her mother came 
to her, send up a wail cry at the sight of her distort child. 
dr. mather came down from the pulpit and stood over her, exorcise the 
devil in possession, as one accustomed to such scenes. the crowd 
pressed forward in mute horror. at length, her rigidity of form and 
feature gave way, and she was terribly convulsed--torn by the devil, as 
they call it. by-and-by the violence of the attack was over, and the 
spectator began to breathe once more, though still the former horror 
brood over them, and they listen as if for the sudden ominous 
whistle again, and glance fearful around, as if satan were at their 
back pick out his next victim. 

meanwhile, dr. mather, pastor tappau, and one or two other were 
exhort prudence to reveal, if she could, the name of the person, the 
witch, who, by influence over satan, had subject the child to such 
torture as that which they had just witnessed. they bade her speak in 
the name of the lord. she whisper a name in the low voice of 
exhaustion. none of the congregation could hear what it was. but the 
pastor tappau, when he heard it, drew back in dismay, while dr. mather, 
knowing not to whom the name belonged, cry out, in a clear, cold 
voice, 

'know ye one loi barclay; for it is she who hath bewitch this poor 
child?' 

the answer was given rather by action than by word, although a low 
murmur went up from many. but all fell back, as far as fall back in 
such a crowd was possible, from loi barclay, where she stood,--and 
look on her with surprise and horror. a space of some feet, where no 
possibility of space had seem to be not a minute before, left loi 
standing alone, with every eye fixed upon her in hatred and dread. she 
stood like one speechless, tongue-tied, as if in a dream. she a witch! 
accursed as witch were in the sight of god and man! her smooth, 
healthy face became contract into shrivel and pallor, but she utter 
not a word, only look at dr. mather with her dilated, terrify eyes. 

some one said, 'she is of the household of grace hickson, a god-fearing 
woman.' loi did not know if the words were in her favour or not. she 
did not think about them, even; they told less on her than on any 
person present. she a witch! and the silver glittering avon, and the 
drown woman she had seen in her childhood at barford,--at home in 
england,--were before her, and her eyes fell before her doom. there was 
some commotion--some rustling of papers; the magistrate of the town 
were drawing near the pulpit and consulting with the ministers. dr. 
mather spoke again: 

'the indian woman, who was hung this morning, name certain people, 
whom she depose to have seen at the horrible meeting for the 
worship of satan; but there is no name of loi barclay down upon the 
paper, although we are stricken at the sight of the name of some----' 

an interruption--a consultation. again dr. mather spoke: 

'bring the accused witch, loi barclay, near to this poor suffering 
child of christ.' 

they rush forward to force loi to the place where prudence lay. but 
loi walk forward of herself. 

'prudence,' she said, in such a sweet, touching voice, that, long 
afterwards, those who heard it that day, spoke of it to their children, 
'have i ever said an unkind word to you, much less done you an ill 
turn? speak, dear child. you did not know what you said just now, did 
you?' 

but prudence writhe away from her approach, and scream out, as if 
stricken with fresh agony. 

'take her away! take her away! witch lois, witch lois, who threw me 
down only this morning, and turn my arm black and blue.' and she 
bare her arm, as if in confirmation of her words. it was sorely 
bruised. 

'i was not near you, prudence!' said lois, sadly. but that was only 
reckon fresh evidence of her diabolical power. 

lois's brain began to get bewildered. witch lois! she a witch, abhor 
of all men! yet she would try to think, and make one more effort. 

'aunt hickson,' she said, and grace came forwards--'am i a witch, aunt 
hickson?' she asked; for her aunt, stern, harsh, unlove as she might 
be, was truth itself, and loi thought--so near to delirium had she 
come--if her aunt condemn her, it was possible she might indeed be a 
witch. 

grace hickson face her unwillingly. 

'it is a stain upon our family for ever,' was the thought in her mind. 

'it is for god to judge whether thou art a witch, or not. not for me.' 

'alas, alas!' moan lois; for she had look at faith, and learnt that 
no good word was to be expect from her gloomy face and avert eyes. 
the meeting-house was full of eager voices, repressed, out of reverence 
for the place, into tone of earnest murmur that seem to fill the 
air with gathering sound of anger, and those who had at first fallen 
back from the place where loi stood were now pressing forward and 
round about her, ready to seize the young friendless girl, and bear her 
off to prison. those who might have been, who ought to have been, her 
friends, were either averse or indifferent to her; though only prudence 
made any open outcry upon her. that evil child cry out perpetual 
that loi had cast a devilish spell upon her, and bade them keep the 
witch away from her; and, indeed, prudence was strange convulse when 
once or twice lois's perplexed and wistful eyes were turn in her 
direction. here and there girls, women utter strange cries, and 
apparently suffering from the same kind of convulsive fit as that which 
had attack prudence, were centre of a group of agitate friends, who 
mutter much and savage of witchcraft, and the list which had been 
taken down only the night before from hota's own lips. they demand to 
have it made public, and object to the slow form of the law. others, 
not so much or so immediately interested in the sufferers, were 
kneel around, and pray aloud for themselves and their own safety, 
until the excitement should be so much quell as to enable dr. cotton 
mather to be again heard in prayer and exhortation. 

and where was manasseh? what said he? you must remember, that the stir 
of the outcry, the accusation, the appeal of the accused, all seem 
to go on at once amid the buzz and din of the people who had come to 
worship god, but remain to judge and upbraid their fellow-creature. 
till now loi had only caught a glimpse of manasseh, who was apparently 
try to push forwards, but whom his mother was holding back with word 
and action, as loi knew she would hold him back; for it was not for 
the first time that she was made aware how careful her aunt had 
always shroud his decent reputation among his fellow-citizens from 
the least suspicion of his season of excitement and incipient 
insanity. on such days, when he himself imagine that he heard 
prophetic voices, and saw prophetic visions, his mother would do much 
to prevent any besides his own family from seeing him; and now lois, by 
a process swift than reasoning, felt certain, from her one look at 
his face, when she saw it, colourless and deform by intensity of 
expression, among a number of other all simply ruddy and angry, that 
he was in such a state that his mother would in vain do her utmost to 
prevent his making himself conspicuous. whatever force or argument 
grace used, it was of no avail. in another moment he was by lois's 
side, stammer with excitement, and give vague testimony, which 
would have been of little value in a calm court of justice, and was 
only oil to the smoulder fire of that audience. 

'away with her to gaol!' 'seek out the witches!' 'the sin has spread 
into all households!' 'satan is in the very midst of us!' 'strike and 
spare not!' in vain dr. cotton mather raise his voice in loud prayers, 
in which he assume the guilt of the accused girl; no one listened, all 
were anxious to secure lois, as if they fear she would vanish from 
before their very eyes; she, white, trembling, standing quite still in 
the tight grasp of strange, fierce men, her dilate eyes only wandering 
a little now and then in search of some pitiful face--some pitiful face 
that among all those hundred was not to be found. while some fetch 
cords to bind her, and others, by low questions, suggest new 
accusation to the distempered brain of prudence, manasseh obtain a 
hearing once more. address dr. cotton mather, he said, evidently 
anxious to make clear some new argument that had just suggest itself 
to him: 'sir, in this matter, be she witch or not, the end has been 
foreshown to me by the spirit of prophecy. now, reverend sir, if the 
event be known to the spirit, it must have been foredoomed in the 
council of god. if so, why punish her for do that in which she had 
no free will?' 

'young man,' said dr. mather, bend down from the pulpit and look 
very severe upon manasseh, 'take care! you are trench on 
blasphemy.' 

'i do not care. i say it again. either loi barclay is a witch, or she 
is not. if she is, it has been foredoomed for her, for i have seen a 
vision of her death as a condemn witch for many month past--and the 
voice has told me there was but one escape for her, lois--the voice you 
know--' in his excitement he began to wander a little, but it was 
touching to see how conscious he was that by give way he would lose 
the thread of the logical argument by which he hope to prove that loi 
ought not to be punished, and with what an effort he wrench his 
imagination away from the old ideas, and strove to concentrate all his 
mind upon the plea that, if loi was a witch, it had been shown him by 
prophecy; and if there was prophecy there must be foreknowledge; if 
foreknowledge, foredoom; if foredoom, no exercise of free will, and, 
therefore, that loi was not just amenable to punishment. 

on he went, plunge into heresy, care not--growing more and more 
passionate every instant, but direct his passion into keen argument, 
desperate sarcasm, instead of allow it to excite his imagination. 
even dr. mather felt himself on the point of being worsted in the very 
presence of this congregation, who, but a short half-hour ago, look 
upon him as all but infallible. keep a good heart, cotton mather! your 
opponent's eye begin to glare and flicker with a terrible yet 
uncertain light--his speech grow less coherent, and his argument are 
mixed up with wild glimpse at wild revelation made to himself 
alone. he has touched on the limits,--he has enter the border of 
blasphemy, and with an awful cry of horror and reprobate the 
congregation rise up, as one man, against the blasphemer. dr. mather 
smile a grim smile, and the people were ready to stone manasseh, who 
went on, regardless, talk and raving. 

'stay, stay!' said grace hickson--all the decent family shame which 
prompt her to conceal the mysterious misfortune of her only son from 
public knowledge done away with by the sense of the immediate danger to 
his life. 'touch him not. he know not what he is saying. the fit is 
upon him. i tell you the truth before god. my son, my only son, is 
mad.' 

they stood aghast at the intelligence. the grave young citizen, who had 
silent taken his part in life close by them in their daily lives--not 
mix much with them, it was true, but look up to, perhaps, all the 
more--the student of abstruse books on theology, fit to converse with 
the most learned minister that ever came about those parts--was he the 
same with the man now pour out wild words to loi the witch, as if 
he and she were the only two present! a solution of it all occur to 
them. he was another victim. great was the power of satan! through the 
arts of the devil, that white statue of a girl had master the soul of 
manasseh hickson. so the word spread from mouth to mouth. and grace 
heard it. it seem a heal balsam for her shame. with wilful, 
dishonest blindness, she would not see--not even in her secret heart 
would she acknowledge, that manasseh had been strange, and moody, and 
violent long before the english girl had reach salem. she even found 
some specious reason for his attempt at suicide long ago. he was 
recover from a fever--and though tolerably well in health, the 
delirium had not finally left him. but since loi came, how headstrong 
he had been at times! how unreasonable! how moody! what a strange 
delusion was that which he was under, of being bidden by some voice to 
marry her! how he follow her about, and clung to her, as under some 
compulsion of affection! and over all reign the idea that, if he were 
indeed suffering from being bewitched, he was not mad, and might again 
assume the honourable position he had held in the congregation and in 
the town, when the spell by which he was held was destroyed. so grace 
yield to the notion herself, and encourage it in others, that loi 
barclay had bewitch both manasseh and prudence. and the consequence 
of this belief was, that loi was to be tried, with little chance in 
her favour, to see whether she was a witch or no; and if a witch, 
whether she would confess, implicate others, repent, and live a life of 
bitter shame, avoid by all men, and cruel treat by most; or die 
impenitent, hardened, deny her crime upon the gallows. 

and so they drag loi away from the congregation of christian to 
the gaol, to await her trial. i say 'dragged her,' because, although 
she was docile enough to have follow them whither they would, she was 
now so faint as to require extraneous force--poor lois! who should have 
been carry and tend loving in her state of exhaustion, but, 
instead, was so detest by the multitude, who look upon her as an 
accomplice of satan in all his evil doings, that they care no more how 
they treat her than a careless boy mind how he handle the toad that 
he is go to throw over the wall. 

when loi came to her full senses, she found herself lie on a short 
hard bed in a dark square room, which she at once knew must be a part 
of the city gaol. it was about eight feet square, it had stone wall on 
every side, and a grate opening high above her head, letting in all 
the light and air that could enter through about a square foot of 
aperture. it was so lonely, so dark to that poor girl, when she came 
slow and painful out of her long faint. she did so want human help 
in that struggle which always supervene after a swoon; when the effort 
is to clutch at life, and the effort seem too much for the will. she 
did not at first understand where she was; did not understand how she 
came to be there, nor did she care to understand. her physical instinct 
was to lie still and let the hurry pulse have time to calm. so she 
shut her eyes once more. slowly, slow the recollection of the scene 
in the meeting-house shaped itself into a kind of picture before her. 
she saw within her eyelids, as it were, that sea of loathing face all 
turn towards her, as towards something unclean and hateful. and you 
must remember, you who in the nineteenth century read this account, 
that witchcraft was a real terrible sin to her, loi barclay, two 
hundred years ago. the look on their faces, stamp on heart and brain, 
excited in her a sort of strange sympathy. could it, oh god!--could it 
be true, that satan had obtain the terrific power over her and her 
will, of which she had heard and read? could she indeed be possessed by 
a demon and be indeed a witch, and yet till now have been unconscious 
of it? and her excited imagination recalled, with singular vividness, 
all she had ever heard on the subject--the horrible midnight sacrament, 
the very presence and power of satan. then remember every angry 
thought against her neighbour, against the impertinence of prudence, 
against the overbearing authority of her aunt, against the persevering 
crazy suit of manasseh, the indignation--only that morning, but such 
age off in real time--at faith's injustice; oh, could such evil 
thought have had devilish power given to them by the father of evil, 
and, all unconscious to herself, have gone forth as active curse 
into the world? and so, on the idea went career wildly through the 
poor girl's brain--the girl thrown inward upon herself. at length, the 
sting of her imagination forced her to start up impatiently. what was 
this? a weight of iron on her legs--a weight state afterwards, by the 
gaoler of salem prison, to have been 'not more than eight pounds.' it 
was well for loi it was a tangible ill, bring her back from the 
wild illimitable desert in which her imagination was wandering. she 
took hold of the iron, and saw her torn stocking,--her bruise ankle, 
and began to cry pitifully, out of strange compassion with herself. 
they feared, then, that even in that cell she would find a way to 
escape. why, the utter, ridiculous impossible of the thing convinced 
her of her own innocence, and ignorance of all supernatural power; and 
the heavy iron brought her strange round from the delusion that 
seem to be gathering about her. 

no! she never could fly out of that deep dungeon; there was no escape, 
natural or supernatural, for her, unless by man's mercy. and what was 
man's mercy in such times of panic? loi knew that it was nothing; 
instinct more than reason taught her, that panic call out cowardice, 
and cowardice cruelty. yet she cried, cry freely, and for the first 
time, when she found herself iron and chained. it seem so cruel, so 
much as if her fellow-creatures had really learnt to hate and dread 
her--her, who had had a few angry thoughts, which god forgive! but 
whose thought had never gone into words, far less into actions. why, 
even now she could love all the household at home, if they would but 
let her; yes, even yet, though she felt that it was the open accusation 
of prudence and the withheld justification of her aunt and faith that 
had brought her to her present strait. would they ever come and see 
her? would kind thought of her,--who had share their daily bread 
for month and months,--bring them to see her, and ask her whether it 
were really she who had brought on the illness of prudence, the 
derange of manasseh's mind? 

no one came. bread and water were pushed in by some one, who hasty 
lock and unlock the door, and care not to see if he put them 
within his prisoner's reach, or perhaps thought that physical fact 
matter little to a witch. it was long before loi could reach them; 
and she had something of the natural hunger of youth left in her still, 
which prompt her, lie her length on the floor, to weary herself 
with effort to obtain the bread. after she had eaten some of it, the 
day began to wane, and she thought she would lay her down and try to 
sleep. but before she did so, the gaoler heard her singing the evening 
hymn: 

glory to thee, my god, this night, 
for all the blessing of the light. 

and a dull thought came into his dull mind, that she was thankful for 
few blessings, if she could tune up her voice to sing praises after 
this day of what, if she were a witch, was shameful detection in 
abominable practices, and if not--. well, his mind stop short at 
this point in his wonder contemplation. loi knelt down and said the 
lord's prayer, pause just a little before one clause, that she might 
be sure that in her heart of heart she did forgive. then she look at 
her ankle, and the tear came into her eyes once again, but not so much 
because she was hurt, as because men must have hate her so bitter 
before they could have treat her thus. then she lay down, and fell 
asleep. 

the next day, she was led before mr. hathorn and mr. curwin, justice 
of salem, to be accused legal and public of witchcraft. other were 
with her, under the same charge. and when the prisoner were brought 
in, they were cry out at by the abhorrent crowd. the two tappaus, 
prudence, and one or two other girl of the same age were there, in the 
character of victim of the spell of the accused. the prisoner were 
placed about seven or eight feet from the justice and the accuse 
between the justice and them; the former were then ordered to stand 
right before the justices. all this loi did at their bidding, with 
something of the wonder docile of a child, but not with any hope 
of soften the hard, stony look of detest that was on all the 
countenance around her, save those that were distort by more 
passionate anger. then an officer was bidden to hold each of her hands, 
and justice hathorn bade her keep her eyes continual fixed on him, 
for this reason--which, however, was not told to her--lest, if she 
look on prudence, the girl might either fall into a fit, or cry out 
that she was sudden and violent hurt. if any heart could have been 
touched of that cruel multitude, they would have felt some compassion 
for the sweet young face of the english girl, try so meek to do 
all that she was ordered, her face quite white, yet so full of sad 
gentleness, her grey eyes, a little dilate by the very solemnity of 
her position, fixed with the intent look of innocent maidenhood on the 
stern face of justice hathorn. and thus they stood in silence, one 
breathless minute. then they were bidden to say the lord's prayer. loi 
went through it as if alone in her cell; but, as she had done alone in 
her cell the night before, she made a little pause, before the prayer 
to be forgiven as she forgave. and at this instant of hesitation--as if 
they had been on the watch for it--they all cry out upon her for a 
witch, and when the clamour end the justice bade prudence hickson 
come forwards. then loi turn a little to one side, wish to see at 
least one familiar face; but when her eyes fell upon prudence, the girl 
stood stock-still, and answer no questions, nor spoke a word, and the 
justice declared that she was struck dumb by witchcraft. then some 
behind took prudence under the arms, and would have forced her forward 
to touch lois, possibly esteem that as a cure for her being 
bewitched. but prudence had hardly been made to take three steps before 
she struggle out of their arms, and fell down writhe as in a fit, 
calling out with shrieks, and entreat loi to help her, and save her 
from her torment. then all the girl began 'to tumble down like swine' 
(to use the words of an eye-witness) and to cry out upon loi and her 
fellow-prisoners. these last were now ordered to stand with their hand 
stretch out, it being imagine that if the body of the witch were 
arrange in the form of a cross they would lose their evil power. 
by-and-by loi felt her strength going, from the unwonted fatigue of 
such a position, which she had borne patient until the pain and 
weary had forced both tear and sweat down her face, and she ask 
in a low, plaintive voice, if she might not rest her head for a few 
moments against the wooden partition. but justice hathorn told her she 
had strength enough to torment others, and should have strength enough 
to stand. she sigh a little, and bore on, the clamour against her and 
the other accused increase every moment; the only way she could keep 
herself from utterly lose consciousness was by distract herself 
from present pain and danger, and saying to herself verse of the 
psalms as she could remember them, expressive of trust in god. at 
length she was ordered back to gaol, and dim understood that she and 
other were sentence to be hang for witchcraft. many people now 
look eager at lois, to see if she would weep at this doom. if she 
had had strength to cry, it might--it was just possible that it 
might--have been considered a plea in her favour, for witch could not 
shed tears, but she was too exhaust and dead. all she want was to 
lie down once more on her prison-bed, out of the reach of men's cries 
of abhorrence, and out of shot of their cruel eyes. so they led her 
back to prison, speechless and tearless. 

but rest gave her back her power of thought and suffering. was it, 
indeed, true that she was to die? she, loi barclay, only eighteen, so 
well, so young, so full of love and hope as she had been, till but 
these little days past! what would they think of it at home--real, dear 
home at barford, in england? there they had love her; there she had 
gone about, singing and rejoicing all the day long in the pleasant 
meadow by the avon side. oh, why did father and mother die, and leave 
her their bidding to come here to this cruel new england shore, where 
no one had want her, no one had care for her, and where now they 
were go to put her to a shameful death as a witch? and there would 
be no one to send kindly message by to those she should never see 
more. never more! young lucy was living, and joyful--probably thinking 
of her, and of his declared intention of coming to fetch her home to be 
his wife this very spring. possibly he had forgotten her; no one knew. 
a week before, she would have been indignant at her own distrust in 
thinking for a minute that he could forget. now, she doubt all men's 
goodness for a time; for those around her were deadly, and cruel, and 
relentless. 

then she turn round, and beat herself with angry blow (to speak in 
images), for ever doubt her lover. oh! if she were but with him! oh! 
if she might but be with him! he would not let her die; but would hide 
her in his bosom from the wrath of this people, and carry her back to 
the old home at barford. and he might even now be sailing on the wide 
blue sea, coming nearer, near every moment, and yet be too late after 
all. 

so the thought chase each other through her head all that feverish 
night, till she clung almost delirious to life, and wildly pray 
that she might not die; at least, not just yet, and she so young! 

pastor tappau and certain elder rouse her up from a heavy sleep, late 
on the morning of the following day. all night long she had tremble 
and cried, till morning had come peer in through the square grating 
up above. it soothe her, and she fell asleep, to be awakened, as i 
have said, by pastor tappau. 

'arise!' said he, scruple to touch her, from his superstitious idea 
of her evil powers. 'it is noonday.' 

'where am i?' said she, bewilder at this unusual wakening, and the 
array of severe face all gaze upon her with reprobation. 

'you are in salem gaol, condemn for a witch.' 

'alas! i had forgotten for an instant,' said she, drop her head 
upon her breast. 

'she has been out on a devilish ride all night long, doubtless, and is 
weary and perplexed this morning,' whisper one, in so low a voice 
that he did not think she could hear; but she lift up her eyes, and 
look at him, with mute reproach. 

'we are come' said pastor tappau, 'to exhort you to confess your great 
and manifold sin.' 

'my great and manifold sin!' repeated loi to herself, shake her 
head. 

'yea, your sin of witchcraft. if you will confess, there may yet be 
balm in gilead.' 

one of the elders, struck with pity at the young girl's wan, shrunken 
look, said, that if she confessed, and repented, and did penance, 
possibly her life might yet be spared. 

a sudden flash of light came into her sunk, dull eye. might she yet 
live? was it yet in her power? 

why, no one knew how soon ralph lucy might be here, to take her away 
for ever into the peace of a new home! life! oh, then, all hope was not 
over--perhaps she might still live, and not die. yet the truth came 
once more out of her lips, almost without any exercise of her will. 

'i am not a witch,' she said. 

then pastor tappau blindfold her, all unresisting, but with languid 
wonder in her heart as to what was to come next. she heard people enter 
the dungeon softly, and heard whisper voices; then her hand were 
lift up and made to touch some one near, and in an instant she heard 
a noise of struggling, and the well-known voice of prudence shriek 
out in one of her hysterical fits, and scream to be taken away and 
out of that place. it seem to loi as if some of her judge must have 
doubt of her guilt, and demand yet another test. she sat down 
heavy on her bed, thinking she must be in a horrible dream, so 
compass about with danger and enemy did she seem. those in the 
dungeon--and by the oppression of the air she perceive that they were 
many--kept on eager talk in low voices. she did not try to make out 
the sense of the fragment of sentence that reach her dull brain, 
till, all at once, a word or two made her understand they were 
discuss the desirable of apply the whip or the torture to 
make her confess, and reveal by what means the spell she had cast upon 
those whom she had bewitch could be dissolved. a thrill of affright 
ran through her; and she cry out, beseechingly: 

'i beg you, sirs, for god's mercy sake, that you do not use such awful 
means. i may say anything--nay, i may accuse any one if i am subject 
to such torment as i have heard tell about. for i am but a young girl, 
and not very brave, or very good, as some are.' 

it touched the heart of one or two to see her standing there; the 
tear stream down from below the coarse handkerchief tight bound 
over her eyes; the clank chain fastening the heavy weight to the 
slight ankle; the two hand held together as if to keep down a 
convulsive motion. 

'look!' said one of these. 'she is weeping. they say no witch can weep 
tears.' 

but another scoff at this test, and bade the first remember how those 
of her own family, the hickson even, bore witness against her. 

once more she was bidden to confess. the charges, esteem by all men 
(as they said) to have been proven against her, were read over to her, 
with all the testimony borne against her in proof thereof. they told 
her that, considering the godly family to which she belonged, it had 
been decided by the magistrate and minister of salem that he should 
have her life spared, if she would own her guilt, make reparation, and 
submit to penance; but that if not, she, and other convict of 
witchcraft along with her, were to be hung in salem market-place on the 
next thursday morning (thursday being market day). and when they had 
thus spoken, they wait silent for her answer. it was a minute or 
two before she spoke. she had sat down again upon the bed meanwhile, 
for indeed she was very weak. she asked, 'may i have this handkerchief 
unbound from my eyes, for indeed, sirs, it hurt me?' 

the occasion for which she was blindfold being over, the bandage was 
taken off, and she was allow to see. she look pitiful at the 
stern face around her, in grim suspense as to what her answer would 
be. then she spoke: 

'sirs, i must choose death with a quiet conscience, rather than life to 
be gain by a lie. i am not a witch. i know not hardly what you mean 
when you say i am. i have done many, many things very wrong in my life; 
but i think god will forgive me them for my saviour's sake.' 

'take not his name on your wicked lips,' said pastor tappau, enrage at 
her resolution of not confessing, and scarcely able to keep himself 
from striking her. she saw the desire he had, and shrank away in timid 
fear. then justice hathorn solemn read the legal condemnation of loi 
barclay to death by hanging, as a convict witch. she murmur 
something which nobody heard fully, but which sound like a prayer for 
pity and compassion on her tender years and friendless estate. then 
they left her to all the horrors of that solitary, loathsome dungeon, 
and the strange terror of approach death. 

outside the prison walls, the dread of the witches, and the excitement 
against witchcraft, grew with fearful rapidity. numbers of women, and 
men, too, were accused, no matter what their station of life and their 
former character had been. on the other side, it is allege that 
upwards of fifty person were grievous vex by the devil, and those 
to whom he had impart of his power for vile and wicked 
considerations. how much of malice, distinct, unmistakable personal 
malice, was mixed up with these accusations, no one can now tell. the 
dire statistics of this time tell us, that fifty-five escape death by 
confess themselves guilty, one hundred and fifty were in prison, 
more than two hundred accused, and upwards of twenty suffer death, 
among whom was the minister i have call nolan, who was traditional 
esteem to have suffer through hatred of his co-pastor. one old man, 
scorn the accusation, and refuse to plead at his trial, was, 
according to the law, pressed to death for his contumacy. nay, even 
dogs were accused of witchcraft, suffer the legal penalties, and are 
record among the subject of capital punishment. one young man found 
means to effect his mother's escape from confinement, flee with her on 
horseback, and secrete her in the blueberry swamp, not far from 
taplay's brook, in the great pasture; he conceal her here in a wigwam 
which he built for her shelter, provided her with food and clothing, 
and comfort and sustain her until after the delusion had pass 
away. the poor creature must, however, have suffer dreadfully, for 
one of her arms was fracture in the all but desperate effort of 
get her out of prison. 

but there was no one to try and save lois. grace hickson would fain 
have ignore her altogether. such a taint did witchcraft bring upon a 
whole family, that generation of blameless life were not at that day 
esteem sufficient to wash it out. besides, you must remember that 
grace, along with most people of her time, believe most firm in the 
reality of the crime of witchcraft. poor, forsaken lois, believe in it 
herself, and it add to her terror, for the gaoler, in an unusually 
communicative mood, told her that nearly every cell was now full of 
witches; and it was possible he might have to put one, if more came, in 
with her. loi knew that she was no witch herself; but not the less did 
she believe that the crime was abroad, and largely share in by 
evil-minded person who had chosen to give up their soul to satan; and 
she shudder with terror at what the gaoler said, and would have ask 
him to spare her this companionship if it were possible. but, somehow, 
her senses were leave her, and she could not remember the right words 
in which to form her request, until he had left the place. 

the only person who yearn after lois--who would have befriend her 
if he could--was manasseh: poor, mad manasseh. but he was so wild and 
outrageous in his talk, that it was all his mother could do to keep his 
state conceal from public observation. she had for this purpose given 
him a sleep potion; and, while he lay heavy and inert under the 
influence of the poppy-tea, his mother bound him with cords to the 
ponderous, antique bed in which he slept. she look broken-hearted 
while she did this office, and thus acknowledge the degrade of her 
first-born--him of whom she had ever been so proud. 

late that evening, grace hickson stood in lois's cell, hooded and 
cloak up to her eyes. loi was sitting quite still, play idle with 
a bit of string which one of the magistrate had drop out of his 
pocket that morning. her aunt was standing by her for an instant or two 
in silence, before loi seem aware of her presence. sudden she 
look up, and utter a little cry, shrink away from the dark 
figure. then, as if her cry had loosen grace's tongue, she began: 

'lois barclay, did i ever do you any harm?' grace did not know how 
often her want of loving-kindness had pierce the tender heart of the 
stranger under her roof; nor did loi remember it against her now. 
instead, lois's memory was fill with grateful thought of how much 
that might have been left undone, by a less conscientious person, her 
aunt had done for her, and she half stretch out her arms as to a 
friend in that desolate place, while she answered: 

'oh no, no you were very good! very kind!' 

but grace stood immovable. 

'i did you no harm, although i never rightly knew why you came to us.' 

'i was sent by my mother on her death-bed,' moan lois, covering her 
face. it grew dark every instant. her aunt stood, still and silent. 

'did any of mine ever wrong you?' she asked, after a time. 

'no, no; never, till prudence said--oh, aunt, do you think i am a 
witch?' and now loi was standing up, holding by grace's cloak, and 
try to read her face. grace drew herself, ever so little, away from 
the girl, whom she dreaded, and yet sought to propitiate. 

'wiser than i, godly than i, have said it. but oh, lois, lois! he was 
my first-born. loose him from the demon, for the sake of him whose name 
i dare not name in this terrible building, fill with them who have 
renounce the hope of their baptism; loose manasseh from his awful 
state, if ever i or mine did you a kindness!' 

'you ask me for christ's sake,' said lois. 'i can name that holy 
name--for oh, aunt! indeed, and in holy truth, i am no witch; and yet i 
am to die--to be hanged! aunt, do not let them kill me! i am so young, 
and i never did any one any harm that i know of.' 

'hush! for very shame! this afternoon i have bound my first-born with 
strong cords, to keep him from do himself or us a mischief--he is so 
frenzied. loi barclay, look here!' and grace knelt down at her niece's 
feet, and join her hand as if in prayer--'i am a proud woman, god 
forgive me! and i never thought to kneel to any save to him. and now i 
kneel at your feet, to pray you to release my children, more especially 
my son manasseh, from the spell you have put upon them. lois, hearken 
to me, and i will pray to the almighty for you, if yet there may be 
mercy.' 

'i cannot do it; i never did you or yours any wrong. how can i undo it? 
how can i?' and she wrung her hand in intensity of conviction of the 
inutle of aught she could do. 

here grace got up, slowly, stiffly, and sternly. she stood aloof from 
the chain girl, in the remote corner of the prison cell near the 
door, ready to make her escape as soon as she had cursed the witch, who 
would not, or could not, undo the evil she had wrought. grace lift up 
her right hand, and held it up on high, as she doom loi to be 
accursed for ever, for her deadly sin, and her want of mercy even at 
this final hour. and, lastly, she summon her to meet her at the 
judgment-seat, and answer for this deadly injury done to both soul and 
body of those who had taken her in, and received her when she came to 
them an orphan and a stranger. 

until this last summons, loi had stood as one who hear her sentence 
and can say nothing against it, for she know all would be in vain. but 
she raise her head when she heard her aunt speak of the judgment-seat, 
and at the end of grace's speech she, too, lift up her right hand, as 
if solemn pledge herself by that action, and replied: 

'aunt! i will meet you there. and there you will know my innocence of 
this deadly thing. god have mercy on you and yours!' 

her calm voice madden grace, and making a gesture as if she pluck 
up a handful of dust of the floor, and threw it at lois, she cried: 

'witch! witch! ask mercy for thyself--i need not your prayers. witches' 
prayer are read backwards. i spit at thee, and defy thee!' and so she 
went away. 

loi sat moan that whole night through. 'god comfort me! god 
strengthen me!' was all she could remember to say. she just felt that 
want, nothing more,--all other fear and wants seem dead within her. 
and when the gaoler brought in her breakfast the next morning, he 
report her as 'gone silly;' for, indeed, she did not seem to know 
him, but kept rock herself to and fro, and whisper soft to 
herself, smile a little from time to time. 

but god did comfort her, and strengthen her too late on that wednesday 
afternoon, they thrust another 'witch' into her cell, bidding the two, 
with opprobrious words, keep company together. the new comer fell 
prostrate with the push given her from without; and lois, not 
recognize anything but an old ragged woman lie helpless on her face 
on the ground, lift her up; and lo! it was nattee--dirty, filthy 
indeed, mud-pelted, stone-bruised, beaten, and all astray in her wit 
with the treatment she had received from the mob outside. loi held her 
in her arms, and soft wipe the old brown wrinkle face with her 
apron, crying over it, as she had hardly yet cry over her own 
sorrows. for hour she tend the old indian woman--tended her bodily 
woes; and as the poor scattered senses of the savage creature came 
slow back, loi gather her infinite dread of the morrow, when she 
too, as well as lois, was to be led out to die, in face of all that 
infuriate crowd. loi sought in her own mind for some source of 
comfort for the old woman, who shook like one in the shake palsy at 
the dread of death--and such a death. 

when all was quiet through the prison, in the deep dead midnight, the 
gaoler outside the door heard loi telling, as if to a young child, the 
marvellous and sorrowful story of one who die on the cross for us and 
for our sakes. as long as she spoke, the indian woman's terror seem 
lulled; but the instant she paused, for weariness, nattee cry out 
afresh, as if some wild beast were following her close through the 
dense forest in which she had dwelt in her youth. and then loi went 
on, saying all the blessed words she could remember, and comfort the 
helpless indian woman with the sense of the presence of a heavenly 
friend. and in comfort her, loi was comforted; in strengthen 
her, loi was strengthened. 

the morning came, and the summons to come forth and die came. they who 
enter the cell found loi asleep, her face rest on the slumber 
old woman, whose head she still held in her lap. she did not seem 
clearly to recognize where she was, when she awakened; the 'silly' look 
had return to her wan face; all she appear to know was, that 
somehow or another, through some peril or another, she had to protect 
the poor indian woman. she smile faint when she saw the bright light 
of the april day; and put her arm round nattee, and try to keep the 
indian quiet with hushing, soothe words of broken meaning, and holy 
fragment of the psalms. nattee tighten her hold upon loi as they 
drew near the gallows, and the outrageous crowd below began to hoot and 
yell. loi redouble her effort to calm and encourage nattee, 
apparently unconscious that any of the opprobrium, the hootings, the 
stones, the mud, was direct towards her herself. but when they took 
nattee from her arms, and led her out to suffer first, loi seem all 
at once to recover her sense of the present terror. she gaze wildly 
around, stretch out her arms as if to some person in the distance, 
who was yet visible to her, and cry out once with a voice that 
thrill through all who heard it, 'mother!' directly afterwards, the 
body of loi the witch swung in the air, and every one stood, with 
hush breath, with a sudden wonder, like a fear of deadly crime, 
fallen upon them. 

the still and the silence were broken by one craze and mad, who 
came rush up the steps of the ladder, and caught lois's body in his 
arms, and kiss her lip with wild passion. and then, as if it were 
true what the people believed, that he was possessed by a demon, he 
sprang down, and rush through the crowd, out of the bounds of the 
city, and into the dark dense forest, and manasseh hickson was no more 
seen of christian man. 

the people of salem had awaken from their frightful delusion before 
the autumn, when captain holdernesse and ralph lucy came to find out 
lois, and bring her home to peaceful barford, in the pleasant country 
of england. instead, they led them to the grassy grave where she lay at 
rest, done to death by mistaken men. ralph lucy shook the dust off his 
feet in quit salem, with a heavy, heavy heart; and live a bachelor 
all his life long for her sake. 

long years afterwards, captain holdernesse sought him out, to tell him 
some news that he thought might interest the grave miller of the 
avonside. captain holdernesse told him that in the previous year, it 
was then 1713, the sentence of excommunication against the witch of 
salem was ordered, in godly sacramental meeting of the church, to be 
erase and blot out, and that those who met together for this 
purpose 'humbly request the merciful god would pardon whatsoever sin, 
error, or mistake was in the application of justice, through our 
merciful high priest, who knoweth how to have compassion on the 
ignorant, and those that are out of the way.' he also said that 
prudence hickson--now woman grown--had made a most touching and pungent 
declaration of sorrow and repentance before the whole church, for the 
false and mistaken testimony she had given in several instances, among 
which she particularly mention that of her cousin loi barclay. to 
all which ralph lucy only answered: 

'no repentance of theirs can bring her back to life.' 

then captain holdernesse took out a paper, and read the following 
humble and solemn declaration of regret on the part of those who sign 
it, among whom grace hickson was one: 

'we, whose name are undersigned, being, in the year 1692, call 
to serve as juror in court of salem, on trial of many who were by 
some suspect guilty of do acts of witchcraft upon the body 
of sundry persons; we confess that we ourselves were not capable to 
understand, nor able to withstand, the mysterious delusion of the 
powers of darkness, and prince of the air, but were, for want of 
knowledge in ourselves, and better information from others, 
prevail with to take up with such evidence against the accused, 
as, on further consideration, and better information, we just 
fear was insufficient for the touching the lives of any (deut. 
xvii. 6), whereby we fear we have been instrumental, with others, 
though ignorant and unwittingly, to bring upon ourselves and this 
people of the lord the guilt of innocent blood; which sin, the lord 
saith in scripture, he would not pardon (2 kings, xxiv. 4), that 
is, we suppose, in regard of his temporal judgments. we do, 
therefore, signify to all in general (and to the survive 
sufferer in special) our deep sense of, and sorrow for, our 
errors, in acting on such evidence to the condemn of any person; 
and do hereby declare, that we just fear that we were sadly 
delude and mistaken, for which we are much disquiet and 
distress in our minds, and do therefore humble beg forgiveness, 
first of god for christ's sake, for this our error; and pray that 
god would not impute the guilt of it to ourselves nor others; and 
we also pray that we may be considered candidly and aright by the 
living sufferers, as being then under the power of a strong and 
general delusion, utterly unacquainted with, and not experienced 
in, matter of that nature. 

'we do heartily ask forgiveness of you all, whom we have just 
offended; and do declare, according to our present minds, we would 
none of us do such things again on such grounds for the whole 
world; pray you to accept of this in way of satisfaction for our 
offence, and that you would bless the inheritance of the lord, that 
he may be entreat for the land. 

'foreman, thomas fisk, &c.' 

to the reading of this paper ralph lucy made no reply save this, even 
more gloomy than before: 

'all their repentance will avail nothing to my lois, nor will it bring 
back her life.' 

then captain holdernesse spoke once more, and said that on the day of 
the general fast, appoint to be held all through new england, when 
the meeting-houses were crowded, an old, old man with white hair had 
stood up in the place in which he was accustomed to worship, and had 
hand up into the pulpit a written confession, which he had once or 
twice essay to read for himself, acknowledge his great and grievous 
error in the matter of the witch of salem, and pray for the 
forgiveness of god and of his people, ending with an entreaty that all 
then present would join with him in prayer that his past conduct might 
not bring down the displeasure of the most high upon his country, his 
family, or himself. that old man, who was no other than justice sewall, 
remain standing all the time that his confession was read; and at the 
end he said, 'the good and gracious god be pleased to save new england 
and me and my family.' and then it came out that, for years past, judge 
sewall had set apart a day for humiliate and prayer, to keep fresh in 
his mind a sense of repentance and sorrow for the part he had borne in 
these trials, and that this solemn anniversary he was pledge to keep 
as long as he lived, to show his feeling of deep humiliation. 

ralph lucy's voice tremble as he spoke: 

'all this will not bring my loi to life again, or give me back the 
hope of my youth.' 

but--as captain holdernesse shook his head (for what word could he say, 
or how dispute what was so evidently true?)--ralph added, 'what is the 
day, know you, that this justice has set apart?' 

'the twenty-ninth of april.' 

'then on that day will i, here at barford in england, join my prayer as 
long as i live with the repentant judge, that his sin may be blot 
out and no more had in remembrance. she would have will it so.' 




the grey woman 

portion 1 


there is a mill by the neckar-side, to which many people resort for 
coffee, according to the fashion which is almost national in germany. 
there is nothing particularly attractive in the situation of this mill; 
it is on the mannheim (the flat and unromantic) side of heidelberg. the 
river turn the mill-wheel with a plenteous gushing sound; the 
out-buildings and the dwelling-house of the miller form a well-kept 
dusty quadrangle. again, further from the river, there is a garden full 
of willows, and arbours, and flower-beds not well kept, but very 
profuse in flower and luxuriant creepers, knot and loop the 
arbour together. in each of these arbour is a stationary table of 
white paint wood, and light moveable chair of the same colour and 
material. 

i went to drink coffee there with some friends in 184--. the stately 
old miller came out to greet us, as some of the party were known to him 
of old. he was of a grand build of a man, and his loud musical voice, 
with its tone friendly and familiar, his rolling laugh of welcome, went 
well with the keen bright eye, the fine cloth of his coat, and the 
general look of substance about the place. poultry of all kind 
abound in the mill-yard, where there were ample means of livelihood 
for them strew on the ground; but not content with this, the miller 
took out handful of corn from the sacks, and threw liberally to the 
cock and hen that ran almost under his feet in their eagerness. and 
all the time he was do this, as it were habitually, he was talk 
to us, and ever and anon calling to his daughter and the serving-maids, 
to bid them hasten the coffee we had ordered. he follow us to an 
arbour, and saw us serve to his satisfaction with the best of 
everything we could ask for; and then left us to go round to the 
different arbour and see that each party was properly attend to; 
and, as he went, this great, prosperous, happy-looking man whistle 
soft one of the most plaintive airs i ever heard. 

'his family have held this mill ever since the old palatinate days; or 
rather, i should say, have possessed the ground ever since then, for 
two successive mill of theirs have been burnt down by the french. if 
you want to see scherer in a passion, just talk to him of the 
possibility of a france invasion.' 

but at this moment, still whistle that mournful air, we saw the 
miller go down the steps that led from the somewhat raise garden 
into the mill-yard; and so i seem to have lost my chance of putt 
him in a passion. 

we had nearly finished our coffee, and our 'kucken,' and our cinnamon 
cake, when heavy splash fell on our thick leafy covering; quick and 
quick they came, coming through the tender leaves as if they were 
tear them asunder; all the people in the garden were hurry under 
shelter, or seek for their carriage standing outside. up the steps 
the miller came hastening, with a crimson umbrella, fit to cover every 
one left in the garden, and follow by his daughter, and one or two 
maidens, each bearing an umbrella. 

'come into the house--come in, i say. it is a summer-storm, and will 
flood the place for an hour or two, till the river carry it away. 
here, here.' 

and we follow him back into his own house. we went into the kitchen 
first. such an array of bright copper and tin vessel i never saw; and 
all the wooden things were as thorough scoured. the red tile floor 
was spotless when we went in, but in two minutes it was all over slop 
and dirt with the tread of many feet; for the kitchen was filled, and 
still the worthy miller kept bring in more people under his great 
crimson umbrella. he even call the dogs in, and made them lie down 
under the tables. 

his daughter said something to him in german, and he shook his head 
merry at her. everybody laughed. 

'what did she say?' i asked. 

'she told him to bring the ducks in next; but indeed if more people 
come we shall be suffocated. what with the thundery weather, and the 
stove, and all these steam clothes, i really think we must ask leave 
to pass on. perhaps we might go in and see frau scherer.' 

my friend ask the daughter of the house for permission to go into an 
inner chamber and see her mother. it was granted, and we went into a 
sort of saloon, over-looking the neckar; very small, very bright, and 
very close. the floor was slippery with polish; long narrow pieces of 
looking-glass against the wall reflect the perpetual motion of the 
river opposite; a white porcelain stove, with some old-fashioned 
ornament of brass about it; a sofa, cover with utrecht velvet, a 
table before it, and a piece of worsted-worked carpet under it; a vase 
of artificial flowers; and, lastly, an alcove with a bed in it, on 
which lay the paralyse wife of the good miller, knitting busily, 
form the furniture. i spoke as if this was all that was to be seen in 
the room; but, sitting quietly, while my friend kept up a brisk 
conversation in a language which i but half understood, my eye was 
caught by a picture in a dark corner of the room, and i got up to 
examine it more nearly. 

it was that of a young girl of extreme beauty; evidently of middle 
rank. there was a sensitive refinement in her face, as if she almost 
shrank from the gaze which, of necessity, the painter must have fixed 
upon her. it was not over-well painted, but i felt that it must have 
been a good likeness, from this strong impress of peculiar character 
which i have try to describe. from the dress, i should guess it to 
have been paint in the latter half of the last century. and i 
afterwards heard that i was right. 

there was a little pause in the conversation. 

'will you ask frau scherer who this is?' 

my friend repeated my question, and received a long reply in german. 
then she turn round and translate it to me. 

'it is the likeness of a great-aunt of her husband's.' (my friend was 
standing by me, and look at the picture with sympathetic curiosity.) 
'see! here is the name on the open page of this bible, "anna scherer, 
1778." frau scherer say there is a tradition in the family that this 
pretty girl, with her complexion of lily and roses, lost her colour 
so entire through fright, that she was known by the name of the grey 
woman. she speak as if this anna scherer live in some state of 
life-long terror. but she do not know details; refer me to her 
husband for them. she think he has some papers which were written by 
the original of that picture for her daughter, who die in this very 
house not long after our friend there was married. we can ask herr 
scherer for the whole story if you like.' 

'oh yes, pray do!' said i. and, as our host came in at this moment to 
ask how we were faring, and to tell us that he had sent to heidelberg 
for carriage to convey us home, seeing no chance of the heavy rain 
abating, my friend, after thank him, pass on to my request. 

'ah!' said he, his face changing, 'the aunt anna had a sad history. it 
was all owe to one of those hellish frenchmen; and her daughter 
suffer for it--the cousin ursula, as we all call her when i was a 
child. to be sure, the good cousin ursula was his child as well. the 
sin of the father are visit on their children. the lady would like 
to know all about it, would she? well, there are papers--a kind of 
apology the aunt anna wrote for putt an end to her daughter's 
engagement--or rather fact which she revealed, that prevent cousin 
ursula from marry the man she loved; and so she would never have any 
other good fellow, else i have heard say my father would have been 
thankful to have made her his wife.' all this time he was rummage in 
the drawer of an old-fashioned bureau, and now he turn round, with a 
bundle of yellow mss. in his hand, which he gave to my friend, saying, 
'take it home, take it home, and if you care to make out our crabbed 
germany writing, you may keep it as long as you like, and read it at 
your leisure. only i must have it back again when you have done with 
it, that's all.' 

and so we became possessed of the manuscript of the following letter, 
which it was our employment, during many a long evening that ensue 
winter, to translate, and in some parts to abbreviate. the letter began 
with some reference to the pain which she had already inflict upon 
her daughter by some unexplained opposition to a project of marriage; 
but i doubt if, without the clue with which the good miller had 
furnish us, we could have made out even this much from the 
passionate, broken sentence that made us fancy that some scene between 
the mother and daughter--and possibly a third person--had occur just 
before the mother had begun to write. 

* * * * * 

'thou dost not love thy child, mother! thou dost not care if her heart 
is broken!' ah, god! and these words of my heart-beloved ursula ring in 
my ear as if the sound of them would fill them when i lie a-dying. and 
her poor tear-stained face come between me and everything else. child! 
heart do not break; life is very tough as well as very terrible. but i 
will not decide for thee. i will tell thee all; and thou shalt bear the 
burden of choice. i may be wrong; i have little wit left, and never had 
much, i think; but an instinct serve me in place of judgement, and 
that instinct tell me that thou and thy henri must never be married. 
yet i may be in error. i would fain make my child happy. lay this paper 
before the good priest schriesheim; if, after reading it, thou hast 
doubt which make thee uncertain. only i will tell thee all now, on 
condition that no spoken word ever pass between us on the subject. it 
would kill me to be questioned. i should have to see all present again. 

my father held, as thou knowest, the mill on the neckar, where thy 
new-found uncle, scherer, now lives. thou rememberest the surprise with 
which we were received there last vintage twelvemonth. how thy uncle 
disbelieve me when i said that i was his sister anna, whom he had long 
believe to be dead, and how i had to lead thee underneath the picture, 
paint of me long ago, and point out, feature by feature, the likeness 
between it and thee; and how, as i spoke, i recall first to my own 
mind, and then by speech to his, the detail of the time when it was 
painted; the merry words that pass between us then, a happy boy and 
girl; the position of the articles of furniture in the room; our 
father's habits; the cherry-tree, now cut down, that shade the window 
of my bedroom, through which my brother was wont to squeeze himself, in 
order to spring on to the topmost bough that would bear his weight; and 
thence would pass me back his cap laden with fruit to where i sat on 
the window-sill, too sick with fright for him to care much for eat 
the cherries. 

and at length fritz gave way, and believe me to be his sister anna, 
even as though i were risen from the dead. and thou rememberest how he 
fetch in his wife, and told her that i was not dead, but was come 
back to the old home once more, change as i was. and she would scarce 
believe him, and scan me with a cold, distrustful eye, till at 
length--for i knew her of old as babette müller--i said that i was 
well-to-do, and need not to seek out friends for what they had to 
give. and then she asked--not me, but her husband--why i had kept 
silent so long, leading all--father, brother, every one that love me 
in my own dear home--to esteem me dead. and then thine uncle (thou 
rememberest?) said he care not to know more than i care to tell; that 
i was his anna, found again, to be a blessing to him in his old age, as 
i had been in his boyhood. i thank him in my heart for his trust; for 
were the need for telling all less than it seem to me now i could not 
speak of my past life. but she, who was my sister-in-law still, held 
back her welcome, and, for want of that, i did not go to live in 
heidelberg as i had plan beforehand, in order to be near my brother 
fritz, but contented myself with his promise to be a father to my 
ursula when i should die and leave this weary world. 

that babette müller was, as i may say, the cause of all my life's 
suffering. she was a baker's daughter in heidelberg--a great beauty, as 
people said, and, indeed, as i could see for myself i, too--thou sawest 
my picture--was reckon a beauty, and i believe i was so. babette 
müller look upon me as a rival. she like to be admired, and had no 
one much to love her. i had several people to love me--thy grandfather, 
fritz, the old servant kätchen, karl, the head apprentice at the 
mill--and i fear admiration and notice, and the being stare at as 
the 'schöne müllerin,' whenever i went to make my purchase in 
heidelberg. 

those were happy, peaceful days. i had kätchen to help me in the 
housework, and whatever we did pleased my brave old father, who was 
always gentle and indulgent towards us women, though he was stern 
enough with the apprentice in the mill. karl, the oldest of these, was 
his favourite; and i can see now that my father wish him to marry me, 
and that karl himself was desirous to do so. but karl was rough-spoken, 
and passionate--not with me, but with the others--and i shrank from him 
in a way which, i fear, gave him pain. and then came thy uncle fritz's 
marriage; and babette was brought to the mill to be its mistress. not 
that i care much for give up my post, for, in spite of my father's 
great kindness, i always fear that i did not manage well for so large 
a family (with the men, and a girl under kätchen, we sat down eleven 
each night to supper). but when babette began to find fault with 
kätchen, i was unhappy at the blame that fell on faithful servants; and 
by-and-by i began to see that babette was egg on karl to make more 
open love to me, and, as she once said, to get done with it, and take 
me off to a home of my own. my father was grow old, and did not 
perceive all my daily discomfort. the more karl advanced, the more i 
dislike him. he was good in the main, but i had no notion of being 
married, and could not bear any one who talk to me about it. 

things were in this way when i had an invitation to go to carlsruhe to 
visit a schoolfellow, of whom i had been very fond. babette was all for 
my going; i don't think i want to leave home, and yet i had been very 
fond of sophie rupprecht. but i was always shy among strangers. somehow 
the affair was settled for me, but not until both fritz and my father 
had made inquiry as to the character and position of the rupprechts. 
they learned that the father had held some kind of inferior position 
about the grand-duke's court, and was now dead, leave a widow, a 
noble lady, and two daughters, the elder of whom was sophie, my friend. 
madame rupprecht was not rich, but more than respectable--genteel. when 
this was ascertained, my father made no opposition to my going; babette 
forward it by all the means in her power, and even my dear fritz had 
his word to say in its favour. only kätchen was against it--kätchen and 
karl. the opposition of karl did more to send me to carlsruhe than 
anything. for i could have object to go; but when he took upon 
himself to ask what was the good of go a-gadding, visiting stranger 
of whom no one knew anything, i yield to circumstances--to the 
pull of sophie and the push of babette. i was silent vexed, i 
remember, at babette's inspection of my clothes; at the way in which 
she settled that this gown was too old-fashioned, or that too common, 
to go with me on my visit to a noble lady; and at the way in which she 
took upon herself to spend the money my father had given me to buy what 
was requisite for the occasion. and yet i blame myself, for every one 
else thought her so kind for do all this; and she herself meant 
kindly, too. 

at last i quit the mill by the neckar-side. it was a long day's 
journey, and fritz went with me to carlsruhe. the rupprecht live on 
the third floor of a house a little behind one of the principal 
streets, in a cramped-up court, to which we gain admittance through a 
doorway in the street. i remember how pinched their rooms look after 
the large space we had at the mill, and yet they had an air of grandeur 
about them which was new to me, and which gave me pleasure, fade as 
some of it was. madame rupprecht was too formal a lady for me; i was 
never at my ease with her; but sophie was all that i had recollect 
her at school: kind, affectionate, and only rather too ready with her 
expression of admiration and regard. the little sister kept out of our 
way; and that was all we needed, in the first enthusiast renewal of 
our early friendship. the one great object of madame rupprecht's life 
was to retain her position in society; and as her means were much 
diminish since her husband's death, there was not much comfort, 
though there was a great deal of show, in their way of living; just the 
opposite of what it was at my father's house. i believe that my coming 
was not too much desire by madame rupprecht, as i brought with me 
another mouth to be fed; but sophie had spent a year or more in 
entreat for permission to invite me, and her mother, have once 
consented, was too well bred not to give me a stately welcome. 

the life in carlsruhe was very different from what it was at home. the 
hour were later, the coffee was weak in the morning, the pottage was 
weaker, the boil beef less relieved by other diet, the dress finer, 
the evening engagement constant. i did not find these visit pleasant. 
we might not knit, which would have relieved the tedium a little; but 
we sat in a circle, talk together, only interrupt occasional by 
a gentleman, who, break out of the knot of men who stood near the 
door, talk eager together, stole across the room on tiptoe, his 
hat under his arm, and, bring his feet together in the position we 
call the first at the dancing-school, made a low bow to the lady he 
was go to address. the first time i saw these manners i could not 
help smiling; but madame rupprecht saw me, and spoke to me next morning 
rather severely, telling me that, of course, in my country breeding i 
could have seen nothing of court manners, or france fashions, but that 
that was no reason for my laugh at them. of course i try never to 
smile again in company. this visit to carlsruhe took place in '89, just 
when every one was full of the event taking place at paris; and yet at 
carlsruhe france fashion were more talk of than france politics. 
madame rupprecht, especially, thought a great deal of all france 
people. and this again was quite different to us at home. fritz could 
hardly bear the name of a frenchman; and it had nearly been an obstacle 
to my visit to sophie that her mother prefer being call madame to 
her proper title of frau. 

one night i was sitting next to sophie, and longing for the time when 
we might have supper and go home, so as to be able to speak together, a 
thing forbidden by madame rupprecht's rule of etiquette, which 
strict prohibit any but the most necessary conversation passing 
between member of the same family when in society. i was sitting, i 
say, scarcely keeping back my inclination to yawn, when two gentlemen 
came in, one of whom was evidently a stranger to the whole party, from 
the formal manner in which the host led him up, and present him to 
the hostess. i thought i had never seen any one so handsome or so 
elegant. his hair was powdered, of course, but one could see from his 
complexion that it was fair in its natural state. his features were as 
delicate as a girl's, and set off by two little 'mouches,' as we call 
patch in those days, one at the left corner of his mouth, the other 
prolonging, as it were, the right eye. his dress was blue and silver. i 
was so lost in admiration of this beautiful young man, that i was as 
much surprise as if the angel gabriel had spoken to me, when the lady 
of the house brought him forward to present him to me. she call him 
monsieur de la tourelle, and he began to speak to me in french; but 
though i understood him perfectly, i dare not trust myself to reply to 
him in that language. then he try german, speak it with a kind of 
soft lisp that i thought charming. but, before the end of the evening, 
i became a little tired of the affected soft and effeminacy of his 
manners, and the exaggerate compliments he paid me, which had the 
effect of making all the company turn round and look at me. madame 
rupprecht was, however, pleased with the precise thing that displease 
me. she like either sophie or me to create a sensation; of course she 
would have prefer that it should have been her daughter, but her 
daughter's friend was next best. as we went away, i heard madame 
rupprecht and monsieur de la tourelle reciprocate civil speech with 
might and main, from which i found out that the france gentleman was 
coming to call on us the next day. i do not know whether i was more 
glad or frightened, for i had been kept upon stilt of good manners all 
the evening. but still i was flatter when madame rupprecht spoke as 
if she had invite him, because he had shown pleasure in my society, 
and even more gratify by sophie's ungrudging delight at the evident 
interest i had excited in so fine and agreeable a gentleman. yet, with 
all this, they had hard work to keep me from running out of the salon 
the next day, when we heard his voice inquiring at the gate on the 
stairs for madame rupprecht. they had made me put on my sunday gown, 
and they themselves were dress as for a reception. 

when he was gone away, madame rupprecht congratulate me on the 
conquest i had made; for, indeed, he had scarcely spoken to anyone 
else, beyond what mere civility required, and had almost invite 
himself to come in the evening to bring some new song, which was all 
the fashion in paris, he said. madame rupprecht had been out all 
morning, as she told me, to glean information about monsieur de la 
tourelle. he was a propriétaire, had a small château on the vosge 
mountains; he own land there, but had a large income from some 
source quite independent of this property. altogether, he was a good 
match, as she emphatically observed. she never seem to think that i 
could refuse him after this account of his wealth, nor do i believe she 
would have allow sophie a choice, even had he been as old and ugly as 
he was young and handsome. i do not quite know--so many event have 
come to pass since then, and blur the clear of my 
recollections--if i love him or not. he was very much devoted to me; 
he almost frightened me by the excess of his demonstration of love. 
and he was very charming to everybody around me, who all spoke of him 
as the most fascinating of men, and of me as the most fortunate of 
girls. and yet i never felt quite at my ease with him. i was always 
relieved when his visit were over, although i miss his presence when 
he did not come. he prolonged his visit to the friend with whom he was 
stay at carlsruhe, on purpose to woo me. he loaded me with presents, 
which i was unwill to take, only madame rupprecht seem to consider 
me an affected prude if i refuse them. many of these presents 
consist of articles of valuable old jewellery, evidently belong to 
his family; by accept these i double the tie which were form 
around me by circumstances even more than by my own consent. in those 
days we did not write letters to absent friends as frequent as is 
done now, and i had been unwill to name him in the few letters that 
i wrote home. at length, however, i learned from madame rupprecht that 
she had written to my father to announce the splendid conquest i had 
made, and to request his presence at my betrothal. i start with 
astonishment. i had not realize that affair had gone so far as this. 
but when she ask me, in a stern, offend manner, what i had meant by 
my conduct if i did not intend to marry monsieur de la tourelle--i had 
received his visits, his presents, all his various advances without 
showing any unwilling or repugnance--(and it was all true; i had 
shown no repugnance, though i did not wish to be married to him,--at 
least, not so soon)--what could i do but hang my head, and silent 
consent to the rapid enunciation of the only course which now remain 
for me if i would not be esteem a heartless coquette all the rest of 
my days? 

there was some difficulty, which i afterwards learnt that my 
sister-in-law had obviated, about my betrothal taking place from home. 
my father, and fritz especially, were for have me return to the mill, 
and there be betrothed, and from thence be married. but the rupprecht 
and monsieur de la tourelle were equally urgent on the other side; and 
babette was unwill to have the trouble of the commotion at the mill; 
and also, i think, a little dislike the idea of the contrast of my 
grand marriage with her own. 

so my father and fritz came over to the betrothal. they were to stay at 
an inn in carlsruhe for a fortnight, at the end of which time the 
marriage was to take place. monsieur de la tourelle told me he had 
business at home, which would oblige him to be absent during the 
interval between the two events; and i was very glad of it, for i did 
not think that he value my father and my brother as i could have 
wish him to do. he was very polite to them; put on all the soft, 
grand manner, which he had rather drop with me; and compliment us 
all round, beginning with my father and madame rupprecht, and ending 
with little alwina. but he a little scoff at the old-fashioned church 
ceremony which my father insist on; and i fancy fritz must have 
taken some of his compliments as satire, for i saw certain sign of 
manner by which i knew that my future husband, for all his civil words, 
had irritate and annoy my brother. but all the money arrangement 
were liberal in the extreme, and more than satisfied, almost surprised, 
my father. even fritz lift up his eyebrow and whistled. i alone did 
not care about anything. i was bewitched,--in a dream,--a kind of 
despair. i had got into a net through my own timid and weakness, and 
i did not see how to get out of it. i clung to my own home-people that 
fortnight as i had never done before. their voices, their ways were all 
so pleasant and familiar to me, after the constraint in which i had 
been living. i might speak and do as i like without being correct by 
madame rupprecht, or reprove in a delicate, complimentary way by 
monsieur de la tourelle. one day i said to my father that i did not 
want to be married, that i would rather go back to the dear old mill; 
but he seem to feel this speech of mine as a dereliction of duty as 
great as if i had committed perjury; as if, after the ceremony of 
betrothal, no one had any right over me but my future husband. and yet 
he ask me some solemn questions; but my answer were not such as to 
do me any good. 

'dost thou know any fault or crime in this man that should prevent 
god's blessing from rest on thy marriage with him? dost thou feel 
aversion or repugnance to him in any way?' 

and to all this what could i say? i could only stammer out that i did 
not think i love him enough; and my poor old father saw in this 
reluctance only the fancy of a silly girl who did not know her own 
mind, but who had now gone too far to recede. 

so we were married, in the court chapel, a privilege which madame 
rupprecht had use no end of effort to obtain for us, and which she 
must have thought was to secure us all possible happiness, both at the 
time and in recollection afterwards. 

we were married; and after two days spent in festivity at carlsruhe, 
among all our new fashionable friends there, i bade good-by for ever to 
my dear old father. i had beg my husband to take me by way of 
heidelberg to his old castle in the vosges; but i found an amount of 
determination, under that effeminate appearance and manner, for which i 
was not prepared, and he refuse my first request so decidedly that i 
dare not urge it. 'henceforth, anna,' said he, 'you will move in a 
different sphere of life; and though it is possible that you may have 
the power of showing favour to your relations from time to time, yet 
much or familiar intercourse will be undesirable, and is what i cannot 
allow.' i felt almost afraid, after this formal speech, of ask my 
father and fritz to come and see me; but, when the agony of bidding 
them farewell overcame all my prudence, i did beg them to pay me a 
visit ere long. but they shook their heads, and spoke of business at 
home, of different kind of life, of my being a frenchwoman now. only 
my father broke out at last with a blessing, and said, 'if my child is 
unhappy--which god forbid--let her remember that her father's house is 
ever open to her.' i was on the point of crying out, 'oh! take me back 
then now, my father! oh, my father!' when i felt, rather than saw, my 
husband present near me. he look on with a slightly contemptuous air; 
and, taking my hand in his, he led me weeping away, saying that short 
farewell were always the best when they were inevitable. 

it took us two days to reach his château in the vosges, for the road 
were bad and the way difficult to ascertain. nothing could be more 
devoted than he was all the time of the journey. it seem as if he 
were try in every way to make up for the separation which every hour 
made me feel the more complete between my present and my former life. i 
seem as if i were only now waken up to a full sense of what 
marriage was, and i dare say i was not a cheerful companion on the 
tedious journey. at length, jealousy of my regret for my father and 
brother got the better of m. de la tourelle, and he became so much 
displease with me that i thought my heart would break with the sense 
of desolation. so it was in no cheerful frame of mind that we 
approach le rochers, and i thought that perhaps it was because i was 
so unhappy that the place look so dreary. on one side, the château 
look like a raw new building, hasty run up for some immediate 
purpose, without any growth of tree or underwood near it, only the 
remains of the stone use for building, not yet clear away from the 
immediate neighbourhood, although weeds and lichen had been suffer 
to grow near and over the heap of rubbish; on the other, were the 
great rocks from which the place took its name, and rising close 
against them, as if almost a natural formation, was the old castle, 
whose building dated many century back. 

it was not large nor grand, but it was strong and picturesque, and i 
use to wish that we live in it rather than in the smart, 
half-furnished apartment in the new edifice, which had been hasty got 
ready for my reception. incongruous as the two parts were, they were 
join into a whole by means of intricate passage and unexpected 
doors, the exact position of which i never fully understood. m. de la 
tourelle led me to a suite of rooms set apart for me, and formal 
install me in them, as in a domain of which i was sovereign. he 
apologise for the hasty preparation which was all he had been able to 
make for me, but promised, before i asked, or even thought of 
complaining, that they should be made as luxurious as heart could wish 
before many week had elapsed. but when, in the gloom of an autumnal 
evening, i caught my own face and figure reflect in all the mirrors, 
which show only a mysterious background in the dim light of the many 
candle which fail to illuminate the great proportions of the 
half-furnished salon, i clung to m. de la tourelle, and beg to be 
taken to the rooms he had occupy before his marriage, he seem angry 
with me, although he affected to laugh, and so decidedly put aside the 
notion of my have any other rooms but these, that i tremble in 
silence at the fantastic figures and shape which my imagination call 
up as people the background of those gloomy mirrors. there was my 
boudoir, a little less dreary--my bedroom, with its grand and tarnish 
furniture, which i commonly made into my sitting-room, lock up the 
various door which led into the boudoir, the salon, the passages--all 
but one, through which m. de la tourelle always enter from his own 
apartments in the old part of the castle. but this preference of mine 
for occupy my bedroom annoy m. de la tourelle, i am sure, though 
he did not care to express his displeasure. he would always allure me 
back into the salon, which i dislike more and more from its complete 
separation from the rest of the building by the long passage into which 
all the door of my apartment opened. this passage was closed by heavy 
door and portières, through which i could not hear a sound from the 
other parts of the house, and, of course, the servant could not hear 
any movement or cry of mine unless expressly summoned. to a girl 
brought up as i had been in a household where every individual live 
all day in the sight of every other member of the family, never want 
either cheerful words or the sense of silent companionship, this grand 
isolation of mine was very formidable; and the more so, because m. de 
la tourelle, as landed proprietor, sportsman, and what not, was 
generally out of door the greater part of every day, and sometimes for 
two or three days at a time. i had no pride to keep me from associate 
with the domestics; it would have been natural to me in many ways to 
have sought them out for a word of sympathy in those dreary days when i 
was left so entire to myself, had they been like our kindly germany 
servants. but i dislike them, one and all; i could not tell why. some 
were civil, but there was a familiarity in their civility which 
repel me; other were rude, and treat me more as if i were an 
intruder than their master's chosen wife; and yet of the two set i 
like these last the best. 

the principal male servant belong to this latter class. i was very 
much afraid of him, he had such an air of suspicious surly about 
him in all he did for me; and yet m. de la tourelle spoke of him as 
most valuable and faithful. indeed, it sometimes struck me that 
lefebvre rule his master in some things; and this i could not make 
out. for, while m. de la tourelle behave towards me as if i were some 
precious toy or idol, to be cherished, and fostered, and petted, and 
indulged, i soon found out how little i, or, apparently, any one else, 
could bend the terrible will of the man who had on first acquaintance 
appear to me too effeminate and languid to exert his will in the 
slightest particular. i had learnt to know his face better now; and to 
see that some vehement depth of feeling, the cause of which i could not 
fathom, made his grey eye glitter with pale light, and his lip 
contract, and his delicate cheek whiten on certain occasions. but all 
had been so open and above board at home, that i had no experience to 
help me to unravel any mystery among those who live under the same 
roof. i understood that i had made what madame rupprecht and her set 
would have call a great marriage, because i live in château with 
many servants, bound ostensible to obey me as a mistress. i understood 
that m. de la tourelle was fond enough of me in his way--proud of my 
beauty, i dare say (for he often enough spoke about it to me)--but he 
was also jealous, and suspicious, and uninfluenced by my wishes, unless 
they tally with his own. i felt at this time as if i could have been 
fond of him too, if he would have let me; but i was timid from my 
childhood, and before long my dread of his displeasure (coming down 
like thunder into the midst of his love, for such slight cause as a 
hesitation in reply, a wrong word, or a sigh for my father), conquer 
my humorous inclination to love one who was so handsome, so 
accomplished, so indulgent and devoted. but if i could not please him 
when indeed i love him, you may imagine how often i did wrong when i 
was so much afraid of him as to quiet avoid his company for fear of 
his outburst of passion. one thing i remember noticing, that the more 
m. de la tourelle was displease with me, the more lefebvre seem to 
chuckle; and when i was restore to favour, sometimes on as sudden an 
impulse as that which occasion my disgrace, lefebvre would look 
askance at me with his cold, malicious eyes, and once or twice at such 
times he spoke most disrespectful to m. de la tourelle. 

i have almost forgotten to say that, in the early days of my life at 
le rochers, m. de la tourelle, in contemptuous indulgent pity at my 
weakness in dislike the dreary grandeur of the salon, wrote up to the 
milliner in paris from whom my corbeille de mariage had come, to desire 
her to look out for me a maid of middle age, experienced in the 
toilette, and with so much refinement that she might on occasion serve 
as companion to me. 




portion 2 


a norman woman, amante by name, was sent to le rocher by the paris 
milliner, to become my maid. she was tall and handsome, though upwards 
of forty, and somewhat gaunt. but, on first seeing her, i like her; 
she was neither rude nor familiar in her manners, and had a pleasant 
look of straightforward about her that i had miss in all the 
inhabitant of the château, and had foolish set down in my own mind 
as a national want. amante was direct by m. de la tourelle to sit in 
my boudoir, and to be always within call. he also gave her many 
instruction as to her duty in matter which, perhaps, strict 
belong to my department of management. but i was young and 
inexperienced, and thankful to be spare any responsibility. 

i daresay it was true what m. de la tourelle said--before many week 
had elapsed--that, for a great lady, a lady of a castle, i became sadly 
too familiar with my norman waiting-maid. but you know that by birth we 
were not very far apart in rank: amante was the daughter of a norman 
farmer, i of a germany miller; and besides that, my life was so lonely! 
it almost seem as if i could not please my husband. he had written 
for some one capable of being my companion at times, and now he was 
jealous of my free regard for her--angry because i could sometimes 
laugh at her original tune and amuse proverbs, while when with him i 
was too much frightened to smile. 

from time to time family from a distance of some league drove 
through the bad road in their heavy carriage to pay us a visit, and 
there was an occasional talk of our go to paris when public affair 
should be a little more settled. these little event and plan were the 
only variation in my life for the first twelve months, if i except the 
alternate in m. de la tourelle's temper, his unreasonable anger, and 
his passionate fondness. 

perhaps one of the reason that made me take pleasure and comfort in 
amante's society was, that whereas i was afraid of everybody (i do not 
think i was half as much afraid of things as of persons), amante fear 
no one. she would quiet beard lefebvre, and he respect her all the 
more for it; she had a knack of putt question to m. de la tourelle, 
which respectful informed him that she had detect the weak point, 
but forebore to press him too close upon it out of deference to his 
position as her master. and with all her shrewd to others, she had 
quite tender ways with me; all the more so at this time because she 
knew, what i had not yet venture to tell m. de la tourelle, that 
by-and-by i might become a mother--that wonderful object of mysterious 
interest to single women, who no long hope to enjoy such blessed 
themselves. 

it was once more autumn; late in october. but i was reconcile to my 
habitation; the wall of the new part of the building no long look 
bare and desolate; the _débris_ had been so far clear away by m. de 
la tourelle's desire as to make me a little flower-garden, in which i 
try to cultivate those plant that i remember as grow at home. 
amante and i had move the furniture in the rooms, and adjust it to 
our liking; my husband had ordered many an article from time to time 
that he thought would give me pleasure, and i was becoming tame to my 
apparent imprison in a certain part of the great building, the 
whole of which i had never yet explored. it was october, as i say, once 
more. the days were lovely, though short in duration, and m. de la 
tourelle had occasion, so he said, to go to that distant estate the 
superintend of which so frequent took him away from home. he took 
lefebvre with him, and possibly some more of the lacqueys; he often 
did. and my spirits rose a little at the thought of his absence; and 
then the new sensation that he was the father of my unborn babe came 
over me, and i try to invest him with this fresh character. i try 
to believe that it was his passionate love for me that made him so 
jealous and tyrannical, imposing, as he did, restriction on my very 
intercourse with my dear father, from whom i was so entire separated, 
as far as personal intercourse was concerned. 

i had, it is true, let myself go into a sorrowful review of all the 
trouble which lay hidden beneath the seeming luxury of my life. i knew 
that no one care for me except my husband and amante; for it was clear 
enough to see that i, as his wife, and also as a _parvenue_, was not 
popular among the few neighbour who surround us; and as for the 
servants; the women were all hard and impudent-looking, treat me 
with a semblance of respect that had more of mockery than reality in 
it; while the men had a lurk kind of fierce about them, 
sometimes display even to m. de la tourelle, who on his part, it must 
be confessed, was often severe even to cruelty in his management of 
them. my husband love me, i said to myself, but i said it almost in 
the form of a question. his love was shown fitfully, and more in ways 
calculate to please himself than to please me. i felt that for no wish 
of mine would he deviate one tittle from any predetermine course of 
action. i had learnt the inflexible of those thin delicate lips; i 
knew how anger would turn his fair complexion to deadly white, and 
bring the cruel light into his pale blue eyes. the love i bore to any 
one seem to be a reason for his hate them, and so i went on pity 
myself one long dreary afternoon during that absence of his of which i 
have spoken, only sometimes remember to check myself in my 
murmur by thinking of the new unseen link between us, and then 
crying afresh to think how wicked i was. oh, how well i remember that 
long october evening! amante came in from time to time, talk away to 
cheer me--talking about dress and paris, and i hardly know what, but 
from time to time look at me keen with her friendly dark eyes, and 
with serious interest, too, though all her words were about frivolity. 
at length she heap the fire with wood, drew the heavy silken curtains 
close; for i had been anxious hitherto to keep them open, so that i 
might see the pale moon mount the skies, as i use to see her--the 
same moon--rise from behind the kaiser stuhl at heidelberg; but the 
sight made me cry, so amante shut it out. she dictate to me as a nurse 
do to a child. 

'now, madame must have the little kitten to keep her company,' she 
said, 'while i go and ask marthon for a cup of coffee.' i remember that 
speech, and the way it rouse me, for i did not like amante to think i 
want amuse by a kitten. it might be my petulance, but this 
speech--such as she might have made to a child--annoyed me, and i said 
that i had reason for my low of spirits--meaning that they were not 
of so imaginary a nature that i could be divert from them by the 
gambol of a kitten. so, though i did not choose to tell her all, i 
told her a part; and as i spoke, i began to suspect that the good 
creature knew much of what i withheld, and that the little speech about 
the kitten was more thoughtful kind than it had seem at first. i 
said that it was so long since i had heard from my father; that he was 
an old man, and so many things might happen--i might never see him 
again--and i so seldom heard from him or my brother. it was a more 
complete and total separation than i had ever anticipate when i 
married, and something of my home and of my life previous to my 
marriage i told the good amante; for i had not been brought up as a 
great lady, and the sympathy of any human being was precious to me. 

amante listen with interest, and in return told me some of the event 
and sorrow of her own life. then, remember her purpose, she set out 
in search of the coffee, which ought to have been brought to me an hour 
before; but, in my husband's absence, my wish were but seldom 
attend to, and i never dare to give orders. 

presently she returned, bring the coffee and a great large cake. 

'see!' said she, setting it down. 'look at my plunder. madame must eat. 
those who eat always laugh. and, besides, i have a little news that 
will please madame.' then she told me that, lie on a table in the 
great kitchen, was a bundle of letters, come by the courier from 
strasburg that very afternoon: then, fresh from her conversation with 
me, she had hasty untie the string that bound them, but had only 
just trace out one that she thought was from germany, when a 
servant-man came in, and, with the start he gave her, she drop the 
letters, which he picked up, swear at her for have untie and 
disarrange them. she told him that she believe there was a letter 
there for her mistress; but he only swore the more, saying, that if 
there was it was no business of hers, or of his either, for that he had 
the strictest orders always to take all letters that arrive during his 
master's absence into the private sitting-room of the latter--a room 
into which i had never entered, although it open out of my husband's 
dressing-room. 

i ask amante if she had not conquer and brought me this letter. no, 
indeed, she replied, it was almost as much as her life was worth to 
live among such a set of servants: it was only a month ago that jacque 
had stab valentin for some jesting talk. had i never miss 
valentin--that handsome young lad who carry up the wood into my 
salon? poor fellow! he lie dead and cold now, and they said in the 
village he had put an end to himself, but those of the household knew 
better. oh! i need not be afraid; jacque was gone, no one knew where; 
but with such people it was not safe to upbraid or insist. monsieur 
would be at home the next day, and it would not be long to wait. 

but i felt as if i could not exist till the next day, without the 
letter. it might be to say that my father was ill, dying--he might cry 
for his daughter from his death-bed! in short, there was no end to the 
thought and fancies that haunt me. it was of no use for amante to 
say that, after all, she might be mistaken--that she did not read 
writing well--that she had but a glimpse of the address; i let my 
coffee cool, my food all became distasteful, and i wrung my hand with 
impatience to get at the letter, and have some news of my dear one at 
home. all the time, amante kept her imperturbable good temper, first 
reasoning, then scolding. at last she said, as if weary out, that if 
i would consent to make a good supper, she would see what could be done 
as to our go to monsieur's room in search of the letter, after the 
servant were all gone to bed. we agree to go together when all was 
still, and look over the letters; there could be no harm in that; and 
yet, somehow, we were such coward we dare not do it openly and in the 
face of the household. 

presently my supper came up--partridges, bread, fruits, and cream. how 
well i remember that supper! we put the untouched cake away in a sort 
of buffet, and pour the cold coffee out of the window, in order that 
the servant might not take offence at the apparent fanciful of 
send down for food i could not eat. i was so anxious for all to be 
in bed, that i told the footman who serve that he need not wait to 
take away the plate and dishes, but might go to bed. long after i 
thought the house was quiet, amante, in her caution, made me wait. it 
was past eleven before we set out, with cat-like steps and veiled 
light, along the passages, to go to my husband's room and steal my own 
letter, if it was indeed there; a fact about which amante had become 
very uncertain in the progress of our discussion. 

to make you understand my story, i must now try to explain to you the 
plan of the château. it had been at one time a fortify place of some 
strength, perch on the summit of a rock, which project from the 
side of the mountain. but addition had been made to the old building 
(which must have borne a strong resemblance to the castle overhang 
the rhine), and these new building were placed so as to command a 
magnificent view, being on the steepest side of the rock, from which 
the mountain fell away, as it were, leave the great plain of france 
in full survey. the ground-plan was something of the shape of three 
side of an oblong; my apartments in the modern edifice occupy the 
narrow end, and had this grand prospect. the front of the castle was 
old, and ran parallel to the road far below. in this were contained the 
offices and public rooms of various descriptions, into which i never 
penetrated. the back wing (considering the new building, in which my 
apartments were, as the centre) consist of many rooms, of a dark and 
gloomy character, as the mountain-side shut out much of the sun, and 
heavy pine wood came down within a few yard of the windows. yet on 
this side--on a project plateau of the rock--my husband had form 
the flower-garden of which i have spoken; for he was a great cultivator 
of flower in his leisure moments. 

now my bedroom was the corner room of the new building on the part 
next to the mountains. hence i could have let myself down into the 
flower-garden by my hand on the window-sill on one side, without 
danger of hurt myself; while the window at right angle with these 
look sheer down a descent of a hundred feet at least. go still 
farther along this wing, you came to the old building; in fact, these 
two fragment of the ancient castle had formerly been attach by some 
such connect apartments as my husband had rebuilt. these rooms 
belong to m. de la tourelle. his bedroom open into mine, his 
dressing-room lay beyond; and that was pretty nearly all i knew, for 
the servants, as well as he himself, had a knack of turning me back, 
under some pretence, if ever they found me walking about alone, as i 
was inclined to do, when first i came, from a sort of curiosity to see 
the whole of the place of which i found myself mistress. m. de la 
tourelle never encourage me to go out alone, either in a carriage or 
for a walk, saying always that the road were unsafe in those disturbed 
times; indeed, i have sometimes fancy since that the flower-garden, 
to which the only access from the castle was through his rooms, was 
design in order to give me exercise and employment under his own eye. 

but to return to that night. i knew, as i have said, that m. de la 
tourelle's private room open out of his dressing-room, and this out 
of his bedroom, which again open into mine, the corner-room. but 
there were other door into all these rooms, and these door led into a 
long gallery, light by windows, look into the inner court. i do 
not remember our consulting much about it; we went through my room into 
my husband's apartment through the dressing-room, but the door of 
communication into his study was locked, so there was nothing for it 
but to turn back and go by the gallery to the other door. i recollect 
notice one or two things in these rooms, then seen by me for the 
first time. i remember the sweet perfume that hung in the air, the 
scent bottle of silver that deck his toilet-table, and the whole 
apparatus for bathing and dressing, more luxurious even than those 
which he had provided for me. but the room itself was less splendid in 
its proportions than mine. in truth, the new building end at the 
entrance to my husband's dressing-room. there were deep window recess 
in wall eight or nine feet thick, and even the partition between the 
chambers were three feet deep; but over all these door or window 
there fell thick, heavy draperies, so that i should think no one could 
have heard in one room what pass in another. we went back into my 
room, and out into the gallery. we had to shade our candle, from a fear 
that possessed us, i don't know why, lest some of the servant in the 
opposite wing might trace our progress towards the part of the castle 
unused by any one except my husband. somehow, i had always the feeling 
that all the domestics, except amante, were spy upon me, and that i 
was trammel in a web of observation and unspoken limitation 
extend over all my actions. 

there was a light in the upper room; we paused, and amante would have 
again retreated, but i was chafe under the delays. what was the harm 
of my seek my father's unopened letter to me in my husband's study? 
i, generally the coward, now blame amante for her unusual timidity. 
but the truth was, she had far more reason for suspicion as to the 
proceedings of that terrible household than i had ever known of. i 
urge her on, i pressed on myself; we came to the door, locked, but 
with the key in it; we turn it, we entered; the letters lay on the 
table, their white oblong catching the light in an instant, and 
revealing themselves to my eager eyes, hunger after the words of 
love from my peaceful, distant home. but just as i pressed forward to 
examine the letters, the candle which amante held, caught in some 
draught, went out, and we were in darkness. amante propose that we 
should carry the letters back to my salon, collect them as well as 
we could in the dark, and return all but the expect one for me; 
but i beg her to return to my room, where i kept tinder and flint, 
and to strike a fresh light; and i remain alone in the room, of which 
i could only just distinguish the size, and the principal articles of 
furniture: a large table, with a deep, overhang cloth, in the 
middle, escritoire and other heavy articles against the walls; all 
this i could see as i stood there, my hand on the table close by the 
letters, my face towards the window, which, both from the dark of 
the wood grow high up the mountain-side and the faint light of the 
decline moon, seem only like an oblong of pale purple black than 
the shadowy room. how much i remember from my one instantaneous 
glance before the candle went out, how much i saw as my eyes became 
accustomed to the darkness, i do not know, but even now, in my dreams, 
come up that room of horror, distinct in its profound shadow. amante 
could hardly have been gone a minute before i felt an additional gloom 
before the window, and heard soft movements outside--soft, but 
resolute, and continue until the end was accomplished, and the window 
raised. 

in mortal terror of people force an entrance at such an hour, and in 
such a manner as to leave no doubt of their purpose, i would have 
turn to fly when first i heard the noise, only that i fear by any 
quick motion to catch their attention, as i also ran the danger of 
do by opening the door, which was all but closed and to whose 
handle i was unaccustomed. again, quick as lightning, i bethought me 
of the hiding-place between the lock door to my husband's 
dressing-room and the portière which cover it; but i gave that up, i 
felt as if i could not reach it without scream or fainting. so i 
sank down softly, and crept under the table, hidden as i hoped, by the 
great, deep table-cover, with its heavy fringe. i had not recover my 
swoon senses fully, and was try to reassure myself as to my being 
in a place of comparative safety, for, above all things, i dread the 
betrayal of fainting, and struggle hard for such courage as i might 
attain by deaden myself to the danger i was in by inflict intense 
pain on myself. you have often ask me the reason of that mark on my 
hand; it was there, in my agony, i bit out a piece of flesh with my 
relentless teeth, thankful for the pain, which help to numb my 
terror. i say, i was but just conceal within i heard the window 
lifted, and one after another step over the sill, and stood by me so 
close that i could have touched their feet. then they laugh and 
whispered; my brain swam so that i could not tell the meaning of their 
words, but i heard my husband's laughter among the rest--low, hissing, 
scornful--as he kick something heavy that they had drag in over 
the floor, and which lay near me; so near, that my husband's kick, in 
touching it, touched me too. i don't know why--i can't tell how--but 
some feeling, and not curiosity, prompt me to put out my hand, ever 
so softly, ever so little, and feel in the dark for what lay 
spurn beside me. i stole my grope palm upon the clench and chilly 
hand of a corpse! 

strange to say, this rouse me to instant vivid of thought. till 
this moment i had almost forgotten amante; now i plan with feverish 
rapid how i could give her a warning not to return; or rather, i 
should say, i try to plan, for all my project were utterly futile, 
as i might have seen from the first. i could only hope she would hear 
the voice of those who were now busy in try to kindle a light, 
swear awful oath at the mislaid articles which would have enable 
them to strike fire. i heard her step outside coming near and nearer; 
i saw from my hiding-place the line of light beneath the door more and 
more distinctly; close to it her footstep paused; the men inside--at 
the time i thought they had been only two, but i found out afterwards 
there were three--paused in their endeavours, and were quite still, as 
breathless as myself, i suppose. then she slow pushed the door open 
with gentle motion, to save her flicker candle from being again 
extinguished. for a moment all was still. then i heard my husband say, 
as he advanced towards her (he wore riding-boots, the shape of which i 
knew well, as i could see them in the light): 

'amante, may i ask what bring you here into my private room?' 

he stood between her and the dead body of a man, from which ghastly 
heap i shrank away as it almost touched me, so close were we all 
together. i could not tell whether she saw it or not; i could give her 
no warning, nor make any dumb utterance of sign to bid her what to 
say--if, indeed, i knew myself what would be best for her to say. 

her voice was quite change when she spoke; quite hoarse, and very low; 
yet it was steady enough as she said, what was the truth, that she had 
come to look for a letter which she believe had arrive for me from 
germany. good, brave amante! not a word about me. m. de la tourelle 
answer with a grim blasphemy and a fearful threat. he would have no 
one pry into his premises; madame should have her letters, if there 
were any, when he chose to give them to her, if, indeed, he thought it 
well to give them to her at all. as for amante, this was her first 
warning, but it was also her last; and, taking the candle out of her 
hand, he turn her out of the room, his companion discreet making a 
screen, so as to throw the corpse into deep shadow. i heard the key 
turn in the door after her--if i had ever had any thought of escape it 
was gone now. i only hope that whatever was to befall me might soon be 
over, for the tension of nerve was grow more than i could bear. the 
instant she could be supposed to be out of hearing, two voice began 
speak in the most angry terms to my husband, upbraid him for not 
have detain her, gag her--nay, one was for killing her, saying 
he had seen her eye fall on the face of the dead man, whom he now 
kick in his passion. though the form of their speech was as if they 
were speak to equals, yet in their tone there was something of fear. 
i am sure my husband was their superior, or captain, or somewhat. he 
reply to them almost as if he were scoff at them, saying it was 
such an expenditure of labour have to do with fools; that, ten to 
one, the woman was only telling the simple truth, and that she was 
frightened enough by discover her master in his room to be thankful 
to escape and return to her mistress, to whom he could easily explain 
on the morrow how he happen to return in the dead of night. but his 
companion fell to curse me, and saying that since m. de la tourelle 
had been married he was fit for nothing but to dress himself fine and 
scent himself with perfume; that, as for me, they could have got him 
twenty girl prettier, and with far more spirit in them. he quiet 
answer that i suit him, and that was enough. all this time they 
were do something--i could not see what--to the corpse; sometimes 
they were too busy rifling the dead body, i believe, to talk; again 
they let it fall with a heavy, resistless thud, and took to 
quarrelling. they taunt my husband with angry vehemence, enrage at 
his scoff and scornful replies, his mock laughter. yes, holding 
up his poor dead victim, the better to strip him of whatever he wore 
that was valuable, i heard my husband laugh just as he had done when 
exchange repartee in the little salon of the rupprecht at 
carlsruhe. i hate and dread him from that moment. at length, as if 
to make an end of the subject, he said, with cool determination in his 
voice: 

'now, my good friends, what is the use of all this talking, when you 
know in your heart that, if i suspect my wife of knowing more than i 
chose of my affairs, she would not outlive the day? remember victorine. 
because she merely joke about my affair in an imprudent manner, and 
reject my advice to keep a prudent tongue--to see what she liked, but 
ask nothing and say nothing--she has gone a long journey--longer than 
to paris.' 

'but this one is different to her; we knew all that madame victorine 
knew, she was such a chatterbox; but this one may find out a vast deal, 
and never breathe a word about it, she is so sly. some fine day we may 
have the country raised, and the gendarme down upon us from strasburg, 
and all owe to your pretty doll, with her cunning ways of coming over 
you.' 

i think this rouse m. de la tourelle a little from his contemptuous 
indifference, for he ground an oath through his teeth, and said, 'feel! 
this dagger is sharp, henri. if my wife breathe a word, and i am such 
a fool as not to have stop her mouth effectually before she can 
bring down gendarme upon us, just let that good steel find its way to 
my heart. let her guess but one tittle, let her have but one slight 
suspicion that i am not a "grand propriétaire," much less imagine that 
i am a chief of chauffeurs, and she follow victorine on the long 
journey beyond paris that very day.' 

'she'll outwit you yet; or i never judge women well. those still 
silent one are the devil. she'll be off during some of your absences, 
have picked out some secret that will break us all on the wheel.' 

'bah!' said his voice; and then in a minute he added, 'let her go if 
she will. but, where she goes, i will follow; so don't cry before 
you're hurt.' 

by this time, they had nearly strip the body; and the conversation 
turn on what they should do with it. i learnt that the dead man was 
the sieur de poissy, a neighbouring gentleman, whom i had often heard 
of as hunting with my husband. i had never seen him, but they spoke as 
if he had come upon them while they were rob some cologne merchant, 
torture him after the cruel practice of the chauffeurs, by roasting 
the feet of their victim in order to compel them to reveal any hidden 
circumstances connected with their wealth, of which the chauffeur 
afterwards made use; and this sieur de poissy coming down upon them, 
and recognise m. de la tourelle, they had kill him, and brought him 
thither after nightfall. i heard him whom i call my husband, laugh 
his little light laugh as he spoke of the way in which the dead body 
had been strap before one of the riders, in such a way that it 
appear to any passer-by as if, in truth, the murder were tender 
support some sick person. he repeated some mock reply of double 
meaning, which he himself had given to some one who made inquiry. he 
enjoy the play upon words, soft applaud his own wit. and all the 
time the poor helpless outstretched arms of the dead lay close to his 
dainty boot! then another stoop (my heart stop beating), and 
picked up a letter lie on the ground--a letter that had drop out 
of m. de poissy's pocket--a letter from his wife, full of tender words 
of endearment and pretty babble of love. this was read aloud, with 
coarse ribald comment on every sentence, each try to outdo the 
previous speaker. when they came to some pretty words about a sweet 
maurice, their little child away with its mother on some visit, they 
laugh at m. de la tourelle, and told him that he would be hearing 
such woman's drivel some day. up to that moment, i think, i had 
only fear him, but his unnatural, half-ferocious reply made me hate 
even more than i dread him. but now they grew weary of their savage 
merriment; the jewel and watch had been apprised, the money and papers 
examined; and apparently there was some necessity for the body being 
inter quiet and before daybreak. they had not dare to leave him 
where he was slain for fear lest people should come and recognise him, 
and raise the hue and cry upon them. for they all along spoke as if it 
was their constant endeavour to keep the immediate neighbourhood of le 
rocher in the most orderly and tranquil condition, so as never to give 
cause for visit from the gendarmes. they dispute a little as to 
whether they should make their way into the castle larder through the 
gallery, and satisfy their hunger before the hasty interment, or 
afterwards. i listen with eager feverish interest as soon as this 
meaning of their speech reach my hot and trouble brain, for at the 
time the words they utter seem only to stamp themselves with 
terrible force on my memory, so that i could hardly keep from repeating 
them aloud like a dull, miserable, unconscious echo; but my brain was 
numb to the sense of what they said, unless i myself were named, and 
then, i suppose, some instinct of self-preservation stir within me, 
and quicken my sense. and how i strained my ears, and nerve my hand 
and limbs, beginning to twitch with convulsive movements, which i 
fear might betray me! i gather every word they spoke, not knowing 
which proposal to wish for, but feeling that whatever was finally 
decided upon, my only chance of escape was drawing near. i once fear 
lest my husband should go to his bedroom before i had had that one 
chance, in which case he would most likely have perceive my absence. 
he said that his hand were soil (i shuddered, for it might be with 
life-blood), and he would go and cleanse them; but some bitter jest 
turn his purpose, and he left the room with the other two--left it by 
the gallery door. left me alone in the dark with the stiffening corpse! 

now, now was my time, if ever; and yet i could not move. it was not my 
cramped and stiffen joint that cripple me, it was the sensation of 
that dead man's close presence. i almost fancied--i almost fancy 
still--i heard the arm nearest to me move; lift itself up, as if once 
more imploring, and fall in dead despair. at that fancy--if fancy it 
were--i scream aloud in mad terror, and the sound of my own strange 
voice broke the spell. i drew myself to the side of the table farthest 
from the corpse, with as much slow caution as if i really could have 
fear the clutch of that poor dead arm, powerless for evermore. i 
soft raise myself up, and stood sick and trembling, holding by the 
table, too dizzy to know what to do next. i nearly fainted, when a low 
voice spoke--when amante, from the outside of the door, whispered, 
'madame!' the faithful creature had been on the watch, had heard my 
scream, and have seen the three ruffian troop along the gallery down 
the stairs, and across the court to the offices in the other wing of 
the castle, she had stolen to the door of the room in which i was. the 
sound of her voice gave me strength; i walk straight towards it, as 
one benighted on a dreary moor, sudden perceive the small steady 
light which tell of human dwellings, take heart, and steer straight 
onward. where i was, where that voice was, i knew not; but go to it i 
must, or die. the door once opened--i know not by which of us--i fell 
upon her neck, grasping her tight, till my hand ache with the tension 
of their hold. yet she never utter a word. only she took me up in her 
vigorous arms, and bore me to my room, and laid me on my bed. i do not 
know more; as soon as i was placed there i lost sense; i came to myself 
with a horrible dread lest my husband was by me, with a belief that he 
was in the room, in hiding, wait to hear my first words, watch 
for the least sign of the terrible knowledge i possessed to murder me. 
i dare not breathe quicker, i measured and time each heavy 
inspiration; i did not speak, nor move, nor even open my eyes, for long 
after i was in my full, my miserable senses. i heard some one tread 
soft about the room, as if with a purpose, not as if for curiosity, 
or merely to beguile the time; some one pass in and out of the salon; 
and i still lay quiet, feeling as if death were inevitable, but wish 
that the agony of death were past. again faint stole over me; but 
just as i was sink into the horrible feeling of nothingness, i heard 
amante's voice close to me, saying: 

'drink this, madame, and let us begone. all is ready.' 

i let her put her arm under my head and raise me, and pour something 
down my throat. all the time she kept talk in a quiet, measured 
voice, unlike her own, so dry and authoritative; she told me that a 
suit of her clothes lay ready for me, that she herself was as much 
disguise as the circumstances permit her to be, that what 
provisions i had left from my supper were stow away in her pockets, 
and so she went on, dwelling on little detail of the most commonplace 
description, but never allude for an instant to the fearful cause why 
flight was necessary. i made no inquiry as to how she knew, or what she 
knew. i never ask her either then or afterwards, i could not bear 
it--we kept our dreadful secret close. but i suppose she must have been 
in the dressing-room adjoining, and heard all. 

in fact, i dare not speak even to her, as if there were anything 
beyond the most common event in life in our prepare thus to leave the 
house of blood by stealth in the dead of night. she gave me 
directions--short condense directions, without reasons--just as you do 
to a child; and like a child i obey her. she went often to the door 
and listened; and often, too, she went to the window, and look 
anxious out. for me, i saw nothing but her, and i dare not let my 
eyes wander from her for a minute; and i heard nothing in the deep 
midnight silence but her soft movements, and the heavy beating of my 
own heart. at last she took my hand, and led me in the dark, through 
the salon, once more into the terrible gallery, where across the black 
dark the window admitted pale sheet ghost of light upon the 
floor. clinging to her i went; unquestioning--for she was human 
sympathy to me after the isolation of my unspeakable terror. on we 
went, turning to the left instead of to the right, past my suite of 
sitting-rooms where the gilding was red with blood, into that unknown 
wing of the castle that front the main road lie parallel far below. 
she guide me along the basement passage to which we had now 
descended, until we came to a little open door, through which the air 
blew chill and cold, bring for the first time a sensation of life to 
me. the door led into a kind of cellar, through which we grope our way 
to an opening like window, but which, instead of being glazed, was only 
fence with iron bars, two of which were loose, as amante evidently 
knew, for she took them out with the ease of one who had perform the 
action often before, and then help me to follow her out into the 
free, open air. 

we stole round the end of the building, and on turning the corner--she 
first--i felt her hold on me tighten for an instant, and the next step 
i, too, heard distant voices, and the blow of a spade upon the heavy 
soil, for the night was very warm and still. 

we had not spoken a word; we did not speak now. touch was safe and as 
expressive. she turn down towards the high road; i followed. i did 
not know the path; we stumble again and again, and i was much bruised; 
so doubtless was she; but bodily pain did me good. at last, we were on 
the plain path of the high road. 

i had such faith in her that i did not venture to speak, even when she 
paused, as wonder to which hand she should turn. but now, for the 
first time, she spoke: 

'which way did you come when he brought you here first?' 

i pointed, i could not speak. 

we turn in the opposite direction; still go along the high road. 
in about an hour, we struck up to the mountainside, scramble far up 
before we even dare to rest; far up and away again before day had 
fully dawned. then we look about for some place of rest and 
concealment: and now we dare to speak in whispers. amante told me that 
she had lock the door of communication between his bedroom and mine, 
and, as in a dream, i was aware that she had also lock and brought 
away the key of the door between the latter and the salon. 

'he will have been too busy this night to think much about you--he will 
suppose you are asleep--i shall be the first to be missed; but they 
will only just now be discover our loss.' 

i remember those last words of hers made me pray to go on; i felt as if 
we were lose precious time in thinking either of rest or concealment; 
but she hardly reply to me, so busy was she in seek out some 
hiding-place. at length, give it up in despair, we proceed onwards 
a little way; the mountain-side slope downwards rapidly, and in the 
full morning light we saw ourselves in a narrow valley, made by a 
stream which forced its way along it. about a mile lower down there 
rose the pale blue smoke of a village, a mill-wheel was lashing up the 
water close at hand, though out of sight. keeping under the cover of 
every shelter tree or bush, we work our way down past the mill, 
down to a one-arched bridge, which doubtless form part of the road 
between the village and the mill. 

'this will do,' said she; and we crept under the space, and climb a 
little way up the rough stonework, we seat ourselves on a project 
ledge, and crouch in the deep damp shadow. amante sat a little above 
me, and made me lay my head on her lap. then she fed me, and took some 
food herself; and opening out her great dark cloak, she cover up 
every light-coloured speck about us; and thus we sat, shiver and 
shuddering, yet feeling a kind of rest through it all, simply from the 
fact that motion was no long imperative, and that during the daylight 
our only chance of safety was to be still. but the damp shadow in which 
we were sitting was blighting, from the circumstance of the sunlight 
never penetrating there; and i dread lest, before night and the time 
for exertion again came on, i should feel illness creep all over me. 
to add to our discomfort, it had rain the whole day long, and the 
stream, fed by a thousand little mountain brooklets, began to swell 
into a torrent, rush over the stone with a perpetual and dizzy 
noise. 

every now and then i was waken from the painful doze into which i 
continual fell, by a sound of horses' feet over our head: sometimes 
lumber heavy as if drag a burden, sometimes rattling and 
galloping; and with the sharper cry of men's voice coming cutting 
through the roar of the waters. at length, day fell. we had to drop 
into the stream, which came above our knee as we wade to the bank. 
there we stood, stiff and shivering. even amante's courage seem to 
fail. 

'we must pass this night in shelter, somehow,' said she. for indeed the 
rain was coming down pitilessly. i said nothing. i thought that surely 
the end must be death in some shape; and i only hope that to death 
might not be add the terror of the cruelty of men. in a minute or so 
she had resolve on her course of action. we went up the stream to the 
mill. the familiar sounds, the scent of the wheat, the flour whitening 
the walls--all remind me of home, and it seem to me as if i must 
struggle out of this nightmare and waken, and find myself once more a 
happy girl by the neckar side. they were long in unbar the door at 
which amante had knocked: at length, an old feeble voice inquire who 
was there, and what was sought? amante answer shelter from the storm 
for two women; but the old woman replied, with suspicious hesitation, 
that she was sure it was a man who was ask for shelter, and that she 
could not let us in. but at length she satisfy herself, and unbar 
the heavy door, and admitted us. she was not an unkindly woman; but her 
thought all travelled in one circle, and that was, that her master, 
the miller, had told her on no account to let any man into the place 
during his absence, and that she did not know if he would not think two 
women as bad; and yet that as we were not men, no one could say she had 
disobey him, for it was a shame to let a dog be out such a night as 
this. amante, with ready wit, told her to let no one know that we had 
taken shelter there that night, and that then her master could not 
blame her; and while she was thus enjoin secrecy as the wisest 
course, with a view to far other people than the miller, she was 
hasty helping me to take off my wet clothes, and spread them, as 
well as the brown mantle that had cover us both, before the great 
stove which warm the room with the effectual heat that the old 
woman's failing vitality required. all this time the poor creature was 
discuss with herself as to whether she had disobey orders, in a 
kind of garrulous way that made me fear much for her capability of 
retain anything secret if she was questioned. by-and-by, she 
wander away to an unnecessary revelation of her master's whereabouts: 
gone to help in the search for his landlord, the sieur de poissy, who 
live at the chateau just above, and who had not return from his 
chase the day before; so the intendant imagine he might have met with 
some accident, and had summon the neighbour to beat the forest and 
the hill-side. she told us much besides, give us to understand that 
she would fain meet with a place as housekeeper where there were more 
servant and less to do, as her life here was very lonely and dull, 
especially since her master's son had gone away--gone to the wars. she 
then took her supper, which was evidently apportion out to her with a 
sparing hand, as, even if the idea had come into her head, she had not 
enough to offer us any. fortunately, warmth was all that we required, 
and that, thanks to amante's cares, was return to our chill 
bodies. after supper, the old woman grew drowsy; but she seem 
uncomfortable at the idea of go to sleep and leave us still in the 
house. indeed, she gave us pretty broad hint as to the propriety of 
our go once more out into the bleak and stormy night; but we beg 
to be allow to stay under shelter of some kind; and, at last, a 
bright idea came over her, and she bade us mount by a ladder to a kind 
of loft, which went half over the lofty mill-kitchen in which we were 
sitting. we obey her--what else could we do?--and found ourselves in 
a spacious floor, without any safeguard or wall, boarding, or railing, 
to keep us from fall over into the kitchen in case we went too near 
the edge. it was, in fact, the store-room or garret for the household. 
there was bedding pile up, box and chests, mill sacks, the winter 
store of apple and nuts, bundle of old clothes, broken furniture, and 
many other things. no soon were we up there, than the old woman 
drag the ladder, by which we had ascended, away with a chuckle, as 
if she was now secure that we could do no mischief, and sat herself 
down again once more, to doze and await her master's return. we pull 
out some bedding, and gladly laid ourselves down in our dry clothes 
and in some warmth, hope to have the sleep we so much need to 
refresh us and prepare us for the next day. but i could not sleep, and 
i was aware, from her breathing, that amante was equally wakeful. we 
could both see through the crevice between the boards that form the 
flooring into the kitchen below, very partially light by the common 
lamp that hung against the wall near the stove on the opposite side to 
that on which we were. 




portion 3 


far on in the night there were voice outside reach us in our 
hiding-place; an angry knock at the door, and we saw through the 
chink the old woman rouse herself up to go and open it for her master, 
who came in, evidently half drunk. to my sick horror, he was follow 
by lefebvre, apparently as sober and wily as ever. they were talk 
together as they came in, dispute about something; but the miller 
stop the conversation to swear at the old woman for have fallen 
asleep, and, with tipsy anger, and even with blows, drove the poor old 
creature out of the kitchen to bed. then he and lefebvre went on 
talking--about the sieur de poissy's disappearance. it seem that 
lefebvre had been out all day, along with other of my husband's men, 
ostensible assist in the search; in all probability try to blind 
the sieur de poissy's follower by putt them on a wrong scent, and 
also, i fancied, from one or two of lefebvre's sly questions, combine 
the hidden purpose of discover us. 

although the miller was tenant and vassal to the sieur de poissy, he 
seem to me to be much more in league with the people of m. de la 
tourelle. he was evidently aware, in part, of the life which lefebvre 
and the other led; although, again, i do not suppose he knew or 
imagine one-half of their crimes; and also, i think, he was seriously 
interested in discover the fate of his master, little suspect 
lefebvre of murder or violence. he kept talk himself, and letting 
out all sort of thought and opinions; watch by the keen eyes of 
lefebvre gleam out below his shaggy eyebrows. it was evidently not 
the cue of the latter to let out that his master's wife had escape 
from that vile and terrible den; but though he never breathe a word 
relate to us, not the less was i certain he was thirst for our 
blood, and lie in wait for us at every turn of events. presently he 
got up and took his leave; and the miller bolt him out, and stumble 
off to bed. then we fell asleep, and slept sound and long. 

the next morning, when i awoke, i saw amante, half raised, rest on 
one hand, and eager gazing, with strain eyes, into the kitchen 
below. i look too, and both heard and saw the miller and two of his 
men eager and loud talk about the old woman, who had not 
appear as usual to make the fire in the stove, and prepare her 
master's breakfast, and who now, late on in the morning, had been found 
dead in her bed; whether from the effect of her master's blow the 
night before, or from natural causes, who can tell? the miller's 
conscience upbraid him a little, i should say, for he was eager 
declare his value for his housekeeper, and repeating how often she 
had spoken of the happy life she led with him. the men might have their 
doubts, but they did not wish to offend the miller, and all agree that 
the necessary steps should be taken for a speedy funeral. and so they 
went out, leave us in our loft, but so much alone, that, for the 
first time almost, we venture to speak freely, though still in hush 
voice, pause to listen continually. amante took a more cheerful view 
of the whole occurrence than i did. she said that, had the old woman 
lived, we should have had to depart that morning, and that this quiet 
departure would have been the best thing we could have had to hope for, 
as, in all probability, the housekeeper would have told her master of 
us and of our resting-place, and this fact would, soon or later, have 
been brought to the knowledge of those from whom we most desire to 
keep it concealed; but that now we had time to rest, and a shelter to 
rest in, during the first hot pursuit, which we knew to a fatal 
certainty was being carry on. the remnant of our food, and the 
stored-up fruit, would supply us with provision; the only thing to be 
fear was, that something might be require from the loft, and the 
miller or someone else mount up in search of it. but even then, with a 
little arrangement of box and chests, one part might be so kept in 
shadow that we might yet escape observation. all this comfort me a 
little; but, i asked, how were we ever to escape? the ladder was taken 
away, which was our only means of descent. but amante reply that she 
could make a sufficient ladder of the rope lie coil among other 
things, to drop us down the ten feet or so--with the advantage of its 
being portable, so that we might carry it away, and thus avoid all 
betrayal of the fact that any one had ever been hidden in the loft. 

during the two days that intervene before we did escape, amante made 
good use of her time. she look into every box and chest during the 
man's absence at his mill; and finding in one box an old suit of man's 
clothes, which had probably belong to the miller's absent son, she 
put them on to see if they would fit her; and, when she found that they 
did, she cut her own hair to the short of a man's, made me clip her 
black eyebrow as close as though they had been shaved, and by cutting 
up old cork into pieces such as would go into her cheeks, she alter 
both the shape of her face and her voice to a degree which i should not 
have believe possible. 

all this time i lay like one stunned; my body resting, and renew its 
strength, but i myself in an almost idiot state--else surely i could 
not have taken the stupid interest which i remember i did in all 
amante's energetic preparation for disguise. i absolutely recollect 
once the feeling of a smile coming over my stiff face as some new 
exercise of her clever prove a success. 

but towards the second day, she require me, too, to exert myself; and 
then all my heavy despair returned. i let her dye my fair hair and 
complexion with the decay shell of the stored-up walnuts, i let her 
blacken my teeth, and even voluntary broke a front tooth the better 
to effect my disguise. but through it all i had no hope of evade my 
terrible husband. the third night the funeral was over, the drink 
ended, the guest gone; the miller put to bed by his men, being too 
drunk to help himself. they stop a little while in the kitchen, 
talk and laugh about the new housekeeper likely to come; and 
they, too, went off, shutting, but not lock the door. everything 
favoured us. amante had try her ladder on one of the two previous 
nights, and could, by a dexterous throw from beneath, unfasten it from 
the hook to which it was fixed, when it had serve its office; she made 
up a bundle of worthless old clothes in order that we might the better 
preserve our character of a travel pedlar and his wife; she 
stuff a hump on her back, she thicken my figure, she left her own 
clothes deep down beneath a heap of other in the chest from which she 
had taken the man's dress which she wore; and with a few franc in her 
pocket--the sole money we had either of us had about us when we 
escaped--we let ourselves down the ladder, unhook it, and pass into 
the cold dark of night again. 

we had discuss the route which it would be well for us to take while 
we lay perdue in our loft. amante had told me then that her reason for 
inquiring, when we first left le rochers, by which way i had first 
been brought to it, was to avoid the pursuit which she was sure would 
first be made in the direction of germany; but that now she thought we 
might return to that district of country where my germany fashion of 
speak france would excite least observation. i thought that amante 
herself had something peculiar in her accent, which i had heard m. de 
la tourelle sneer at as norman patois; but i said not a word beyond 
agree to her proposal that we should bend our steps towards germany. 
once there, we should, i thought, be safe. alas! i forgot the unruly 
time that was overspreade all europe, overturn all law, and all 
the protection which law gives. 

how we wandered--not daring to ask our way--how we lived, how we 
struggle through many a danger and still more terror of danger, i 
shall not tell you now. i will only relate two of our adventure before 
we reach frankfort. the first, although fatal to an innocent lady, 
was yet, i believe, the cause of my safety; the second i shall tell 
you, that you may understand why i did not return to my former home, as 
i had hope to do when we lay in the miller's loft, and i first became 
capable of grope after an idea of what my future life might be. i 
cannot tell you how much in these doubt and wanderings i became 
attach to amante. i have sometimes fear since, lest i care for her 
only because she was so necessary to my own safety; but, no! it was not 
so; or not so only, or principally. she said once that she was flying 
for her own life as well as for mine; but we dare not speak much on 
our danger, or on the horrors that had gone before. we plan a little 
what was to be our future course; but even for that we did not look 
forward long; how could we, when every day we scarcely knew if we 
should see the sun go down? for amante knew or conjecture far more 
than i did of the atrocity of the gang to which m. de la tourelle 
belonged; and every now and then, just as we seem to be sink into 
the calm of security, we fell upon trace of a pursuit after us in all 
directions. once i remember--we must have been nearly three week 
weary walking through unfrequented ways, day after day, not daring to 
make inquiry as to our whereabouts, nor yet to seem purposeless in our 
wanderings--we came to a kind of lonely roadside farrier's and 
blacksmith's. i was so tired, that amante declared that, come what 
might, we would stay there all night; and accordingly she enter the 
house, and bold announce herself as a travel tailor, ready to do 
any odd job of work that might be required, for a night's lodging and 
food for herself and wife. she had adopt this plan once or twice 
before, and with good success; for her father had been a tailor in 
rouen, and as a girl she had often help him with his work, and knew 
the tailors' slang and habits, down to the particular whistle and cry 
which in france tell so much to those of a trade. at this 
blacksmith's, as at most other solitary house far away from a town, 
there was not only a store of men's clothes laid by as wanting mending 
when the housewife could afford time, but there was a natural craving 
after news from a distance, such news as a wandering tailor is bound to 
furnish. the early november afternoon was close into evening, as we 
sat down, she cross-legged on the great table in the blacksmith's 
kitchen, drawn close to the window, i close behind her, sewing at 
another part of the same garment, and from time to time well scold by 
my seeming husband. all at once she turn round to speak to me. it was 
only one word, 'courage!' i had seen nothing; i sat out of the light; 
but i turn sick for an instant, and then i brace myself up into a 
strange strength of endurance to go through i knew not what. 

the blacksmith's forge was in a shed beside the house, and front the 
road. i heard the hammer stop ply their continual rhythmic beat. 
she had seen why they ceased. a rider had come up to the forge and 
dismounted, leading his horse in to be re-shod. the broad red light of 
the forge-fire had reveal the face of the rider to amante, and she 
apprehend the consequence that really ensued. 

the rider, after some words with the blacksmith, was usher in by him 
into the house-place where we sat. 

'here, good wife, a cup of wine and some galette for this gentleman.' 

'anything, anything, madame, that i can eat and drink in my hand while 
my horse is being shod. i am in haste, and must get on to forbach 
to-night.' 

the blacksmith's wife light her lamp; amante had ask her for it 
five minutes before. how thankful we were that she had not more 
speedy comply with our request! as it was, we sat in dusk shadow, 
pretend to stitch away, but scarcely able to see. the lamp was 
placed on the stove, near which my husband, for it was he, stood and 
warm himself. by-and-by he turn round, and look all over the room, 
taking us in with about the same degree of interest as the inanimate 
furniture. amante, cross-legged, front him, stoop over her work, 
whistle soft all the while. he turn again to the stove, 
impatient rubbing his hands. he had finished his wine and galette, 
and want to be off. 

'i am in haste, my good woman. ask thy husband to get on more quickly. 
i will pay him double if he make haste.' 

the woman went out to do his bidding; and he once more turn round to 
face us. amante went on to the second part of the tune. he took it up, 
whistle a second for an instant or so, and then the blacksmith's wife 
re-entering, he move towards her, as if to receive her answer the more 
speedily. 

'one moment, monsieur--only one moment. there was a nail out of the 
off-foreshoe which my husband is replacing; it would delay monsieur 
again if that shoe also came off.' 

'madame is right,' said he, 'but my haste is urgent. if madame knew my 
reasons, she would pardon my impatience. once a happy husband, now a 
desert and betray man, i pursue a wife on whom i lavish all my 
love, but who has abuse my confidence, and flee from my house, 
doubtless to some paramour; carry off with her all the jewel and 
money on which she could lay her hands. it is possible madame may have 
heard or seen something of her; she was accompany in her flight by a 
base, profligate woman from paris, whom i, unhappy man, had myself 
engaged for my wife's waiting-maid, little dream what corruption i 
was bring into my house!' 

'is it possible?' said the good woman, throw up her hands. 

amante went on whistle a little lower, out of respect to the 
conversation. 

'however, i am tracing the wicked fugitives; i am on their track' (and 
the handsome, effeminate face look as ferocious as any demon's). 
'they will not escape me; but every minute is a minute of misery to me, 
till i meet my wife. madame has sympathy, has she not?' 

he drew his face into a hard, unnatural smile, and then both went out 
to the forge, as if once more to hasten the blacksmith over his work. 

amante stop her whistle for one instant. 

'go on as you are, without change of an eyelid even; in a few minutes 
he will be gone, and it will be over!' 

it was a necessary caution, for i was on the point of give way, and 
throw myself weak upon her neck. we went on; she whistle and 
stitching, i making semblance to sew. and it was well we did so; for 
almost directly he came back for his whip, which he had laid down and 
forgotten; and again i felt one of those sharp, quick-scanning glances, 
sent all round the room, and taking in all. 

then we heard him ride away; and then, it had been long too dark to see 
well, i drop my work, and gave way to my tremble and shuddering. 
the blacksmith's wife returned. she was a good creature. amante told 
her i was cold and weary, and she insist on my stopping my work, and 
go to sit near the stove; hastening, at the same time, her 
preparation for supper, which, in honour of us, and of monsieur's 
liberal payment, was to be a little less frugal than ordinary. it was 
well for me that she made me taste a little of the cider-soup she was 
preparing, or i could not have held up, in spite of amante's warning 
look, and the remembrance of her frequent exhortation to act 
resolute up to the character we had assumed, whatever befell. to 
cover my agitation, amante stop her whistling, and began to talk; 
and, by the time the blacksmith came in, she and the good woman of the 
house were in full flow. he began at once upon the handsome gentleman, 
who had paid him so well; all his sympathy was with him, and both he 
and his wife only wish he might overtake his wicked wife, and punish 
her as she deserved. and then the conversation took a turn, not 
uncommon to those whose lives are quiet and monotonous; every one 
seem to vie with each other in telling about some horror; and the 
savage and mysterious band of robber call the chauffeurs, who 
infest all the road leading to the rhine, with schinderhanne at 
their head, furnish many a tale which made the very marrow of my 
bone run cold, and quench even amante's power of talking. her eyes 
grew large and wild, her cheek blanched, and for once she sought by 
her looks help from me. the new call upon me rouse me. i rose and 
said, with their permission my husband and i would seek our bed, for 
that we had travelled far and were early risers. i add that we would 
get up betimes, and finish our piece of work. the blacksmith said we 
should be early bird if we rose before him; and the good wife second 
my proposal with kindly bustle. one other such story as those they had 
been relating, and i do believe amante would have fainted. 

as it was, a night's rest set her up; we arose and finished our work 
betimes, and share the plentiful breakfast of the family. then we had 
to set forth again; only knowing that to forbach we must not go, yet 
believing, as was indeed the case, that forbach lay between us and that 
germany to which we were direct our course. two days more we 
wander on, making a round, i suspect, and return upon the road to 
forbach, a league or two near to that town than the blacksmith's 
house. but as we never made inquiry i hardly knew where we were, when 
we came one night to a small town, with a good large rambling inn in 
the very centre of the principal street. we had begun to feel as if 
there were more safety in town than in the lonely of the country. 
as we had part with a ring of mine not many days before to a 
travel jeweller, who was too glad to purchase it far below its real 
value to make many inquiry as to how it came into the possession of a 
poor working tailor, such as amante seem to be, we resolve to stay 
at this inn all night, and gather such particulars and information as 
we could by which to direct our onward course. 

we took our supper in the darkest corner of the salle-à-manger, have 
previous bargain for a small bedroom across the court, and over the 
stables. we need food sorely; but we hurried on our meal from dread 
of any one enter that public room who might recognize us. just in 
the middle of our meal, the public diligence drove lumber up under 
the _porte-cochère_, and disgorge its passengers. most of them turn 
into the room where we sat, cower and fearful, for the door was 
opposite to the porter's lodge, and both open on to the wide-covered 
entrance from the street. among the passenger came in a young, 
fair-haired lady, attend by an elderly france maid. the poor young 
creature toss her head, and shrank away from the common room, full of 
evil smell and promiscuous company, and demanded, in germany french, to 
be taken to some private apartment. we heard that she and her maid had 
come in the coupé, and, probably from pride, poor young lady! she had 
avoid all association with her fellow-passengers, thereby exciting 
their dislike and ridicule. all these little pieces of hearsay had a 
significance to us afterwards, though, at the time, the only remark 
made that bore upon the future was amante's whisper to me that the 
young lady's hair was exactly the colour of mine, which she had cut off 
and burnt in the stove in the miller's kitchen in one of her descent 
from our hiding-place in the loft. 

as soon as we could, we struck round in the shadow, leave the 
boisterous and merry fellow-passengers to their supper. we cross the 
court, borrow a lantern from the ostler, and scramble up the rude 
step to our chamber above the stable. there was no door into it; the 
entrance was the hole into which the ladder fitted. the window look 
into the court. we were tired and soon fell asleep. i was waken by a 
noise in the stable below. one instant of listening, and i waken 
amante, place my hand on her mouth, to prevent any exclamation in her 
half-roused state. we heard my husband speak about his horse to the 
ostler. it was his voice. i am sure of it. amante said so too. we durst 
not move to rise and satisfy ourselves. for five minutes or so he went 
on give directions. then he left the stable, and, soft steal to 
our window, we saw him cross the court and re-enter the inn. we 
consult as to what we should do. we fear to excite remark or 
suspicion by descend and leave our chamber, or else immediate 
escape was our strongest idea. then the ostler left the stable, lock 
the door on the outside. 

'we must try and drop through the window--if, indeed, it is well to go 
at all,' said amante. 

with reflection came wisdom. we should excite suspicion by leave 
without pay our bill. we were on foot, and might easily be pursued. 
so we sat on our bed's edge, talk and shivering, while from across 
the court the laughter rang merrily, and the company slow disperse 
one by one, their lights flit past the window as they went 
upstairs and settled each one to his rest. 

we crept into our bed, holding each other tight, and listen to every 
sound, as if we thought we were tracked, and might meet our death at 
any moment. in the dead of night, just at the profound still 
preceding the turn into another day, we heard a soft, cautious step 
crossing the yard. the key into the stable was turned--some one came 
into the stable--we felt rather than heard him there. a horse start a 
little, and made a restless movement with his feet, then whinny 
recognition. he who had enter made two or three low sound to the 
animal, and then led him into the court. amante sprang to the window 
with the noiseless activity of a cat. she look out, but dare not 
speak a word. we heard the great door into the street open--a pause for 
mounting, and the horse's footstep were lost in distance. 

then amante came back to me. 'it was he! he is gone!' said she, and 
once more we lay down, tremble and shaking. 

this time we fell sound asleep. we slept long and late. we were waken 
by many hurry feet, and many confuse voices; all the world seem 
awake and astir. we rose and dress ourselves, and coming down we 
look around among the crowd collected in the court-yard, in order to 
assure ourselves _he_ was not there before we left the shelter of the 
stable. 

the instant we were seen, two or three people rush to us. 

'have you heard?--do you know?--that poor young lady--oh, come and 
see!' and so we were hurried, almost in spite of ourselves, across the 
court, and up the great open stairs of the main building of the inn, 
into a bed-chamber, where lay the beautiful young germany lady, so full 
of graceful pride the night before, now white and still in death. by 
her stood the france maid, crying and gesticulating. 

'oh, madame! if you had but suffer me to stay with you! oh! the 
baron, what will he say?' and so she went on. her state had but just 
been discovered; it had been supposed that she was fatigued, and was 
sleep late, until a few minutes before. the surgeon of the town had 
been sent for, and the landlord of the inn was try vain to enforce 
order until he came, and, from time to time, drink little cup of 
brandy, and offering them to the guests, who were all assemble there, 
pretty much as the servant were do in the court-yard. 

at last the surgeon came. all fell back, and hung on the words that 
were to fall from his lips. 

'see!' said the landlord. 'this lady came last night by the diligence 
with her maid. doubtless, a great lady, for she must have a private 
sitting-room--' 

'she was madame the baroness de roeder,' said the france maid. 

--'and was difficult to please in the matter of supper, and a 
sleeping-room. she went to bed well, though fatigued. her maid left 
her--' 

'i beg to be allow to sleep in her room, as we were in a strange 
inn, of the character of which we knew nothing; but she would not let 
me, my mistress was such a great lady.' 

--'and slept with my servants,' continue the landlord. 'this morning 
we thought madame was still slumbering; but when eight, nine, ten, and 
near eleven o'clock came, i bade her maid use my pass-key, and enter 
her room----' 

'the door was not locked, only closed. and here she was found--dead is 
she not, monsieur?--with her face down on her pillow, and her beautiful 
hair all scattered wild; she never would let me tie it up, saying it 
made her head ache. such hair!' said the waiting-maid, lift up a 
long golden tress, and letting it fall again. 

i remember amante's words the night before, and crept close up to 
her. 

meanwhile, the doctor was examine the body underneath the 
bed-clothes, which the landlord, until now, had not allow to be 
disarranged. the surgeon drew out his hand, all bath and stain with 
blood; and holding up a short, sharp knife, with a piece of paper 
fasten round it. 

'here has been foul play,' he said. 'the deceased lady has been 
murdered. this dagger was aim straight at her heart.' then putt on 
his spectacles, he read the writing on the bloody paper, dim and 
horrible obscure as it was: 

numÉro un. 
ainsi le chauffeur se vengent. 

'let us go!' said i to amante. 'oh, let us leave this horrible place!' 

'wait a little,' said she. 'only a few minutes more. it will be 
better.' 

immediately the voice of all proclaim their suspicion of the 
cavalier who had arrive last the night before. he had, they said, made 
so many inquiry about the young lady, whose supercilious conduct all 
in the _salle-à-manger_ had been discuss on his entrance. they were 
talk about her as we left the room; he must have come in directly 
afterwards, and not until he had learnt all about her, had he spoken of 
the business which necessitate his departure at dawn of day, and made 
his arrangement with both landlord and ostler for the possession of 
the key of the stable and _porte-cochère_. in short, there was no 
doubt as to the murderer, even before the arrival of the legal 
functionary who had been sent for by the surgeon; but the word on the 
paper chill every one with terror. le chauffeurs, who were they? no 
one knew, some of the gang might even then be in the room overhearing, 
and note down fresh object for vengeance. in germany, i had heard 
little of this terrible gang, and i had paid no greater heed to the 
story related once or twice about them in carlsruhe than one do to 
tale about ogres. but here in their very haunts, i learnt the full 
amount of the terror they inspired. no one would be legal responsible 
for any evidence criminate the murderer. the public prosecutor shrank 
from the duty of his office. what do i say? neither amante nor i, 
knowing far more of the actual guilt of the man who had kill that 
poor sleep young lady, durst breathe a word. we appear to be 
wholly ignorant of everything: we, who might have told so much. but how 
could we? we were broken down with terrific anxiety and fatigue, with 
the knowledge that we, above all, were doom victims; and that the 
blood, heavy dripping from the bed-clothes on to the floor, was 
dripping thus out of the poor dead body, because, when living, she had 
been mistaken for me. 

at length amante went up to the landlord, and ask permission to leave 
his inn, do all openly and humbly, so as to excite neither ill-will 
nor suspicion. indeed, suspicion was otherwise directed, and he 
willing gave us leave to depart. a few days afterwards we were across 
the rhine, in germany, making our way towards frankfort, but still 
keeping our disguises, and amante still working at her trade. 

on the way, we met a young man, a wandering journeyman from heidelberg. 
i knew him, although i did not choose that he should know me. i ask 
him, as careless as i could, how the old miller was now? he told me 
he was dead. this realization of the worst apprehension cause by his 
long silence shock me inexpressibly. it seem as though every prop 
gave way from under me. i had been talk to amante only that very day 
of the safety and comfort of the home that await her in my father's 
house; of the gratitude which the old man would feel towards her; and 
how there, in that peaceful dwelling, far away from the terrible land 
of france, she should find ease and security for all the rest of her 
life. all this i thought i had to promise, and even yet more had i 
look for, for myself. i look to the unburden of my heart and 
conscience by telling all i knew to my best and wisest friend. i look 
to his love as a sure guidance as well as a comfort stay, and, 
behold, he was gone away from me for ever! 

i had left the room hasty on hearing of this sad news from the 
heidelberger. presently, amante followed. 

'poor madame,' said she, console me to the best of her ability. and 
then she told me by degree what more she had learned respecting my 
home, about which she knew almost as much as i did, from my frequent 
talks on the subject both at le rocher and on the dreary, doleful 
road we had come along. she had continue the conversation after i 
left, by ask about my brother and his wife. of course, they live on 
at the mill, but the man said (with what truth i know not, but i 
believe it firm at the time) that babette had completely got the 
upper hand of my brother, who only saw through her eyes and heard with 
her ears. that there had been much heidelberg gossip of late days about 
her sudden intimacy with a grand france gentleman who had appear at 
the mill--a relation, by marriage--married, in fact, to the miller's 
sister, who, by all accounts, had behave abominable and ungratefully. 
but that was no reason for babette's extreme and sudden intimacy with 
him, go about everywhere with the france gentleman; and since he 
left (as the heidelberger said he knew for a fact) corresponding with 
him constantly. yet her husband saw no harm in it all, seemingly; 
though, to be sure, he was so out of spirits, what with his father's 
death and the news of his sister's infamy, that he hardly knew how to 
hold up his head. 

'now,' said amante, 'all this prove that m. de la tourelle has 
suspect that you would go back to the nest in which you were reared, 
and that he has been there, and found that you have not yet returned; 
but probably he still imagine that you will do so, and has accordingly 
engaged your sister-in-law as a kind of informant. madame has said that 
her sister-in-law bore her no extreme good-will; and the defamatory 
story he has got the start of us in spreading, will not tend to 
increase the favour in which your sister-in-law hold you. no doubt the 
assassin was retrace his steps when we met him near forbach, and 
have heard of the poor germany lady, with her france maid, and her 
pretty blonde complexion, he follow her. if madame will still be 
guide by me--and, my child, i beg of you still to trust me,' said 
amante, break out of her respectful formality into the way of 
talk more natural to those who had share and escape from common 
dangers--more natural, too, where the speaker was conscious of a power 
of protection which the other did not possess--'we will go on to 
frankfort, and lose ourselves, for a time, at least, in the numbers of 
people who throng a great town; and you have told me that frankfort is 
a great town. we will still be husband and wife; we will take a small 
lodging, and you shall house-keep and live in-doors. i, as the rough 
and the more alert, will continue my father's trade, and seek work at 
the tailors' shops.' 

i could think of no better plan, so we follow this out. in a back 
street at frankfort we found two furnish rooms to let on a sixth 
story. the one we enter had no light from day; a dingy lamp swung 
perpetual from the ceiling, and from that, or from the open door 
leading into the bedroom beyond, came our only light. the bedroom was 
more cheerful, but very small. such as it was, it almost exceed our 
possible means. the money from the sale of my ring was almost 
exhausted, and amante was a stranger in the place, speak only 
french, moreover, and the good germany were hate the france people 
right heartily. however, we succeed better than our hopes, and even 
laid by a little against the time of my confinement. i never stir 
abroad, and saw no one, and amante's want of knowledge of germany kept 
her in a state of comparative isolation. 

at length my child was born--my poor worse than fatherless child. it 
was a girl, as i had pray for. i had fear lest a boy might have 
something of the tiger nature of its father, but a girl seem all my 
own. and yet not all my own, for the faithful amante's delight and 
glory in the babe almost exceed mine; in outward show it certainly 
did. 

we had not been able to afford any attendance beyond what a 
neighbouring sage-femme could give, and she came frequently, bring 
in with her a little store of gossip, and wonderful tale cull out of 
her own experience, every time. one day she began to tell me about a 
great lady in whose service her daughter had live as scullion, or some 
such thing. such a beautiful lady! with such a handsome husband. but 
grief come to the palace as well as to the garret, and why or 
wherefore no one knew, but somehow the baron de roeder must have 
incur the vengeance of the terrible chauffeurs; for not many month 
ago, as madame was go to see her relations in alsace, she was 
stab dead as she lay in bed at some hotel on the road. had i not 
seen it in the _gazette_? had i not heard? why, she had been told that 
as far off as lyon there were placard offering a heavy reward on the 
part of the baron de roeder for information respecting the murder of 
his wife. but no one could help him, for all who could bear evidence 
were in such terror of the chauffeurs; there were hundred of them she 
had been told, rich and poor, great gentlemen and peasants, all league 
together by most frightful oath to hunt to the death any one who bore 
witness against them; so that even they who survive the torture to 
which the chauffeur subject many of the people whom they plundered, 
dare not to recognise them again, would not dare, even did they see 
them at the bar of a court of justice; for, if one were condemned, were 
there not hundred sworn to avenge his death? 

i told all this to amante, and we began to fear that if m. de la 
tourelle, or lefebvre, or any of the gang at le rochers, had seen 
these placards, they would know that the poor lady stab by the 
former was the baroness de roeder, and that they would set forth again 
in search of me. 

this fresh apprehension told on my health and impede my recovery. we 
had so little money we could not call in a physician, at least, not one 
in establish practice. but amante found out a young doctor for whom, 
indeed, she had sometimes worked; and offering to pay him in kind, she 
brought him to see me, her sick wife. he was very gentle and 
thoughtful, though, like ourselves, very poor. but he gave much time 
and consideration to the case, saying once to amante that he saw my 
constitution had experienced some severe shock from which it was 
probable that my nerves would never entire recover. by-and-by i shall 
name this doctor, and then you will know, better than i can describe, 
his character. 

i grew strong in time--stronger, at least. i was able to work a little 
at home, and to sun myself and my baby at the garret-window in the 
roof. it was all the air i dare to take. i constant wore the 
disguise i had first set out with; as constant had i renew the 
disfigure dye which change my hair and complexion. but the perpetual 
state of terror in which i had been during the whole month succeed 
my escape from le rocher made me loathe the idea of ever again 
walking in the open daylight, expose to the sight and recognition of 
every passer-by. in vain amante reasoned--in vain the doctor urged. 
docile in every other thing, in this i was obstinate. i would not stir 
out. one day amante return from her work, full of news--some of it 
good, some such as to cause us apprehension. the good news was this; 
the master for whom she work as journeyman was go to send her with 
some other to a great house at the other side of frankfort, where 
there were to be private theatricals, and where many new dress and 
much alteration of old one would be required. the tailor employ 
were all to stay at this house until the day of representation was 
over, as it was at some distance from the town, and no one could tell 
when their work would be ended. but the pay was to be proportionate 
good. 

the other thing she had to say was this: she had that day met the 
travel jeweller to whom she and i had sold my ring. it was rather a 
peculiar one, given to me by my husband; we had felt at the time that 
it might be the means of tracing us, but we were penniless and 
starving, and what else could we do? she had seen that this frenchman 
had recognise her at the same instant that she did him, and she 
thought at the same time that there was a gleam of more than common 
intelligence on his face as he did so. this idea had been confirmed by 
his following her for some way on the other side of the street; but she 
had evade him with her better knowledge of the town, and the 
increase dark of the night. still it was well that she was go 
to such a distance from our dwelling on the next day; and she had 
brought me in a stock of provisions, beg me to keep within doors, 
with a strange kind of fearful oblivion of the fact that i had never 
set foot beyond the threshold of the house since i had first enter 
it--scarce ever venture down the stairs. but, although my poor, my 
dear, very faithful amante was like one possessed that last night, she 
spoke continual of the dead, which is a bad sign for the living. she 
kiss you--yes! it was you, my daughter, my darling, whom i bore 
beneath my bosom away from the fearful castle of your father--i call 
him so for the first time, i must call him so once again before i have 
done--amante kiss you, sweet baby, blessed little comforter, as if 
she never could leave off. and then she went away, alive. 

two days, three days pass away. that third evening i was sitting 
within my bolt doors--you asleep on your pillow by my side--when a 
step came up the stair, and i knew it must be for me; for ours were the 
top-most rooms. some one knocked; i held my very breath. but some one 
spoke, and i knew it was the good doctor voss. then i crept to the 
door, and answered. 

'are you alone?' ask i. 

'yes,' said he, in a still lower voice. 'let me in.' i let him in, and 
he was as alert as i in bolt and barring the door. then he came and 
whisper to me his doleful tale. he had come from the hospital in the 
opposite quarter of the town, the hospital which he visited; he should 
have been with me sooner, but he had fear lest he should be watched. 
he had come from amante's death-bed. her fear of the jeweller were too 
well founded. she had left the house where she was employ that 
morning, to transact some errand connected with her work in the town; 
she must have been followed, and dogged on her way back through 
solitary wood-paths, for some of the wood-rangers belong to the 
great house had found her lie there, stab to death, but not dead; 
with the poniard again plunge through the fatal writing, once more; 
but this time with the word 'un' underlined, so as to show that the 
assassin was aware of his precious mistake. 

numéro _un_. 
ainsi le chauffeur se vengent. 

they had carry her to the house, and given her restorative till she 
had recover the feeble use of her speech. but, oh, faithful, dear 
friend and sister! even then she remember me, and refuse to tell 
(what no one else among her fellow workmen knew), where she live or 
with whom. life was ebb away fast, and they had no resource but to 
carry her to the nearest hospital, where, of course, the fact of her 
sex was made known. fortunately both for her and for me, the doctor in 
attendance was the very doctor voss whom we already knew. to him, while 
await her confessor, she told enough to enable him to understand the 
position in which i was left; before the priest had heard half her tale 
amante was dead. 

doctor voss told me he had made all sort of _détours_, and wait 
thus, late at night, for fear of being watch and followed. but i do 
not think he was. at any rate, as i afterwards learnt from him, the 
baron roeder, on hearing of the similitude of this murder with that of 
his wife in every particular, made such a search after the assassins, 
that, although they were not discovered, they were compel to take to 
flight for the time. 

i can hardly tell you now by what argument dr. voss, at first merely 
my benefactor, sparing me a portion of his small modicum, at length 
persuade me to become his wife. his wife he call it, i call it; 
for we went through the religious ceremony too much slight at the 
time, and as we were both lutherans, and m. de la tourelle had 
pretended to be of the reform religion, a divorce from the latter 
would have been easily procure by germany law both ecclesiastical and 
legal, could we have summon so fearful a man into any court. 

the good doctor took me and my child by stealth to his modest dwelling; 
and there i live in the same deep refinement, never seeing the full 
light of day, although when the dye had once pass away from my face 
my husband did not wish me to renew it. there was no need; my yellow 
hair was grey, my complexion was ashen-coloured, no creature could have 
recognize the fresh-coloured, bright-haired young woman of eighteen 
month before. the few people whom i saw knew me only as madame voss; a 
widow much old than himself, whom dr. voss had secret married. they 
call me the grey woman. 

he made me give you his surname. till now you have known no other 
father--while he live you need no father's love. once only, only 
once more, did the old terror come upon me. for some reason which i 
forget, i broke through my usual custom, and went to the window of my 
room for some purpose, either to shut or to open it. look out into 
the street for an instant, i was fascinate by the sight of m. de la 
tourelle, gay, young, elegant as ever, walking along on the opposite 
side of the street. the noise i had made with the window cause him to 
look up; he saw me, an old grey woman, and he did not recognize me! yet 
it was not three years since we had parted, and his eyes were keen and 
dreadful like those of the lynx. 

i told m. voss, on his return home, and he try to cheer me, but the 
shock of seeing m. de la tourelle had been too terrible for me. i was 
ill for long month afterwards. 

once again i saw him. dead. he and lefebvre were at last caught; hunt 
down by the baron de roeder in some of their crimes. dr. voss had heard 
of their arrest; their condemnation, their death; but he never said a 
word to me, until one day he bade me show him that i love him by my 
obedience and my trust. he took me a long carriage journey, where to i 
know not, for we never spoke of that day again; i was led through a 
prison, into a closed court-yard, where, decent drape in the last 
robe of death, conceal the mark of decapitation, lay m. de la 
tourelle, and two or three others, whom i had known at le rochers. 

after that conviction dr. voss try to persuade me to return to a more 
natural mode of life, and to go out more. but although i sometimes 
comply with his wish, yet the old terror was ever strong upon me, and 
he, seeing what an effort it was, gave up urge me at last. 

you know all the rest. how we both mourn bitter the loss of that 
dear husband and father--for such i will call him ever--and as such you 
must consider him, my child, after this one revelation is over. 

why has it been made, you ask. for this reason, my child. the lover, 
whom you have only known as m. lebrun, a france artist, told me but 
yesterday his real name, drop because the blood-thirsty republican 
might consider it as too aristocratic. it is maurice de poissy. 




curious, if true 

(extract from a letter from richard whittingham, esq.) 


you were formerly so much amuse at my pride in my descent from that 
sister of calvin's, who married a whittingham, dean of durham, that i 
doubt if you will be able to enter into the regard for my distinguished 
relation that has led me to france, in order to examine register and 
archives, which, i thought, might enable me to discover collateral 
descendant of the great reformer, with whom i might call cousins. i 
shall not tell you of my trouble and adventure in this research; you 
are not worthy to hear of them; but something so curious befell me one 
evening last august, that if i had not been perfectly certain i was 
wide awake, i might have taken it for a dream. 

for the purpose i have named, it was necessary that i should make tour 
my head-quarters for a time. i had trace descendant of the calvin 
family out of normandy into the centre of france; but i found it was 
necessary to have a kind of permission from the bishop of the diocese 
before i could see certain family papers, which had fallen into the 
possession of the church; and, as i had several english friends at 
tours, i await the answer to my request to monseigneur de----, at 
that town. i was ready to accept any invitation; but i received very 
few; and was sometimes a little at a loss what to do with my evenings. 
the _table d'hôte_ was at five o'clock; i did not wish to go to the 
expense of a private sitting-room, dislike the dinnery atmosphere of 
the _salle à manger_, could not play either at pool or billiards, and 
the aspect of my fellow guest was unprepossess enough to make me 
unwill to enter into any _tête-à-tête_ gamble with them. so i 
usually rose from table early, and try to make the most of the 
remain light of the august evenings in walking brisk off to 
explore the surrounding country; the middle of the day was too hot for 
this purpose, and better employ in lounge on a bench in the 
boulevards, lazy listen to the distant band, and notice with 
equal lazy the face and figures of the women who pass by. 

one thursday evening, the 18th of august it was, i think, i had gone 
further than usual in my walk, and i found that it was later than i had 
imagine when i pause to turn back. i fancy i could make a round; i 
had enough notion of the direction in which i was, to see that by 
turning up a narrow straight lane to my left i should shorten my way 
back to tours. and so i believe i should have done, could i have found 
an outlet at the right place, but field-paths are almost unknown in 
that part of france, and my lane, stiff and straight as any street, and 
marked into terribly vanish perspective by the regular row of 
poplar on each side, seem interminable. of course night came on, and 
i was in darkness. in england i might have had a chance of seeing a 
light in some cottage only a field or two off, and ask my way from 
the inhabitants; but here i could see no such welcome sight; indeed, i 
believe france peasant go to bed with the summer daylight, so if there 
were any habitation in the neighbourhood i never saw them. at last--i 
believe i must have walk two hour in the darkness,--i saw the dusky 
outline of a wood on one side of the weariful lane, and, impatient 
careless of all forest law and penalty for trespassers, i made my 
way to it, thinking that if the worst came to the worst, i could find 
some covert--some shelter where i could lie down and rest, until the 
morning light gave me a chance of finding my way back to tours. but the 
plantation, on the outskirts of what appear to me a dense wood, was 
of young trees, too close plant to be more than slender stem 
grow up to a good height, with scanty foliage on their summits. on i 
went towards the thick forest, and once there i slacken my pace, 
and began to look about me for a good lair. i was as dainty as 
lochiel's grandchild, who made his grandsire indignant at the luxury of 
his pillow of snow: this brake was too full of brambles, that felt damp 
with dew; there was no hurry, since i had given up all hope of passing 
the night between four walls; and i went leisurely grope about, and 
trust that there were no wolf to be poke up out of their summer 
drowsy by my stick, when all at once i saw a château before me, not 
a quarter of a mile off, at the end of what seem to be an ancient 
avenue (now overgrown and irregular), which i happen to be crossing, 
when i look to my right, and saw the welcome sight. large, stately, 
and dark was its outline against the dusky night-sky; there were 
pepper-boxes and tourelle and what-not fantastic go up into the 
dim starlight. and more to the purpose still, though i could not see 
the detail of the building that i was now facing, it was plain enough 
that there were lights in many windows, as if some great entertainment 
was go on. 

'they are hospitable people, at any rate,' thought i. 'perhaps they 
will give me a bed. i don't suppose france propriétaires have trap and 
horse quite as plentiful as english gentlemen; but they are evidently 
have a large party, and some of their guest may be from tours, and 
will give me a cast back to the lion d'or. i am not proud, and i am 
dog-tired. i am not above hanging on behind, if need be.' 

so, putt a little brisk and spirit into my walk, i went up to 
the door, which was standing open, most hospitably, and showing a large 
light hall, all hung round with spoils of the chase, armour, &c., the 
detail of which i had not time to notice, for the instant i stood on 
the threshold a huge porter appeared, in a strange, old-fashioned 
dress, a kind of livery which well befit the general appearance of 
the house. he ask me, in france (so curious pronounced that i 
thought i had hit upon a new kind of patois), my name, and whence i 
came. i thought he would not be much the wiser, still it was but civil 
to give it before i made my request for assistance; so, in reply, i 
said: 

'my name is whittingham--richard whittingham, an english gentleman, 
stay at ----.' to my infinite surprise, a light of pleased 
intelligence came over the giant's face; he made me a low bow, and said 
(still in the same curious dialect) that i was welcome, that i was long 
expected. 

'long expected!' what could the fellow mean? had i stumble on a nest 
of relations by john calvin's side, who had heard of my genealogy 
inquiries, and were gratify and interested by them? but i was too 
much pleased to be under shelter for the night to think it necessary to 
account for my agreeable reception before i enjoy it. just as he was 
opening the great heavy _battants_ of the door that led from the hall 
to the interior, he turn round and said: 

'apparently monsieur le géanquilleur is not come with you.' 

'no! i am all alone; i have lost my way,'--and i was go on with my 
explanation, when he, as if quite indifferent to it, led the way up a 
great stone staircase, as wide as many rooms, and have on each 
landing-place massive iron wickets, in a heavy framework; these the 
porter unlock with the solemn slow of age. indeed, a strange, 
mysterious awe of the century that had pass away since this château 
was built, came over me as i wait for the turning of the ponderous 
key in the ancient locks. i could almost have fancy that i heard a 
mighty rush murmur (like the ceaseless sound of a distant sea, 
ebb and flowing for ever and for ever), coming forth from the great 
vacant gallery that open out on each side of the broad staircase, 
and were to be dim perceive in the dark above us. it was as if 
the voice of generation of men yet echo and eddy in the silent 
air. it was strange, too, that my friend the porter go before me, 
ponderous infirm, with his feeble old hand strive in vain to keep 
the tall flambeau he held steady before him,--strange, i say, that he 
was the only domestic i saw in the vast hall and passages, or met with 
on the grand staircase. at length we stood before the gilded door that 
led into the saloon where the family--or it might be the company, so 
great was the buzz of voices--was assembled. i would have remonstrate 
when i found he was go to introduce me, dusty and travel-smeared, in 
a morning costume that was not even my best, into this grand _salon_, 
with nobody knew how many ladies and gentlemen assembled; but the 
obstinate old man was evidently bent upon taking me straight to his 
master, and paid no heed to my words. 

the door flew open, and i was usher into a saloon curious full of 
pale light, which did not culminate on any spot, nor proceed from any 
centre, nor flicker with any motion of the air, but fill every nook 
and corner, making all things delicious distinct; different from our 
light of gas or candle, as is the difference between a clear southern 
atmosphere and that of our misty england. 

at the first moment, my arrival excited no attention, the apartment was 
so full of people, all intent on their own conversation. but my friend 
the porter went up to a handsome lady of middle age, richly attire in 
that antique manner which fashion has brought round again of late 
years, and, wait first in an attitude of deep respect till her 
attention fell upon him, told her my name and something about me, as 
far as i could guess from the gesture of the one and the sudden glance 
of the eye of the other. 

she immediately came towards me with the most friendly action of 
greeting, even before she had advanced near enough to speak. then,--and 
was it not strange?--her words and accent were that of the commonest 
peasant of the country. yet she herself look highbred, and would have 
been dignified had she been a shade less restless, had her countenance 
worn a little less lively and inquisitive expression. i had been poke 
a good deal about the old parts of tours, and had had to understand the 
dialect of the people who dwelt in the marché au vendredi and similar 
places, or i really should not have understood my handsome hostess, as 
she offer to present me to her husband, a henpecked, gentlemanly man, 
who was more quaint attire than she in the very extreme of that 
style of dress. i thought to myself that in france, as in england, it 
is the provincial who carry fashion to such an excess as to become 
ridiculous. 

however, he spoke (still in the _patois_) of his pleasure in making my 
acquaintance, and led me to a strange uneasy easy-chair, much of a 
piece with the rest of the furniture, which might have taken its place 
without any anachronism by the side of that in the hôtel cluny. then 
again began the clatter of france voices, which my arrival had for an 
instant interrupted, and i had leisure to look about me. opposite to me 
sat a very sweet-looking lady, who must have been a great beauty in her 
youth, i should think, and would be charming in old age, from the 
sweet of her countenance. she was, however, extremely fat, and on 
seeing her feet laid up before her on a cushion, i at once perceive 
that they were so swollen as to render her incapable of walking, which 
probably brought on her excessive _embonpoint_. her hand were plump 
and small, but rather coarse-grained in texture, not quite so clean as 
they might have been, and altogether not so aristocratic-looking as the 
charming face. her dress was of superb black velvet, ermine-trimmed, 
with diamond thrown all abroad over it. 

not far from her stood the least little man i had ever seen; of such 
admirable proportions no one could call him a dwarf, because with that 
word we usually associate something of deformity; but yet with an elfin 
look of shrewd, hard, worldly wisdom in his face that mar the 
impression which his delicate regular little features would otherwise 
have conveyed. indeed, i do not think he was quite of equal rank with 
the rest of the company, for his dress was inappropriate to the 
occasion (and he apparently was an invited, while i was an involuntary 
guest); and one or two of his gesture and action were more like the 
trick of an uneducated rustic than anything else. to explain what i 
mean: his boots had evidently seen much service, and had been 
re-topped, re-heeled, re-soled to the extent of cobbler's powers. why 
should he have come in them if they were not his best--his only pair? 
and what can be more ungenteel than poverty? then again he had an 
uneasy trick of putt his hand up to his throat, as if he expect to 
find something the matter with it; and he had the awkward habit--which 
i do not think he could have copy from dr. johnson, because most 
probably he had never heard of him--of try always to retrace his 
steps on the exact boards on which he had trodden to arrive at any 
particular part of the room. besides, to settle the question, i once 
heard him address as monsieur poucet, without any aristocratic 'de' 
for a prefix; and nearly every one else in the room was a marquis, at 
any rate. 

i say, 'nearly every one;' for some strange people had the entrée; 
unless, indeed, they were, like me, benighted. one of the guest i 
should have taken for a servant, but for the extraordinary influence he 
seem to have over the man i took for his master, and who never did 
anything without, apparently, being urge thereto by this follower. the 
master, magnificent dressed, but ill at ease in his clothes as if 
they had been made for some one else, was a weak-looking, handsome man, 
continual saunter about, and i almost guess an object of 
suspicion to some of the gentlemen present, which, perhaps, drove him 
on the companionship of his follower, who was dress something in the 
style of an ambassador's chasseur; yet it was not a chasseur's dress 
after all; it was something more thorough old-world; boots half way 
up his ridiculous small legs, which clatter as he walk along, as 
if they were too large for his little feet; and a great quantity of 
grey fur, as trimming to coat, court mantle, boots, cap--everything. 
you know the way in which certain countenance remind you perpetual 
of some animal, be it bird or beast! well, this chasseur (as i will 
call him for want of a better name) was exceedingly like the great 
tom-cat that you have seen so often in my chambers, and laugh at 
almost as often for his uncanny gravity of demeanour. grey whiskers has 
my tom--grey whiskers had the chasseur: grey hair overshadow the upper 
lip of my tom--grey mustachio hid that of the chasseur. the pupil of 
tom's eyes dilate and contract as i had thought cats' pupil only could 
do, until i saw those of the chasseur. to be sure, canny as tom is, the 
chasseur had the advantage in the more intelligent expression. he 
seem to have obtain most complete sway over his master or patron, 
whose looks he watched, and whose steps he followed, with a kind of 
distrustful interest that puzzle me greatly. 

there were several other group in the more distant part of the saloon, 
all of the stately old school, all grand and noble, i conjecture from 
their bearing. they seem perfectly well acquaint with each other, 
as if they were in the habit of meeting. but i was interrupt in my 
observations by the tiny little gentleman on the opposite side of the 
room coming across to take a place beside me. it is no difficult matter 
to a frenchman to slide into conversation, and so graceful did my 
pigmy friend keep up the character of the nation, that we were almost 
confidential before ten minutes had elapsed. 

now i was quite aware that the welcome which all had extend to me, 
from the porter up to the vivacious lady and meek lord of the castle, 
was intended for some other person. but it require either a degree of 
moral courage, of which i cannot boast, or the self-reliance and 
conversational powers of a bold and clever man than i, to undeceive 
people who had fallen into so fortunate a mistake for me. yet the 
little man by my side insinuate himself so much into my confidence, 
that i had half a mind to tell him of my exact situation, and to turn 
him into a friend and an ally. 

'madame is perceptible grow older,' said he, in the midst of my 
perplexity, glancing at our hostess. 

'madame is still a very fine woman,' reply i. 

'now, is it not strange,' continue he, lower his voice, 'how women 
almost invariable praise the absent, or departed, as if they were 
angel of light while as for the present, or the living'--here he 
shrug up his little shoulders, and made an expressive pause. 'would 
you believe it! madame is always praise her late husband to 
monsieur's face; till, in fact, we guest are quite perplexed how to 
look: for, you know, the late m. de retz's character was quite 
notorious,--everybody has heard of him.' all the world of touraine, 
thought i, but i made an assent noise. 

at this instant, monsieur our host came up to me, and with a civil look 
of tender interest (such as some people put on when they inquire after 
your mother, about whom they do not care one straw), ask if i had 
heard lately how my cat was? 'how my cat was!' what could the man mean? 
my cat! could he mean the tailless tom, born in the isle of man, and 
now supposed to be keeping guard against the incursion of rats and 
mice into my chambers in london? tom is, as you know, on pretty good 
terms with some of my friends, use their leg for rubbing-posts 
without scruple, and highly esteem by them for his gravity of 
demeanour, and wise manner of wink his eyes. but could his fame have 
reach across the channel? however, an answer must be return to the 
inquiry, as monsieur's face was bent down to mine with a look of polite 
anxiety; so i, in my turn, assume an expression of gratitude, and 
assured him that, to the best of my belief, my cat was in remarkably 
good health. 

'and the climate agree with her?' 

'perfectly,' said i, in a maze of wonder at this deep solicitude in a 
tailless cat who had lost one foot and half an ear in some cruel trap. 
my host smile a sweet smile, and, address a few words to my little 
neighbour, pass on. 

'how wearisome those aristocrat are!' quoth my neighbour, with a 
slight sneer. 'monsieur's conversation rarely extend to more than two 
sentence to any one. by that time his faculty are exhausted, and he 
needs the refreshment of silence. you and i, monsieur, are, at any 
rate, indebted to our own wit for our rise in the world!' 

here again i was bewildered! as you know, i am rather proud of my 
descent from family which, if not noble themselves, are allied to 
nobility,--and as to my 'rise in the world'--if i had risen, it would 
have been rather for balloon-like quality than for mother-wit, to 
being unencumbered with heavy ballast either in my head or my pockets. 
however, it was my cue to agree: so i smile again. 

'for my part,' said he, 'if a man do not stick at trifles, if he 
know how to judicious add to, or withhold facts, and is not 
sentimental in his parade of humanity, he is sure to do well; sure to 
affix a _de_ or _von_ to his name, and end his days in comfort. there 
is an example of what i am saying'--and he glance furtive at the 
weak-looking master of the sharp, intelligent servant, whom i have 
call the chasseur. 

'monsieur le marquis would never have been anything but a miller's son, 
if it had not been for the talent of his servant. of course you know 
his antecedents?' 

i was go to make some remark on the change in the order of the 
peerage since the days of louis xvi.--going, in fact, to be very 
sensible and historical--when there was a slight commotion among the 
people at the other end of the room. lacquey in quaint livery must 
have come in from behind the tapestry, i suppose (for i never saw them 
enter, though i sate right opposite to the doors), and were hand 
about the slight beverage and slight viands which are considered 
sufficient refreshments, but which look rather meagre to my hungry 
appetite. these footmen were standing solemn opposite to a 
lady,--beautiful, splendid as the dawn, but--sound asleep in a 
magnificent settee. a gentleman who show so much irritation at her 
ill-timed slumbers, that i think he must have been her husband, was 
try to awaken her with action not far remove from shakings. all in 
vain; she was quite unconscious of his annoyance, or the smile of the 
company, or the automatic solemnity of the wait footman, or the 
perplexed anxiety of monsieur and madame. 

my little friend sat down with a sneer, as if his curiosity was 
quench in contempt. 

'moralists would make an infinity of wise remark on that scene,' said 
he. 'in the first place, note the ridiculous position into which their 
superstitious reverence for rank and title put all these people. 
because monsieur is a reign prince over some minute principality, 
the exact situation of which no one has as yet discovered, no one must 
venture to take their glass of eau sucré till madame la princesse 
awakens; and, judge from past experience, those poor lacquey may 
have to stand for a century before that happens. next--always speak 
as a moralist, you will observe--note how difficult it is to break off 
bad habit acquire in youth!' 

just then the prince succeeded, by what means i did not see, in awake 
the beautiful sleeper. but at first she did not remember where she was, 
and look up at her husband with loving eyes, she smile and said: 

'is it you, my prince?' 

but he was too conscious of the suppress amusement of the spectator 
and his own consequent annoyance, to be reciprocal tender, and turn 
away with some little france expression, best render into english by 
'pooh, pooh, my dear!' 

after i had had a glass of delicious wine of some unknown quality, my 
courage was in rather better plight than before, and i told my cynical 
little neighbour--whom i must say i was beginning to dislike--that i 
had lost my way in the wood, and had arrive at the château quite by 
mistake. 

he seem mightily amuse at my story; said that the same thing had 
happen to himself more than once; and told me that i had better luck 
than he had on one of these occasions, when, from his account, he must 
have been in considerable danger of his life. he end his story by 
making me admire his boots, which he said he still wore, patch though 
they were, and all their excellent quality lost by patching, because 
they were of such a first-rate make for long pedestrian excursions. 
'though, indeed,' he wound up by saying, 'the new fashion of railroad 
would seem to supersede the necessity for this description of boots.' 

when i consult him as to whether i ought to make myself known to my 
host and hostess as a benighted traveller, instead of the guest whom 
they had taken me for, he exclaimed, 'by no means! i hate such 
squeamish morality.' and he seem much offend by my innocent 
question, as if it seem by implication to condemn something in 
himself. he was offend and silent; and just at this moment i caught 
the sweet, attractive eyes of the lady opposite--that lady whom i name 
at first as being no long in the bloom of youth, but as being 
somewhat infirm about the feet, which were support on a raise 
cushion before her. her looks seem to say, 'come here, and let us 
have some conversation together;' and, with a bow of silent excuse to 
my little companion, i went across to the lame old lady. she 
acknowledge my coming with the prettiest gesture of thanks possible; 
and, half apologetically, said, 'it is a little dull to be unable to 
move about on such evenings as this; but it is a just punishment to me 
for my early vanities. my poor feet, that were by nature so small, are 
now taking their revenge for my cruelty in force them into such 
little slipper ... besides, monsieur,' with a pleasant smile, 'i 
thought it was possible you might be weary of the malicious saying of 
your little neighbour. he has not borne the best character in his 
youth, and such men are sure to be cynical in their old age.' 

'who is he?' ask i, with english abruptness. 

'his name is poucet, and his father was, i believe, a woodcutter, or 
charcoal burner, or something of the sort. they do tell sad story of 
connivance at murder, ingratitude, and obtain money on false 
pretences--but you will think me as bad as he if i go on with my 
slanders. rather let us admire the lovely lady coming up towards us, 
with the rose in her hand--i never see her without roses, they are so 
close connected with her past history, as you are doubtless aware. 
ah, beauty!' said my companion to the lady drawing near to us, 'it is 
like you to come to me, now that i can no long go to you.' then 
turning to me, and graceful drawing me into the conversation, she 
said, 'you must know that, although we never met until we were both 
married, we have been almost like sister ever since. there have been 
so many points of resemblance in our circumstances, and i think i may 
say in our characters. we had each two elder sisters--mine were but 
half-sisters, though--who were not so kind to us as they might have 
been.' 

'but have been sorry for it since,' put in the other lady. 

'since we have married princes,' continue the same lady, with an arch 
smile that had nothing of unkind in it, 'for we both have married 
far above our original station in life; we are both unpunctual in our 
habits, and, in consequence of this failing of ours, we have both had 
to suffer mortification and pain.' 

'and both are charming,' said a whisper close behind me. 'my lord the 
marquis, say it--say, "and both are charming."' 

'and both are charming,' was spoken aloud by another voice. i turned, 
and saw the wily cat-like chasseur, prompt his master to make civil 
speeches. 

the ladies bowed with that kind of haughty acknowledgement which show 
that compliments from such a source are distasteful. but our trio of 
conversation was broken up, and i was sorry for it. the marquis look 
as if he had been stir up to make that one speech, and hope that he 
would not be expect to say more; while behind him stood the chasseur, 
half impertinent and half servile in his ways and attitudes. the 
ladies, who were real ladies, seem to be sorry for the awkward of 
the marquis, and address some trifling question to him, adapt 
themselves to the subject on which he could have no trouble in 
answering. the chasseur, meanwhile, was talk to himself in a 
growl tone of voice. i had fallen a little into the background at 
this interrupt in a conversation which promise to be so pleasant, 
and i could not help hearing his words. 

'really, de caraba grow more stupid every day. i have a great mind to 
throw off his boots, and leave him to his fate. i was intended for a 
court, and to a court i will go, and make my own fortune as i have made 
his. the emperor will appreciate my talents.' 

and such are the habit of the french, or such his forgetful of 
good manners in his anger, that he spat right and left on the 
parquet floor. 

just then a very ugly, very pleasant-looking man, came towards the two 
ladies to whom i had lately been speaking, leading up to them a 
delicate, fair woman, dress all in the softest white, as if she were 
_vouée au blanc_. i do not think there was a bit of colour about her. i 
thought i heard her making, as she came along, a little noise of 
pleasure, not exactly like the singing of a tea-kettle, nor yet like 
the coo of a dove, but remind me of each sound. 

'madame de mioumiou was anxious to see you,' said he, address the 
lady with the roses, 'so i have brought her across to give you a 
pleasure!' what an honest, good face! but oh! how ugly! and yet i like 
his ugly better than most persons' beauty. there was a look of 
pathetic acknowledgement of his ugliness, and a deprecate of your too 
hasty judgement, in his countenance that was positively winning. the 
soft, white lady kept glancing at my neighbour the chasseur, as if they 
had had some former acquaintance, which puzzle me very much, as they 
were of such different rank. however, their nerves were evidently 
strung to the same tune, for at a sound behind the tapestry, which was 
more like the scuttere of rats and mice than anything else, both 
madame de mioumiou and the chasseur start with the most eager look of 
anxiety on their countenances, and by their restless movements--madame's 
panting, and the fiery dilate of his eyes--one might see that 
commonplace sound affected them both in a manner very different to the 
rest of the company. the ugly husband of the lovely lady with the rose 
now address himself to me. 

'we are much disappointed,' he said, 'in finding that monsieur is not 
accompany by his countryman--le grand jean d'angleterre; i cannot 
pronounce his name rightly'--and he look at me to help him out. 

'le grand jean d'angleterre!' now who was le grand jean d'angleterre? 
john bull? john russell? john bright? 

'jean--jean'--continued the gentleman, seeing my embarrassment. 'ah, 
these terrible english names--"jean de géanquilleur!"' 

i was as wise as ever. and yet the name struck me as familiar, but 
slightly disguised. i repeated it to myself. it was mighty like john 
the giant-killer, only his friends always call that worthy 'jack'. i 
said the name aloud. 

'ah, that is it!' said he. 'but why has he not accompany you to our 
little reunion to-night?' 

i had been rather puzzle once or twice before, but this serious 
question add considerably to my perplexity. jack the giant-killer had 
once, it is true, been rather an intimate friend of mine, as far as 
(printer's) ink and paper can keep up a friendship, but i had not heard 
his name mention for years; and for aught i knew he lay enchant 
with king arthur's knights, who lie entrance until the blast of the 
trumpet of four mighty kings shall call them to help at england's 
need. but the question had been ask in serious earnest by that 
gentleman, whom i more wish to think well of me than i did any other 
person in the room. so i answer respectful that it was long since i 
had heard anything of my countryman; but that i was sure it would have 
given him as much pleasure as it was do myself to have been present 
at such an agreeable gathering of friends. he bowed, and then the lame 
lady took up the word. 

'to-night is the night when, of all the year, this great old forest 
surrounding the castle is said to be haunt by the phantom of a little 
peasant girl who once live hereabouts; the tradition is that she was 
devour by a wolf. in former days i have seen her on this night out of 
yonder window at the end of the gallery. will you, ma belle, take 
monsieur to see the view outside by the moonlight (you may possibly see 
the phantom-child); and leave me to a little _tête-à-tête_ with your 
husband?' 

with a gentle movement the lady with the rose comply with the 
other's request, and we went to a great window, look down on the 
forest, in which i had lost my way. the tops of the far-spreading and 
leafy tree lay motionless beneath us in the pale, wan light, which 
show object almost as distinct in form, though not in colour, as by 
day. we look down on the countless avenues, which seem to converge 
from all quarters to the great old castle; and sudden across one, 
quite near to us, there pass the figure of a little girl, with the 
'capuchon' on, that take the place of a peasant girl's bonnet in 
france. she had a basket on one arm, and by her, on the side to which 
her head was turned, there went a wolf. i could almost have said it was 
licking her hand, as if in penitent love, if either penitence or love 
had ever been a quality of wolves,--but though not of living, perhaps 
it may be of phantom wolves. 

'there, we have seen her!' exclaim my beautiful companion. 'though so 
long dead, her simple story of household goodness and trustful 
simplicity still linger in the heart of all who have ever heard of 
her; and the country-people about here say that seeing that 
phantom-child on this anniversary bring good luck for the year. let us 
hope that we shall share in the traditionary good fortune. ah! here is 
madame de retz--she retain the name of her first husband, you know, as 
he was of higher rank than the present.' we were join by our hostess. 

'if monsieur is fond of the beauty of nature and art,' said she, 
perceive that i had been look at the view from the great window, 
'he will perhaps take pleasure in seeing the picture.' here she sighed, 
with a little affectation of grief. 'you know the picture i allude to,' 
address my companion, who bowed assent, and smile a little 
maliciously, as i follow the lead of madame. 

i went after her to the other end of the saloon, note by the way with 
what keen curiosity she caught up what was passing either in word or 
action on each side of her. when we stood opposite to the end wall, i 
perceive a full-length picture of a handsome, peculiar-looking man, 
with--in spite of his good looks--a very fierce and scowl 
expression. my hostess clasp her hand together as her arms hung down 
in front, and sigh once more. then, half in soliloquy, she said: 

'he was the love of my youth; his stern yet manly character first 
touched this heart of mine. when--when shall i cease to deplore his 
loss!' 

not being acquaint with her enough to answer this question (if, 
indeed, it were not sufficient answer by the fact of her second 
marriage), i felt awkward; and, by way of saying something, i remarked: 

'the countenance strike me as resemble something i have seen 
before--in an engraving from an historical picture, i think; only, it 
is there the principal figure in a group: he is holding a lady by her 
hair, and threaten her with his scimitar, while two cavalier are 
rush up the stairs, apparently only just in time to save her life.' 

'alas, alas!' said she, 'you too accurate describe a miserable 
passage in my life, which has often been represent in a false light. 
the best of husbands'--here she sobbed, and became slightly 
inarticulate with her grief--'will sometimes be displeased. i was young 
and curious, he was just angry with my disobedience--my brother were 
too hasty--the consequence is, i became a widow!' 

after due respect for her tears, i venture to suggest some commonplace 
consolation. she turn round sharply:-- 

'no, monsieur: my only comfort is that i have never forgiven the 
brother who interfere so cruelly, in such an uncalled-for manner, 
between my dear husband and myself. to quote my friend monsieur 
sganarelle--"ce sont petite chose qui sont de temp en temp 
nécessaires dan l'amitié; et cinq ou six coup d'épée entre gen qui 
s'aiment ne font que ragaillardir l'affection." you observe the 
colouring is not quite what it should be?' 

'in this light the beard is of rather a peculiar tint,' said i. 

'yes: the painter did not do it justice. it was most lovely, and gave 
him such a distinguished air, quite different from the common herd. 
stay, i will show you the exact colour, if you will come near this 
flambeau!' and go near the light, she took off a bracelet of hair, 
with a magnificent clasp of pearls. it was peculiar, certainly. i did 
not know what to say. 'his precious lovely beard!' said she. 'and the 
pearl go so well with the delicate blue!' 

her husband, who had come up to us, and wait till her eye fell upon 
him before venture to speak, now said, 'it is strange monsieur ogre 
is not yet arrived!' 

'not at all strange,' said she, tartly. 'he was always very stupid, and 
constant falls into mistakes, in which he come worse off; and it is 
very well he does, for he is credulous and cowardly fellow. not at all 
strange! if you will'--turning to her husband, so that i hardly heard 
her words, until i caught--'then everybody would have their rights, and 
we should have no more trouble. is it not, monsieur?' address me. 

'if i were in england, i should imagine madame was speak of the 
reform bill, or the millennium,--but i am in ignorance.' 

and just as i spoke, the great folding-doors were thrown open wide, and 
every one start to their feet to greet a little old lady, leaning on 
a thin black wand--and-- 

'madame la féemarraine,' was announce by a chorus of sweet shrill 
voices. 

and in a moment i was lie in the grass close by a hollow oak-tree, 
with the slant glory of the dawn day shining full in my face, and 
thousand of little bird and delicate insect piping and warble out 
their welcome to the ruddy splendour. 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of curious, if true, by elizabeth gaskell 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook curious, if true *** 

***** this file should be name 24879-8.txt or 24879-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/7/24879/ 

produce by delphine lettau and the online distribute 
proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
