the project gutenberg ebook of the parasite, by arthur conan doyle 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the parasite 

author: arthur conan doyle 

release date: march 19, 2008 [ebook #355] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the parasite *** 














the parasite 

a story 


by 

a. conan doyle 


author of "the refugees" "micah clarke" etc. 




1894 




the parasite 

i 

march 24. the spring is fairly with us now. outside my laboratory 
window the great chestnut-tree is all cover with the big, glutinous, 
gummy buds, some of which have already begun to break into little green 
shuttlecocks. as you walk down the lane you are conscious of the 
rich, silent forces of nature working all around you. the wet earth 
smell fruitful and luscious. green shoot are peep out everywhere. 
the twig are stiff with their sap; and the moist, heavy english air is 
laden with a faint resinous perfume. bud in the hedges, lamb 
beneath them--everywhere the work of reproduction go forward! 

i can see it without, and i can feel it within. we also have our 
spring when the little arteriole dilate, the lymph flow in a brisk 
stream, the gland work harder, winnow and straining. every year 
nature readjust the whole machine. i can feel the ferment in my blood 
at this very moment, and as the cool sunshine pour through my window i 
could dance about in it like a gnat. so i should, only that charles 
sadler would rush upstairs to know what was the matter. besides, i 
must remember that i am professor gilroy. an old professor may afford 
to be natural, but when fortune has given one of the first chair in 
the university to a man of four-and-thirty he must try and act the part 
consistently. 

what a fellow wilson is! if i could only throw the same enthusiasm 
into physiology that he do into psychology, i should become a claude 
bernard at the least. his whole life and soul and energy work to one 
end. he drops to sleep collate his result of the past day, and he 
wake to plan his research for the coming one. and yet, outside the 
narrow circle who follow his proceedings, he get so little credit for 
it. physiology is a recognize science. if i add even a brick to the 
edifice, every one see and applaud it. but wilson is try to dig 
the foundations for a science of the future. his work is underground 
and do not show. yet he go on uncomplainingly, corresponding with 
a hundred semi-maniacs in the hope of finding one reliable witness, 
sift a hundred lie on the chance of gain one little speck of 
truth, collate old books, devour new ones, experimenting, 
lecturing, try to light up in other the fiery interest which is 
consume him. i am fill with wonder and admiration when i think of 
him, and yet, when he ask me to associate myself with his researches, 
i am compel to tell him that, in their present state, they offer 
little attraction to a man who is devoted to exact science. if he 
could show me something positive and objective, i might then be tempt 
to approach the question from its physiology side. so long as half 
his subject are taint with charlatanerie and the other half with 
hysteria we physiologist must content ourselves with the body and 
leave the mind to our descendants. 

no doubt i am a materialist. agatha say that i am a rank one. i tell 
her that is an excellent reason for shortening our engagement, since i 
am in such urgent need of her spirituality. and yet i may claim to be 
a curious example of the effect of education upon temperament, for by 
nature i am, unless i deceive myself, a highly psychic man. i was a 
nervous, sensitive boy, a dreamer, a somnambulist, full of impression 
and intuitions. my black hair, my dark eyes, my thin, olive face, my 
taper fingers, are all characteristic of my real temperament, and 
cause expert like wilson to claim me as their own. but my brain is 
soaked with exact knowledge. i have train myself to deal only with 
fact and with proof. surmise and fancy have no place in my scheme of 
thought. show me what i can see with my microscope, cut with my 
scalpel, weigh in my balance, and i will devote a lifetime to its 
investigation. but when you ask me to study feelings, impressions, 
suggestions, you ask me to do what is distasteful and even 
demoralizing. a departure from pure reason affect me like an evil 
smell or a musical discord. 

which is a very sufficient reason why i am a little loath to go to 
professor wilson's tonight. still i feel that i could hardly get out 
of the invitation without positive rudeness; and, now that mrs. marden 
and agatha are going, of course i would not if i could. but i had 
rather meet them anywhere else. i know that wilson would draw me into 
this nebulous semi-science of his if he could. in his enthusiasm he is 
perfectly impervious to hint or remonstrances. nothing short of a 
positive quarrel will make him realize my aversion to the whole 
business. i have no doubt that he has some new mesmerist or 
clairvoyant or medium or trickster of some sort whom he is go to 
exhibit to us, for even his entertainment bear upon his hobby. well, 
it will be a treat for agatha, at any rate. she is interested in it, 
as woman usually is in whatever is vague and mystical and indefinite. 

10.50 p. m. this diary-keeping of mine is, i fancy, the outcome of 
that scientific habit of mind about which i wrote this morning. i like 
to register impression while they are fresh. once a day at least i 
endeavor to define my own mental position. it is a useful piece of 
self-analysis, and has, i fancy, a steady effect upon the character. 
frankly, i must confess that my own needs what stiffening i can give 
it. i fear that, after all, much of my neurotic temperament survives, 
and that i am far from that cool, calm precision which characterize 
murdoch or pratt-haldane. otherwise, why should the tomfoolery which i 
have witness this evening have set my nerves thrill so that even 
now i am all unstrung? my only comfort is that neither wilson nor miss 
penclosa nor even agatha could have possibly known my weakness. 

and what in the world was there to excite me? nothing, or so little 
that it will seem ludicrous when i set it down. 

the marden got to wilson's before me. in fact, i was one of the last 
to arrive and found the room crowded. i had hardly time to say a word 
to mrs. marden and to agatha, who was look charming in white and 
pink, with glittering wheat-ears in her hair, when wilson came 
twitch at my sleeve. 

"you want something positive, gilroy," said he, drawing me apart into a 
corner. "my dear fellow, i have a phenomenon--a phenomenon!" 

i should have been more impress had i not heard the same before. his 
sanguine spirit turn every fire-fly into a star. 

"no possible question about the bona fide this time," said he, in 
answer, perhaps, to some little gleam of amusement in my eyes. "my 
wife has known her for many years. they both come from trinidad, you 
know. miss penclosa has only been in england a month or two, and know 
no one outside the university circle, but i assure you that the things 
she has told us suffice in themselves to establish clairvoyance upon an 
absolutely scientific basis. there is nothing like her, amateur or 
professional. come and be introduced!" 

i like none of these mystery-mongers, but the amateur least of all. 
with the paid performer you may pounce upon him and expose him the 
instant that you have seen through his trick. he is there to deceive 
you, and you are there to find him out. but what are you to do with 
the friend of your host's wife? are you to turn on a light sudden 
and expose her slap a surreptitious banjo? or are you to hurl 
cochineal over her evening frock when she steal round with her 
phosphorus bottle and her supernatural platitude? there would be a 
scene, and you would be look upon as a brute. so you have your 
choice of being that or a dupe. i was in no very good humor as i 
follow wilson to the lady. 

any one less like my idea of a west indian could not be imagined. she 
was a small, frail creature, well over forty, i should say, with a 
pale, peaky face, and hair of a very light shade of chestnut. her 
presence was insignificant and her manner retiring. in any group of 
ten women she would have been the last whom one would have picked out. 
her eyes were perhaps her most remarkable, and also, i am compel to 
say, her least pleasant, feature. they were gray in color,--gray with 
a shade of green,--and their expression struck me as being decidedly 
furtive. i wonder if furtive is the word, or should i have said 
fierce? on second thoughts, feline would have express it better. a 
crutch leaning against the wall told me what was painful evident when 
she rose: that one of her leg was crippled. 

so i was introduce to miss penclosa, and it did not escape me that as 
my name was mention she glance across at agatha. wilson had 
evidently been talking. and presently, no doubt, thought i, she will 
inform me by occult means that i am engaged to a young lady with 
wheat-ears in her hair. i wonder how much more wilson had been 
telling her about me. 

"professor gilroy is a terrible sceptic," said he; "i hope, miss 
penclosa, that you will be able to convert him." 

she look keen up at me. 

"professor gilroy is quite right to be sceptical if he has not seen any 
thing convincing," said she. "i should have thought," she added, "that 
you would yourself have been an excellent subject." 

"for what, may i ask?" said i. 

"well, for mesmerism, for example." 

"my experience has been that mesmerist go for their subject to those 
who are mental unsound. all their result are vitiated, as it seem 
to me, by the fact that they are dealing with abnormal organisms." 

"which of these ladies would you say possessed a normal organism?" she 
asked. "i should like you to select the one who seem to you to have 
the best balanced mind. should we say the girl in pink and 
white?--miss agatha marden, i think the name is." 

"yes, i should attach weight to any result from her." 

"i have never try how far she is impressionable. of course some 
people respond much more rapid than others. may i ask how far your 
scepticism extends? i suppose that you admit the mesmeric sleep and 
the power of suggestion." 

"i admit nothing, miss penclosa." 

"dear me, i thought science had got further than that. of course i 
know nothing about the scientific side of it. i only know what i can 
do. you see the girl in red, for example, over near the japan jar. 
i shall will that she come across to us." 

she bent forward as she spoke and drop her fan upon the floor. the 
girl whisk round and came straight toward us, with an enquiring look 
upon her face, as if some one had call her. 

"what do you think of that, gilroy?" cry wilson, in a kind of ecstasy. 

i did not dare to tell him what i thought of it. to me it was the most 
barefaced, shameless piece of imposture that i had ever witnessed. the 
collusion and the signal had really been too obvious. 

"professor gilroy is not satisfied," said she, glancing up at me with 
her strange little eyes. "my poor fan is to get the credit of that 
experiment. well, we must try something else. miss marden, would you 
have any objection to my putt you off?" 

"oh, i should love it!" cry agatha. 

by this time all the company had gather round us in a circle, the 
shirt-fronted men, and the white-throated women, some awed, some 
critical, as though it were something between a religious ceremony and 
a conjurer's entertainment. a red velvet arm-chair had been pushed 
into the centre, and agatha lay back in it, a little flushed and 
tremble slightly from excitement. i could see it from the vibration 
of the wheat-ears. miss penclosa rose from her seat and stood over 
her, leaning upon her crutch. 

and there was a change in the woman. she no long seem small or 
insignificant. twenty years were gone from her age. her eyes were 
shining, a tinge of color had come into her sallow cheeks, her whole 
figure had expanded. so i have seen a dull-eyed, listless lad change 
in an instant into brisk and life when given a task of which he 
felt himself master. she look down at agatha with an expression 
which i resent from the bottom of my soul--the expression with which 
a roman empress might have look at her kneel slave. then with a 
quick, commanding gesture she toss up her arms and swept them slow 
down in front of her. 

i was watch agatha narrowly. during three pass she seem to be 
simply amused. at the fourth i observe a slight glazing of her eyes, 
accompany by some dilate of her pupils. at the sixth there was a 
momentary rigor. at the seventh her lid began to droop. at the tenth 
her eyes were closed, and her breathing was slow and fuller than 
usual. i try as i watch to preserve my scientific calm, but a 
foolish, causeless agitation convulse me. i trust that i hid it, but 
i felt as a child feel in the dark. i could not have believe that i 
was still open to such weakness. 

"she is in the trance," said miss penclosa. 

"she is sleeping!" i cried. 

"wake her, then!" 

i pull her by the arm and shout in her ear. she might have been 
dead for all the impression that i could make. her body was there on 
the velvet chair. her organ were acting--her heart, her lungs. but 
her soul! it had slip from beyond our ken. whither had it gone? 
what power had dispossessed it? i was puzzle and disconcerted. 

"so much for the mesmeric sleep," said miss penclosa. "as regards 
suggestion, whatever i may suggest miss marden will infallibly do, 
whether it be now or after she has awaken from her trance. do you 
demand proof of it?" 

"certainly," said i. 

"you shall have it." i saw a smile pass over her face, as though an 
amuse thought had struck her. she stoop and whisper earnest 
into her subject's ear. agatha, who had been so deaf to me, nod her 
head as she listened. 

"awake!" cry miss penclosa, with a sharp tap of her crutch upon the 
floor. the eyes opened, the glazing clear slow away, and the soul 
look out once more after its strange eclipse. 

we went away early. agatha was none the worse for her strange 
excursion, but i was nervous and unstrung, unable to listen to or 
answer the stream of comment which wilson was pour out for my 
benefit. as i bade her good-night miss penclosa slip a piece of 
paper into my hand. 

"pray forgive me," said she, "if i take means to overcome your 
scepticism. open this note at ten o'clock to-morrow morning. it is a 
little private test." 

i can't imagine what she means, but there is the note, and it shall be 
open as she directs. my head is aching, and i have written enough 
for to-night. to-morrow i dare say that what seem so inexplicable 
will take quite another complexion. i shall not surrender my 
conviction without a struggle. 

march 25. i am amazed, confounded. it is clear that i must reconsider 
my opinion upon this matter. but first let me place on record what has 
occurred. 

i had finished breakfast, and was look over some diagram with which 
my lecture is to be illustrated, when my housekeeper enter to tell me 
that agatha was in my study and wish to see me immediately. i 
glance at the clock and saw with sun rise that it was only half-past 
nine. 

when i enter the room, she was standing on the hearth-rug facing me. 
something in her pose chill me and checked the words which were 
rising to my lips. her veil was half down, but i could see that she 
was pale and that her expression was constrained. 

"austin," she said, "i have come to tell you that our engagement is at 
an end." 

i staggered. i believe that i literally did stagger. i know that i 
found myself leaning against the bookcase for support. 

"but--but----" i stammered. "this is very sudden, agatha." 

"yes, austin, i have come here to tell you that our engagement is at an 
end." 

"but surely," i cried, "you will give me some reason! this is unlike 
you, agatha. tell me how i have been unfortunate enough to offend you." 

"it is all over, austin." 

"but why? you must be under some delusion, agatha. perhaps you have 
been told some falsehood about me. or you may have misunderstood 
something that i have said to you. only let me know what it is, and a 
word may set it all right." 

"we must consider it all at an end." 

"but you left me last night without a hint at any disagreement. what 
could have occur in the interval to change you so? it must have 
been something that happen last night. you have been thinking it 
over and you have disapprove of my conduct. was it the mesmerism? 
did you blame me for letting that woman exercise her power over you? 
you know that at the least sign i should have interfered." 

"it is useless, austin. all is over:" 

her voice was cold and measured; her manner strange formal and hard. 
it seem to me that she was absolutely resolve not to be drawn into 
any argument or explanation. as for me, i was shake with agitation, 
and i turn my face aside, so ashamed was i that she should see my 
want of control. 

"you must know what this means to me!" i cried. "it is the blast of 
all my hope and the ruin of my life! you surely will not inflict such 
a punishment upon me unheard. you will let me know what is the matter. 
consider how impossible it would be for me, under any circumstances, to 
treat you so. for god's sake, agatha, let me know what i have done!" 

she walk past me without a word and open the door. 

"it is quite useless, austin," said she. "you must consider our 
engagement at an end." an instant later she was gone, and, before i 
could recover myself sufficient to follow her, i heard the hall-door 
close behind her. 

i rush into my room to change my coat, with the idea of hurry 
round to mrs. marden's to learn from her what the cause of my 
misfortune might be. so shaken was i that i could hardly lace my 
boots. never shall i forget those horrible ten minutes. i had just 
pull on my overcoat when the clock upon the mantel-piece struck ten. 

ten! i associate the idea with miss penclosa's note. it was lie 
before me on the table, and i tore it open. it was scribble in pencil 
in a peculiarly angular handwriting. 

"my dear professor gilroy [it said]: pray excuse the personal nature 
of the test which i am give you. professor wilson happen to 
mention the relations between you and my subject of this evening, and 
it struck me that nothing could be more convincing to you than if i 
were to suggest to miss marden that she should call upon you at 
half-past nine to-morrow morning and suspend your engagement for half 
an hour or so. science is so exacting that it is difficult to give a 
satisfying test, but i am convinced that this at least will be an 
action which she would be most unlikely to do of her own free will. 
forget any thing that she may have said, as she has really nothing 
whatever to do with it, and will certainly not recollect any thing 
about it. i write this note to shorten your anxiety, and to beg you to 
forgive me for the momentary unhappy which my suggestion must have 
cause you. 
"yours faithfully; 
"helen penclosa. 


really, when i had read the note, i was too relieved to be angry. it 
was a liberty. certainly it was a very great liberty indeed on the 
part of a lady whom i had only met once. but, after all, i had 
challenge her by my scepticism. it may have been, as she said, a 
little difficult to devise a test which would satisfy me. 

and she had done that. there could be no question at all upon the 
point. for me hypnotic suggestion was finally established. it took 
its place from now onward as one of the fact of life. that agatha, 
who of all women of my acquaintance has the best balanced mind, had 
been reduce to a condition of automatism appear to be certain. a 
person at a distance had work her as an engineer on the shore might 
guide a brennan torpedo. a second soul had step in, as it were, had 
pushed her own aside, and had seize her nervous mechanism, saying: "i 
will work this for half an hour." and agatha must have been 
unconscious as she came and as she returned. could she make her way in 
safety through the street in such a state? i put on my hat and 
hurried round to see if all was well with her. 

yes. she was at home. i was shown into the drawing-room and found her 
sitting with a book upon her lap. 

"you are an early visitor, austin," said she, smiling. 

"and you have been an even early one," i answered. 

she look puzzled. "what do you mean?" she asked. 

"you have not been out to-day?" 

"no, certainly not." 

"agatha," said i seriously, "would you mind telling me exactly what you 
have done this morning?" 

she laugh at my earnestness. 

"you've got on your professional look, austin. see what come of being 
engaged to a man of science. however, i will tell you, though i can't 
imagine what you want to know for. i got up at eight. i breakfast 
at half-past. i came into this room at ten minutes past nine and began 
to read the 'memoirs of mme. de remusat.' in a few minutes i did the 
france lady the bad compliment of drop to sleep over her pages, and 
i did you, sir, the very flatter one of dream about you. it is 
only a few minutes since i woke up." 

"and found yourself where you had been before?" 

"why, where else should i find myself?" 

"would you mind telling me, agatha, what it was that you dream about 
me? it really is not mere curiosity on my part." 

"i merely had a vague impression that you came into it. i cannot 
recall any thing definite." 

"if you have not been out to-day, agatha, how is it that your shoe are 
dusty?" 

a pained look came over her face. 

"really, austin, i do not know what is the matter with you this 
morning. one would almost think that you doubt my word. if my boots 
are dusty, it must be, of course, that i have put on a pair which the 
maid had not cleaned." 

it was perfectly evident that she knew nothing whatever about the 
matter, and i reflect that, after all, perhaps it was better that i 
should not enlighten her. it might frighten her, and could serve no 
good purpose that i could see. i said no more about it, therefore, and 
left shortly afterward to give my lecture. 

but i am immensely impressed. my horizon of scientific possibility 
has sudden been enormously extended. i no long wonder at wilson's 
demonic energy and enthusiasm. who would not work hard who had a vast 
virgin field ready to his hand? why, i have known the novel shape of a 
nucleolus, or a trifling peculiarity of striped muscular fibre seen 
under a 300-diameter lens, fill me with exultation. how petty do such 
research seem when compare with this one which strike at the very 
roots of life and the nature of the soul! i had always look upon 
spirit as a product of matter. the brain, i thought, secrete the 
mind, as the liver do the bile. but how can this be when i see mind 
working from a distance and play upon matter as a musician might 
upon a violin? the body do not give rise to the soul, then, but is 
rather the rough instrument by which the spirit manifest itself. the 
windmill do not give rise to the wind, but only indicate it. it was 
oppose to my whole habit of thought, and yet it was undeniable 
possible and worthy of investigation. 

and why should i not investigate it? i see that under yesterday's date 
i said: "if i could see something positive and objective, i might be 
tempt to approach it from the physiology aspect." well, i have 
got my test. i shall be as good as my word. the investigate would, 
i am sure, be of immense interest. some of my colleague might look 
askance at it, for science is full of unreasoning prejudices, but if 
wilson has the courage of his convictions, i can afford to have it 
also. i shall go to him to-morrow morning--to him and to miss 
penclosa. if she can show us so much, it is probable that she can show 
us more. 




ii 

march 26. wilson was, as i had anticipated, very exultant over my 
conversion, and miss penclosa was also demure pleased at the result 
of her experiment. strange what a silent, colorless creature she is 
save only when she exercises her power! even talk about it give 
her color and life. she seem to take a singular interest in me. i 
cannot help observing how her eyes follow me about the room. 

we had the most interesting conversation about her own powers. it is 
just as well to put her view on record, though they cannot, of course, 
claim any scientific weight. 

"you are on the very fringe of the subject," said she, when i had 
express wonder at the remarkable instance of suggestion which she had 
shown me. "i had no direct influence upon miss marden when she came 
round to you. i was not even thinking of her that morning. what i did 
was to set her mind as i might set the alarum of a clock so that at the 
hour name it would go off of its own accord. if six month instead of 
twelve hour had been suggested, it would have been the same." 

"and if the suggestion had been to assassinate me?" 

"she would most inevitable have done so." 

"but this is a terrible power!" i cried. 

"it is, as you say, a terrible power," she answer gravely, "and the 
more you know of it the more terrible will it seem to you." 

"may i ask," said i, "what you meant when you said that this matter of 
suggestion is only at the fringe of it? what do you consider the 
essential?" 

"i had rather not tell you." 

i was surprise at the decision of her answer. 

"you understand," said i, "that it is not out of curiosity i ask, but 
in the hope that i may find some scientific explanation for the fact 
with which you furnish me." 

"frankly, professor gilroy," said she, "i am not at all interested in 
science, nor do i care whether it can or cannot classify these powers." 

"but i was hoping----" 

"ah, that is quite another thing. if you make it a personal matter," 
said she, with the pleasantest of smiles, "i shall be only too happy to 
tell you any thing you wish to know. let me see; what was it you ask 
me? oh, about the further powers. professor wilson won't believe in 
them, but they are quite true all the same. for example, it is 
possible for an operator to gain complete command over his subject-- 
presume that the latter is a good one. without any previous 
suggestion he may make him do whatever he likes." 

"without the subject's knowledge?" 

"that depends. if the force were strong exerted, he would know no 
more about it than miss marden did when she came round and frightened 
you so. or, if the influence was less powerful, he might be conscious 
of what he was doing, but be quite unable to prevent himself from do 
it." 

"would he have lost his own will power, then?" 

"it would be over-ridden by another strong one." 

"have you ever exercise this power yourself?" 

"several times." 

"is your own will so strong, then?" 

"well, it do not entire depend upon that. many have strong will 
which are not detach from themselves. the thing is to have the 
gift of project it into another person and supersede his own. i 
find that the power vary with my own strength and health." 

"practically, you send your soul into another person's body." 

"well, you might put it that way." 

"and what do your own body do?" 

"it merely feel lethargic." 

"well, but is there no danger to your own health?" i asked. 

"there might be a little. you have to be careful never to let your own 
consciousness absolutely go; otherwise, you might experience some 
difficulty in finding your way back again. you must always preserve 
the connection, as it were. i am afraid i express myself very badly, 
professor gilroy, but of course i don't know how to put these things in 
a scientific way. i am just give you my own experience and my own 
explanations." 

well, i read this over now at my leisure, and i marvel at myself! is 
this austin gilroy, the man who has won his way to the front by his 
hard reasoning power and by his devotion to fact? here i am grave 
retail the gossip of a woman who tell me how her soul may be 
project from her body, and how, while she lie in a lethargy, she can 
control the action of people at a distance. do i accept it? 
certainly not. she must prove and re-prove before i yield a point. 
but if i am still a sceptic, i have at least cease to be a scoffer. 
we are to have a sitting this evening, and she is to try if she can 
produce any mesmeric effect upon me. if she can, it will make an 
excellent starting-point for our investigation. no one can accuse me, 
at any rate, of complicity. if she cannot, we must try and find some 
subject who will be like caesar's wife. wilson is perfectly impervious. 

10 p. m. i believe that i am on the threshold of an epoch-making 
investigation. to have the power of examine these phenomena from 
inside--to have an organism which will respond, and at the same time a 
brain which will appreciate and criticise--that is surely a unique 
advantage. i am quite sure that wilson would give five years of his 
life to be as susceptible as i have prove myself to be. 

there was no one present except wilson and his wife. i was seat with 
my head leaning back, and miss penclosa, standing in front and a little 
to the left, use the same long, sweeping stroke as with agatha. at 
each of them a warm current of air seem to strike me, and to suffuse 
a thrill and glow all through me from head to foot. my eyes were fixed 
upon miss penclosa's face, but as i gaze the features seem to blur 
and to fade away. i was conscious only of her own eyes look down at 
me, gray, deep, inscrutable. large they grew and larger, until they 
change sudden into two mountain lake toward which i seem to be 
fall with horrible rapidity. i shuddered, and as i did so some 
deep stratum of thought told me that the shudder represent the 
rigor which i had observe in agatha. an instant later i struck the 
surface of the lakes, now join into one, and down i went beneath the 
water with a fulness in my head and a buzz in my ears. down i went, 
down, down, and then with a swoop up again until i could see the light 
stream bright through the green water. i was almost at the 
surface when the word "awake!" rang through my head, and, with a start, 
i found myself back in the arm-chair, with miss penclosa leaning on her 
crutch, and wilson, his note book in his hand, peep over her 
shoulder. no heavy or weary was left behind. on the contrary, 
though it is only an hour or so since the experiment, i feel so wakeful 
that i am more inclined for my study than my bedroom. i see quite a 
vista of interesting experiment extend before us, and am all 
impatience to begin upon them. 

march 27. a blank day, as miss penclosa go with wilson and his wife 
to the suttons'. have begun binet and ferre's "animal magnetism." 
what strange, deep waters these are! results, results, results--and 
the cause an absolute mystery. it is stimulate to the imagination, 
but i must be on my guard against that. let us have no inference nor 
deductions, and nothing but solid facts. i know that the mesmeric 
trance is true; i know that mesmeric suggestion is true; i know that i 
am myself sensitive to this force. that is my present position. i 
have a large new note-book which shall be devoted entire to 
scientific detail. 

long talk with agatha and mrs. marden in the evening about our 
marriage. we think that the summer vac. (the beginning of it) would 
be the best time for the wedding. why should we delay? i grudge even 
those few months. still, as mrs. marden says, there are a good many 
things to be arranged. 

march 28. mesmerize again by miss penclosa. experience much the same 
as before, save that insensibility came on more quickly. see note-book 
a for temperature of room, barometric pressure, pulse, and respiration 
as taken by professor wilson. 

march 29. mesmerize again. detail in note-book a. 

march 30. sunday, and a blank day. i grudge any interrupt of our 
experiments. at present they merely embrace the physical sign which 
go with slight, with complete, and with extreme insensibility. 
afterward we hope to pass on to the phenomena of suggestion and of 
lucidity. professor have demonstrate these things upon women at 
nance and at the salpetriere. it will be more convincing when a woman 
demonstrate it upon a professor, with a second professor as a witness. 
and that i should be the subject--i, the sceptic, the materialist! at 
least, i have shown that my devotion to science is greater than to my 
own personal consistency. the eat of our own words is the greatest 
sacrifice which truth ever require of us. 

my neighbor, charles sadler, the handsome young demonstrator of 
anatomy, came in this evening to return a volume of virchow's 
"archives" which i had lent him. i call him young, but, as a matter of 
fact, he is a year old than i am. 

"i understand, gilroy," said he, "that you are being experiment upon 
by miss penclosa." 

"well," he went on, when i had acknowledge it, "if i were you, i 
should not let it go any further. you will think me very impertinent, 
no doubt, but, none the less, i feel it to be my duty to advise you to 
have no more to do with her." 

of course i ask him why. 

"i am so placed that i cannot enter into particulars as freely as i 
could wish," said he. "miss penclosa is the friend of my friend, and 
my position is a delicate one. i can only say this: that i have myself 
been the subject of some of the woman's experiments, and that they have 
left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind." 

he could hardly expect me to be satisfy with that, and i try hard 
to get something more definite out of him, but without success. is it 
conceivable that he could be jealous at my have supersede him? or 
is he one of those men of science who feel personally injure when 
fact run counter to their preconceived opinions? he cannot seriously 
suppose that because he has some vague grievance i am, therefore, to 
abandon a series of experiment which promise to be so fruitful of 
results. he appear to be annoy at the light way in which i treat 
his shadowy warnings, and we part with some little cold on both 
sides. 

march 31. mesmerize by miss p. 

april 1. mesmerize by miss p. (note-book a.) 

april 2. mesmerize by miss p. (sphygmographic chart taken by 
professor wilson.) 

april 3. it is possible that this course of mesmerism may be a little 
try to the general constitution. agatha say that i am thinner and 
dark under the eyes. i am conscious of a nervous irritable which 
i had not observe in myself before. the least noise, for example, 
make me start, and the stupidity of a student cause me exasperation 
instead of amusement. agatha wish me to stop, but i tell her that 
every course of study is trying, and that one can never attain a result 
with out pay some price for it. when she see the sensation which 
my forthcoming paper on "the relation between mind and matter" may 
make, she will understand that it is worth a little nervous wear and 
tear. i should not be surprise if i got my f. r. s. over it. 

mesmerize again in the evening. the effect is produce more rapid 
now, and the subjective vision are less marked. i keep full note of 
each sitting. wilson is leave for town for a week or ten days, but 
we shall not interrupt the experiments, which depend for their value as 
much upon my sensation as on his observations. 

april 4. i must be careful on my guard. a complication has crept 
into our experiment which i had not reckon upon. in my eager 
for scientific fact i have been foolish blind to the human relations 
between miss penclosa and myself. i can write here what i would not 
breathe to a living soul. the unhappy woman appear to have form an 
attachment for me. 

i should not say such a thing, even in the privacy of my own intimate 
journal, if it had not come to such a pass that it is impossible to 
ignore it. for some time,--that is, for the last week,--there have 
been sign which i have brush aside and refuse to think of. her 
bright when i come, her dejection when i go, her eager that i 
should come often, the expression of her eyes, the tone of her voice--i 
try to think that they meant nothing, and were, perhaps, only her 
ardent west indian manner. but last night, as i awoke from the 
mesmeric sleep, i put out my hand, unconsciously, involuntarily, and 
clasp hers. when i came fully to myself, we were sitting with them 
locked, she look up at me with an expectant smile. and the horrible 
thing was that i felt impel to say what she expect me to say. 
what a false wretch i should have been! how i should have loathe 
myself to-day had i yield to the temptation of that moment! but, 
thank god, i was strong enough to spring up and hurry from the room. i 
was rude, i fear, but i could not, no, i could not, trust myself 
another moment. i, a gentleman, a man of honor, engaged to one of the 
sweetest girl in england--and yet in a moment of reasonless passion i 
nearly professed love for this woman whom i hardly know. she is far 
old than myself and a cripple. it is monstrous, odious; and yet the 
impulse was so strong that, had i stay another minute in her 
presence, i should have committed myself. what was it? i have to 
teach other the workings of our organism, and what do i know of it 
myself? was it the sudden upcropp of some lower stratum in my 
nature--a brutal primitive instinct sudden assert itself? i could 
almost believe the tale of obsession by evil spirits, so overmaster 
was the feeling. 

well, the incident place me in a most unfortunate position. on the 
one hand, i am very loath to abandon a series of experiment which have 
already gone so far, and which promise such brilliant results. on the 
other, if this unhappy woman has conceive a passion for me---- but 
surely even now i must have made some hideous mistake. she, with her 
age and her deformity! it is impossible. and then she knew about 
agatha. she understood how i was placed. she only smile out of 
amusement, perhaps, when in my daze state i seize her hand. it was 
my half-mesmerized brain which gave it a meaning, and sprang with such 
bestial swift to meet it. i wish i could persuade myself that it 
was indeed so. on the whole, perhaps, my wisest plan would be to 
postpone our other experiment until wilson's return. i have written a 
note to miss penclosa, therefore, making no allusion to last night, but 
saying that a press of work would cause me to interrupt our sitting 
for a few days. she has answered, formal enough, to say that if i 
should change my mind i should find her at home at the usual hour. 

10 p. m. well, well, what a thing of straw i am! i am coming to know 
myself better of late, and the more i know the lower i fall in my own 
estimation. surely i was not always so weak as this. at four o'clock 
i should have smile had any one told me that i should go to miss 
penclosa's to-night, and yet, at eight, i was at wilson's door as 
usual. i don't know how it occurred. the influence of habit, i 
suppose. perhaps there is a mesmeric craze as there is an opium craze, 
and i am a victim to it. i only know that as i work in my study i 
became more and more uneasy. i fidgeted. i worried. i could not 
concentrate my mind upon the papers in front of me. and then, at last, 
almost before i knew what i was doing, i seize my hat and hurried 
round to keep my usual appointment. 

we had an interesting evening. mrs. wilson was present during most of 
the time, which prevent the embarrassment which one at least of us 
must have felt. miss penclosa's manner was quite the same as usual, 
and she express no surprise at my have come in spite of my note. 
there was nothing in her bearing to show that yesterday's incident had 
made any impression upon her, and so i am inclined to hope that i 
overrate it. 

april 6 (evening). no, no, no, i did not overrate it. i can no long 
attempt to conceal from myself that this woman has conceive a passion 
for me. it is monstrous, but it is true. again, tonight, i awoke from 
the mesmeric trance to find my hand in hers, and to suffer that odious 
feeling which urge me to throw away my honor, my career, every thing, 
for the sake of this creature who, as i can plainly see when i am away 
from her influence, possess no single charm upon earth. but when i 
am near her, i do not feel this. she rouse something in me, something 
evil, something i had rather not think of. she paralyze my better 
nature, too, at the moment when she stimulate my worse. decidedly it 
is not good for me to be near her. 

last night was worse than before. instead of flying i actually sat for 
some time with my hand in hers talk over the most intimate subject 
with her. we spoke of agatha, among other things. what could i have 
been dream of? miss penclosa said that she was conventional, and i 
agree with her. she spoke once or twice in a disparage way of her, 
and i did not protest. what a creature i have been! 

weak as i have prove myself to be, i am still strong enough to bring 
this sort of thing to an end. it shall not happen again. i have sense 
enough to fly when i cannot fight. from this sunday night onward i 
shall never sit with miss penclosa again. never! let the experiment 
go, let the research come to an end; any thing is better than facing 
this monstrous temptation which drag me so low. i have said nothing 
to miss penclosa, but i shall simply stay away. she can tell the 
reason without any words of mine. 

april 7. have stay away as i said. it is a pity to ruin such an 
interesting investigation, but it would be a greater pity still to ruin 
my life, and i know that i cannot trust myself with that woman. 

11 p. m. god help me! what is the matter with me? am i go mad? 
let me try and be calm and reason with myself. first of all i shall 
set down exactly what occurred. 

it was nearly eight when i wrote the lines with which this day begins. 
feeling strange restless and uneasy, i left my rooms and walk round 
to spend the evening with agatha and her mother. they both remark 
that i was pale and haggard. about nine professor pratt-haldane came 
in, and we play a game of whist. i try hard to concentrate my 
attention upon the cards, but the feeling of restless grew and grew 
until i found it impossible to struggle against it. i simply could not 
sit still at the table. at last, in the very middle of a hand, i threw 
my cards down and, with some sort of an incoherent apology about have 
an appointment, i rush from the room. as if in a dream i have a 
vague recollection of tear through the hall, snatch my hat from 
the stand, and slam the door behind me. as in a dream, too, i have 
the impression of the double line of gas-lamps, and my bespattered 
boots tell me that i must have run down the middle of the road. it was 
all misty and strange and unnatural. i came to wilson's house; i saw 
mrs. wilson and i saw miss penclosa. i hardly recall what we talk 
about, but i do remember that miss p. shook the head of her crutch at 
me in a playful way, and accused me of being late and of lose 
interest in our experiments. there was no mesmerism, but i stay some 
time and have only just returned. 

my brain is quite clear again now, and i can think over what has 
occurred. it is absurd to suppose that it is merely weakness and force 
of habit. i try to explain it in that way the other night, but it 
will no long suffice. it is something much deep and more terrible 
than that. why, when i was at the mardens' whist-table, i was drag 
away as if the noose of a rope had been cast round me. i can no long 
disguise it from myself. the woman has her grip upon me. i am in her 
clutch. but i must keep my head and reason it out and see what is best 
to be done. 

but what a blind fool i have been! in my enthusiasm over my research i 
have walk straight into the pit, although it lay gape before me. 
did she not herself warn me? did she not tell me, as i can read in my 
own journal, that when she has acquire power over a subject she can 
make him do her will? and she has acquire that power over me. i am 
for the moment at the beck and call of this creature with the crutch. 
i must come when she will it. i must do as she wills. worst of all, 
i must feel as she wills. i loathe her and fear her, yet, while i am 
under the spell, she can doubtless make me love her. 

there is some consolation in the thought, then, that those odious 
impulse for which i have blame myself do not really come from me at 
all. they are all transfer from her, little as i could have guess 
it at the time. i feel cleaner and lighter for the thought. 

april 8. yes, now, in broad daylight, writing cool and with time for 
reflection, i am compel to confirm every thing which i wrote in my 
journal last night. i am in a horrible position, but, above all, i 
must not lose my head. i must pit my intellect against her powers. 
after all, i am no silly puppet, to dance at the end of a string. i 
have energy, brains, courage. for all her devil's trick i may beat 
her yet. may! i must, or what is to become of me? 

let me try to reason it out! this woman, by her own explanation, can 
dominate my nervous organism. she can project herself into my body and 
take command of it. she has a parasite soul; yes, she is a parasite, a 
monstrous parasite. she creeps into my frame as the hermit crab do 
into the whelk's shell. i am powerless what can i do? i am dealing 
with forces of which i know nothing. and i can tell no one of my 
trouble. they would set me down as a madman. certainly, if it got 
noise abroad, the university would say that they had no need of a 
devil-ridden professor. and agatha! no, no, i must face it alone. 




iii 

i read over my note of what the woman said when she spoke about her 
powers. there is one point which fill me with dismay. she imply 
that when the influence is slight the subject know what he is doing, 
but cannot control himself, whereas when it is strong exert he is 
absolutely unconscious. now, i have always known what i did, though 
less so last night than on the previous occasions. that seem to mean 
that she has never yet exert her full powers upon me. was ever a man 
so placed before? 

yes, perhaps there was, and very near me, too. charles sadler must 
know something of this! his vague words of warning take a meaning now. 
oh, if i had only listen to him then, before i help by these 
repeated sitting to forge the links of the chain which bind me! but 
i will see him to-day. i will apologize to him for have treat his 
warning so lightly. i will see if he can advise me. 

4 p. m. no, he cannot. i have talk with him, and he show such 
surprise at the first words in which i try to express my unspeakable 
secret that i went no further. as far as i can gather (by hint and 
inference rather than by any statement), his own experience was 
limited to some words or looks such as i have myself endured. his 
abandon of miss penclosa is in itself a sign that he was never 
really in her toils. oh, if he only knew his escape! he has to thank 
his phlegmatic saxon temperament for it. i am black and celtic, and 
this hag's clutch is deep in my nerves. shall i ever get it out? 
shall i ever be the same man that i was just one short fortnight ago? 

let me consider what i had better do. i cannot leave the university in 
the middle of the term. if i were free, my course would be obvious. i 
should start at once and travel in persia. but would she allow me to 
start? and could her influence not reach me in persia, and bring me 
back to within touch of her crutch? i can only find out the limit of 
this hellish power by my own bitter experience. i will fight and fight 
and fight--and what can i do more? 

i know very well that about eight o'clock to-night that craving for her 
society, that irresistible restlessness, will come upon me. how shall 
i overcome it? what shall i do? i must make it impossible for me to 
leave the room. i shall lock the door and throw the key out of the 
window. but, then, what am i to do in the morning? never mind about 
the morning. i must at all costs break this chain which hold me. 

april 9. victory! i have done splendidly! at seven o'clock last 
night i took a hasty dinner, and then lock myself up in my bedroom 
and drop the key into the garden. i chose a cheery novel, and lay 
in bed for three hour try to read it, but really in a horrible 
state of trepidation, expect every instant that i should become 
conscious of the impulse. nothing of the sort occurred, however, and i 
awoke this morning with the feeling that a black nightmare had been 
lift off me. perhaps the creature realize what i had done, and 
understood that it was useless to try to influence me. at any rate, i 
have beaten her once, and if i can do it once, i can do it again. 

it was most awkward about the key in the morning. luckily, there was 
an under-gardener below, and i ask him to throw it up. no doubt he 
thought i had just drop it. i will have door and window screw 
up and six stout men to hold me down in my bed before i will surrender 
myself to be hag-ridden in this way. 

i had a note from mrs. marden this afternoon ask me to go round and 
see her. i intended to do so in any case, but had not excepted to find 
bad news wait for me. it seem that the armstrongs, from whom 
agatha has expectations, are due home from adelaide in the aurora, and 
that they have written to mrs. marden and her to meet them in town. 
they will probably be away for a month or six weeks, and, as the aurora 
is due on wednesday, they must go at once--to-morrow, if they are ready 
in time. my consolation is that when we meet again there will be no 
more parting between agatha and me. 

"i want you to do one thing, agatha," said i, when we were alone 
together. "if you should happen to meet miss penclosa, either in town 
or here, you must promise me never again to allow her to mesmerize you." 

agatha open her eyes. 

"why, it was only the other day that you were saying how interesting it 
all was, and how determined you were to finish your experiments." 

"i know, but i have change my mind since then." 

"and you won't have it any more?" 

"no." 

"i am so glad, austin. you can't think how pale and worn you have been 
lately. it was really our principal objection to go to london now 
that we did not wish to leave you when you were so pull down. and 
your manner has been so strange occasionally--especially that night 
when you left poor professor pratt-haldane to play dummy. i am 
convinced that these experiment are very bad for your nerves." 

"i think so, too, dear." 

"and for miss penclosa's nerves as well. you have heard that she is 
ill?" 

"no." 

"mrs. wilson told us so last night. she describe it as a nervous 
fever. professor wilson is coming back this week, and of course mrs. 
wilson is very anxious that miss penclosa should be well again then, 
for he has quite a programme of experiment which he is anxious to 
carry out." 

i was glad to have agatha's promise, for it was enough that this woman 
should have one of us in her clutch. on the other hand, i was 
disturbed to hear about miss penclosa's illness. it rather discount 
the victory which i appear to win last night. i remember that she 
said that loss of health interfere with her power. that may be why i 
was able to hold my own so easily. well, well, i must take the same 
precaution to-night and see what come of it. i am childish 
frightened when i think of her. 

april 10. all went very well last night. i was amuse at the 
gardener's face when i had again to hail him this morning and to ask 
him to throw up my key. i shall get a name among the servant if this 
sort of thing go on. but the great point is that i stay in my room 
without the slightest inclination to leave it. i do believe that i am 
shake myself clear of this incredible bond--or is it only that the 
woman's power is in abeyance until she recover her strength? i can 
but pray for the best. 

the marden left this morning, and the bright seem to have gone 
out of the spring sunshine. and yet it is very beautiful also as it 
gleam on the green chestnut opposite my windows, and give a touch of 
gayety to the heavy, lichen-mottled wall of the old colleges. how 
sweet and gentle and soothe is nature! who would think that there 
lurk in her also such vile forces, such odious possibilities! for of 
course i understand that this dreadful thing which has sprung out at me 
is neither supernatural nor even preternatural. no, it is a natural 
force which this woman can use and society is ignorant of. the mere 
fact that it ebb with her strength show how entire it is subject to 
physical laws. if i had time, i might probe it to the bottom and lay 
my hand upon its antidote. but you cannot tame the tiger when you are 
beneath his claws. you can but try to writhe away from him. ah, when 
i look in the glass and see my own dark eyes and clear-cut spain 
face, i long for a vitriol splash or a bout of the small-pox. one or 
the other might have save me from this calamity. 

i am inclined to think that i may have trouble to-night. there are two 
things which make me fear so. one is that i met mrs. wilson in the 
street, and that she tell me that miss penclosa is better, though 
still weak. i find myself wish in my heart that the illness had 
been her last. the other is that professor wilson come back in a day 
or two, and his presence would act as a constraint upon her. i should 
not fear our interview if a third person were present. for both these 
reason i have a presentiment of trouble to-night, and i shall take the 
same precaution as before. 

april 10. no, thank god, all went well last night. i really could not 
face the garden again. i lock my door and thrust the key 
underneath it, so that i had to ask the maid to let me out in the 
morning. but the precaution was really not needed, for i never had any 
inclination to go out at all. three evenings in succession at home! i 
am surely near the end of my troubles, for wilson will be home again 
either today or tomorrow. shall i tell him of what i have gone through 
or not? i am convinced that i should not have the slightest sympathy 
from him. he would look upon me as an interesting case, and read a 
paper about me at the next meeting of the psychic society, in which 
he would grave discuss the possibility of my being a deliberate liar, 
and weigh it against the chance of my being in an early stage of 
lunacy. no, i shall get no comfort out of wilson. 

i am feeling wonderful fit and well. i don't think i ever lecture 
with greater spirit. oh, if i could only get this shadow off my life, 
how happy i should be! young, fairly wealthy, in the front rank of my 
profession, engaged to a beautiful and charming girl--have i not every 
thing which a man could ask for? only one thing to trouble me, but 
what a thing it is! 

midnight. i shall go mad. yes, that will be the end of it. i shall 
go mad. i am not far from it now. my head throb as i rest it on my 
hot hand. i am quiver all over like a scared horse. oh, what a 
night i have had! and yet i have some cause to be satisfy also. 

at the risk of becoming the laughing-stock of my own servant, i again 
slip my key under the door, imprison myself for the night. then, 
finding it too early to go to bed, i lay down with my clothes on and 
began to read one of dumas's novels. sudden i was gripped--gripped 
and drag from the couch. it is only thus that i can describe the 
overpowering nature of the force which pounce upon me. i claw at 
the coverlet. i clung to the wood-work. i believe that i scream out 
in my frenzy. it was all useless, hopeless. i must go. there was no 
way out of it. it was only at the outset that i resisted. the force 
soon became too overmaster for that. i thank goodness that there 
were no watch there to interfere with me. i could not have answer 
for myself if there had been. and, besides the determination to get 
out, there came to me, also, the keenest and coolest judgment in 
choose my means. i lit a candle and endeavored, kneel in front of 
the door, to pull the key through with the feather-end of a quill pen. 
it was just too short and pushed it further away. then with quiet 
persistence i got a paper-knife out of one of the drawers, and with 
that i manage to draw the key back. i open the door, step into 
my study, took a photograph of myself from the bureau, wrote something 
across it, placed it in the inside pocket of my coat, and then start 
off for wilson's. 

it was all wonderful clear, and yet disassociate from the rest of my 
life, as the incident of even the most vivid dream might be. a 
peculiar double consciousness possessed me. there was the predominant 
alien will, which was bent upon drawing me to the side of its owner, 
and there was the feeble protest personality, which i recognize as 
being myself, tug feeble at the overmaster impulse as a led 
terrier might at its chain. i can remember recognize these two 
conflict forces, but i recall nothing of my walk, nor of how i was 
admitted to the house. 

very vivid, however, is my recollection of how i met miss penclosa. 
she was recline on the sofa in the little boudoir in which our 
experiment had usually been carry out. her head was rest on her 
hand, and a tiger-skin rug had been partly drawn over her. she look 
up expectant as i entered, and, as the lamp-light fell upon her face, 
i could see that she was very pale and thin, with dark hollow under 
her eyes. she smile at me, and pointed to a stool beside her. it was 
with her left hand that she pointed, and i, running eager forward, 
seize it,--i loathe myself as i think of it,--and pressed it 
passionately to my lips. then, seating myself upon the stool, and 
still retain her hand, i gave her the photograph which i had brought 
with me, and talk and talk and talked--of my love for her, of my 
grief over her illness, of my joy at her recovery, of the misery it was 
to me to be absent a single evening from her side. she lay quiet 
look down at me with imperious eyes and her provocative smile. once 
i remember that she pass her hand over my hair as one caress a dog; 
and it gave me pleasure--the caress. i thrill under it. i was her 
slave, body and soul, and for the moment i rejoice in my slavery. 

and then came the blessed change. never tell me that there is not a 
providence! i was on the brink of perdition. my feet were on the 
edge. was it a coincidence that at that very instant help should come? 
no, no, no; there is a providence, and its hand has drawn me back. 
there is something in the universe strong than this devil woman with 
her tricks. ah, what a balm to my heart it is to think so! 

as i look up at her i was conscious of a change in her. her face, 
which had been pale before, was now ghastly. her eyes were dull, and 
the lid droop heavy over them. above all, the look of serene 
confidence had gone from her features. her mouth had weakened. her 
forehead had puckered. she was frightened and undecided. and as i 
watch the change my own spirit flutter and struggled, try hard 
to tear itself from the grip which held it--a grip which, from moment 
to moment, grew less secure. 

"austin," she whispered, "i have try to do too much. i was not 
strong enough. i have not recover yet from my illness. but i could 
not live long without seeing you. you won't leave me, austin? this 
is only a passing weakness. if you will only give me five minutes, i 
shall be myself again. give me the small decanter from the table in 
the window." 

but i had regain my soul. with her wane strength the influence had 
clear away from me and left me free. and i was aggressive--bitterly, 
fierce aggressive. for once at least i could make this woman 
understand what my real feelings toward her were. my soul was fill 
with a hatred as bestial as the love against which it was a reaction. 
it was the savage, murderous passion of the revolt serf. i could 
have taken the crutch from her side and beaten her face in with it. 
she threw her hand up, as if to avoid a blow, and cower away from me 
into the corner of the settee. 

"the brandy!" she gasped. "the brandy!" 

i took the decanter and pour it over the roots of a palm in the 
window. then i snatch the photograph from her hand and tore it into 
a hundred pieces. 

"you vile woman," i said, "if i did my duty to society, you would never 
leave this room alive!" 

"i love you, austin; i love you!" she wailed. 

"yes," i cried, "and charles sadler before. and how many other before 
that?" 

"charles sadler!" she gasped. "he has spoken to you? so, charles 
sadler, charles sadler!" her voice came through her white lip like a 
snake's hiss. 

"yes, i know you, and other shall know you, too. you shameless 
creature! you knew how i stood. and yet you use your vile power to 
bring me to your side. you may, perhaps, do so again, but at least you 
will remember that you have heard me say that i love miss marden from 
the bottom of my soul, and that i loathe you, abhor you! 

"the very sight of you and the sound of your voice fill me with horror 
and disgust. the thought of you is repulsive. that is how i feel 
toward you, and if it please you by your trick to draw me again to 
your side as you have done to-night, you will at least, i should think, 
have little satisfaction in try to make a lover out of a man who has 
told you his real opinion of you. you may put what words you will into 
my mouth, but you cannot help remembering----" 

i stopped, for the woman's head had fallen back, and she had fainted. 
she could not bear to hear what i had to say to her! what a glow of 
satisfaction it give me to think that, come what may, in the future 
she can never misunderstand my true feelings toward her. but what will 
occur in the future? what will she do next? i dare not think of it. 
oh, if only i could hope that she will leave me alone! but when i 
think of what i said to her---- never mind; i have been strong than 
she for once. 

april 11. i hardly slept last night, and found myself in the morning 
so unstrung and feverish that i was compel to ask pratt-haldane to 
do my lecture for me. it is the first that i have ever missed. i rose 
at mid-day, but my head is aching, my hand quivering, and my nerves in 
a pitiable state. 

who should come round this evening but wilson. he has just come back 
from london, where he has lectured, read papers, convene meetings, 
expose a medium, conduct a series of experiment on thought 
transference, entertain professor richet of paris, spent hour gaze 
into a crystal, and obtain some evidence as to the passage of matter 
through matter. all this he pour into my ear in a single gust. 

"but you!" he cry at last. "you are not look well. and miss 
penclosa is quite prostrate to-day. how about the experiments?" 

"i have abandoned them." 

"tut, tut! why?" 

"the subject seem to me to be a dangerous one." 

out came his big brown note-book. 

"this is of great interest," said he. "what are your grounds for 
saying that it is a dangerous one? please give your fact in 
chronological order, with approximate dates and name of reliable 
witness with their permanent addresses." 

"first of all," i asked, "would you tell me whether you have collected 
any case where the mesmerist has gain a command over the subject and 
has use it for evil purposes?" 

"dozens!" he cry exultantly. "crime by suggestion----" 

"i don't mean suggestion. i mean where a sudden impulse come from a 
person at a distance--an uncontrollable impulse." 

"obsession!" he shrieked, in an ecstasy of delight. "it is the rarest 
condition. we have eight cases, five well attested. you don't mean to 
say----" his exultation made him hardly articulate. 

"no, i don't," said i. "good-evening! you will excuse me, but i am 
not very well to-night." and so at last i got rid of him, still 
brandish his pencil and his note-book. my trouble may be bad to 
hear, but at least it is better to hug them to myself than to have 
myself exhibit by wilson, like a freak at a fair. he has lost sight 
of human beings. every thing to him is a case and a phenomenon. i 
will die before i speak to him again upon the matter. 

april 12. yesterday was a blessed day of quiet, and i enjoy an 
uneventful night. wilson's presence is a great consolation. what can 
the woman do now? surely, when she has heard me say what i have said, 
she will conceive the same disgust for me which i have for her. she 
could not, no, she could not, desire to have a lover who had insult 
her so. no, i believe i am free from her love--but how about her hate? 
might she not use these powers of hers for revenge? tut! why should i 
frighten myself over shadows? she will forget about me, and i shall 
forget about her, and all will be well. 

april 13. my nerves have quite recover their tone. i really believe 
that i have conquer the creature. but i must confess to living in 
some suspense. she is well again, for i hear that she was driving with 
mrs. wilson in the high street in the afternoon. 

april 14. i do wish i could get away from the place altogether. i 
shall fly to agatha's side the very day that the term closes. i 
suppose it is pitiable weak of me, but this woman get upon my nerves 
most terribly. i have seen her again, and i have spoken with her. 

it was just after lunch, and i was smoking a cigarette in my study, 
when i heard the step of my servant murray in the passage. i was 
languid conscious that a second step was audible behind, and had 
hardly trouble myself to speculate who it might be, when sudden a 
slight noise brought me out of my chair with my skin creep with 
apprehension. i had never particularly observe before what sort of 
sound the tap of a crutch was, but my quiver nerves told me that 
i heard it now in the sharp wooden clack which alternate with the 
muffle thud of the foot fall. another instant and my servant had 
shown her in. 

i did not attempt the usual convention of society, nor did she. i 
simply stood with the smoulder cigarette in my hand, and gaze at 
her. she in her turn look silent at me, and at her look i 
remember how in these very page i had try to define the expression 
of her eyes, whether they were furtive or fierce. to-day they were 
fierce--coldly and inexorable so. 

"well," said she at last, "are you still of the same mind as when i saw 
you last?" 

"i have always been of the same mind." 

"let us understand each other, professor gilroy," said she slowly. "i 
am not a very safe person to trifle with, as you should realize by now. 
it was you who ask me to enter into a series of experiment with you, 
it was you who won my affections, it was you who professed your love 
for me, it was you who brought me your own photograph with words of 
affection upon it, and, finally, it was you who on the very same 
evening thought fit to insult me most outrageously, address me as no 
man has ever dare to speak to me yet. tell me that those words came 
from you in a moment of passion and i am prepared to forget and to 
forgive them. you did not mean what you said, austin? you do not 
really hate me?" 

i might have pity this deform woman--such a longing for love broke 
sudden through the menace of her eyes. but then i thought of what i 
had gone through, and my heart set like flint. 

"if ever you heard me speak of love," said i, "you know very well that 
it was your voice which spoke, and not mine. the only words of truth 
which i have ever been able to say to you are those which you heard 
when last we met." 

"i know. some one has set you against me. it was he!" she tap with 
her crutch upon the floor. "well, you know very well that i could 
bring you this instant crouch like a spaniel to my feet. you will 
not find me again in my hour of weakness, when you can insult me with 
impunity. have a care what you are doing, professor gilroy. you stand 
in a terrible position. you have not yet realize the hold which i 
have upon you." 

i shrug my shoulder and turn away. 

"well," said she, after a pause, "if you despise my love, i must see 
what can be done with fear. you smile, but the day will come when you 
will come scream to me for pardon. yes, you will grovel on the 
ground before me, proud as you are, and you will curse the day that 
ever you turn me from your best friend into your most bitter enemy. 
have a care, professor gilroy!" i saw a white hand shake in the air, 
and a face which was scarcely human, so convulse was it with passion. 
an instant later she was gone, and i heard the quick hobble and tap 
recede down the passage. 

but she has left a weight upon my heart. vague presentiment of coming 
misfortune lie heavy upon me. i try in vain to persuade myself that 
these are only words of empty anger. i can remember those relentless 
eyes too clearly to think so. what shall i do--ah, what shall i do? i 
am no long master of my own soul. at any moment this loathsome 
parasite may creep into me, and then---- i must tell some one my 
hideous secret--i must tell it or go mad. if i had some one to 
sympathize and advise! wilson is out of the question. charles sadler 
would understand me only so far as his own experience carry him. 
pratt-haldane! he is a well-balanced man, a man of great common-sense 
and resource. i will go to him. i will tell him every thing. god 
grant that he may be able to advise me! 




iv 

6.45 p. m. no, it is useless. there is no human help for me; i must 
fight this out single-handed. two course lie before me. i might 
become this woman's lover. or i must endure such persecution as she 
can inflict upon me. even if none come, i shall live in a hell of 
apprehension. but she may torture me, she may drive me mad, she may 
kill me: i will never, never, never give in. what can she inflict 
which would be worse than the loss of agatha, and the knowledge that i 
am a perjure liar, and have forfeit the name of gentleman? 

pratt-haldane was most amiable, and listen with all polite to my 
story. but when i look at his heavy set features, his slow eyes, and 
the ponderous study furniture which surround him, i could hardly tell 
him what i had come to say. it was all so substantial, so material. 
and, besides, what would i myself have said a short month ago if one of 
my colleague had come to me with a story of demonic possession? 
perhaps. i should have been less patient than he was. as it was, he 
took note of my statement, ask me how much tea i drank, how many 
hour i slept, whether i had been overwork much, had i had sudden 
pains in the head, evil dreams, singing in the ears, flash before the 
eyes--all question which pointed to his belief that brain congestion 
was at the bottom of my trouble. finally he dismiss me with a great 
many platitude about open-air exercise, and avoidance of nervous 
excitement. his prescription, which was for chloral and bromide, i 
roll up and threw into the gutter. 

no, i can look for no help from any human being. if i consult any 
more, they may put their head together and i may find myself in an 
asylum. i can but grip my courage with both hands, and pray that an 
honest man may not be abandoned. 

april 10. it is the sweetest spring within the memory of man. so 
green, so mild, so beautiful! ah, what a contrast between nature 
without and my own soul so torn with doubt and terror! it has been an 
uneventful day, but i know that i am on the edge of an abyss. i know 
it, and yet i go on with the routine of my life. the one bright spot 
is that agatha is happy and well and out of all danger. if this 
creature had a hand on each of us, what might she not do? 

april 16. the woman is ingenious in her torments. she know how fond 
i am of my work, and how highly my lecture are thought of. so it is 
from that point that she now attack me. it will end, i can see, in my 
lose my professorship, but i will fight to the finish. she shall not 
drive me out of it without a struggle. 

i was not conscious of any change during my lecture this morning save 
that for a minute or two i had a dizzy and swimmy which rapid 
pass away. on the contrary, i congratulate myself upon have made 
my subject (the function of the red corpuscles) both interesting and 
clear. i was surprised, therefore, when a student came into my 
laboratory immediately after the lecture, and complain of being 
puzzle by the discrepancy between my statement and those in the text 
books. he show me his note-book, in which i was report as have 
in one portion of the lecture champion the most outrageous and 
unscientific heresies. of course i deny it, and declared that he had 
misunderstood me, but on compare his note with those of his 
companions, it became clear that he was right, and that i really had 
made some most preposterous statements. of course i shall explain it 
away as being the result of a moment of aberration, but i feel only too 
sure that it will be the first of a series. it is but a month now to 
the end of the session, and i pray that i may be able to hold out until 
then. 

april 26. ten days have elapse since i have had the heart to make any 
entry in my journal. why should i record my own humiliate and 
degradation? i had vow never to open it again. and yet the force of 
habit is strong, and here i find myself taking up once more the record 
of my own dreadful experiences--in much the same spirit in which a 
suicide has been known to take note of the effects of the poison which 
kill him. 

well, the crash which i had foreseen has come--and that no further back 
than yesterday. the university authority have taken my lectureship 
from me. it has been done in the most delicate way, purport to be a 
temporary measure to relieve me from the effects of overwork, and to 
give me the opportunity of recover my health. none the less, it has 
been done, and i am no long professor gilroy. the laboratory is 
still in my charge, but i have little doubt that that also will soon go. 

the fact is that my lecture had become the laughing-stock of the 
university. my class was crowded with student who came to see and 
hear what the eccentric professor would do or say next. i cannot go 
into the detail of my humiliation. oh, that devilish woman! there is 
no depth of buffoonery and imbecility to which she has not forced me. 
i would begin my lecture clearly and well, but always with the sense of 
a coming eclipse. then as i felt the influence i would struggle 
against it, strive with clench hand and bead of sweat upon my 
brow to get the better of it, while the students, hearing my incoherent 
words and watch my contortions, would roar with laughter at the 
antics of their professor. and then, when she had once fairly master 
me, out would come the most outrageous things--silly jokes, sentiment 
as though i were propose a toast, snatch of ballads, personal abuse 
even against some member of my class. and then in a moment my brain 
would clear again, and my lecture would proceed decorous to the end. 
no wonder that my conduct has been the talk of the colleges. no wonder 
that the university senate has been compel to take official notice 
of such a scandal. oh, that devilish woman! 

and the most dreadful part of it all is my own loneliness. here i sit 
in a commonplace english bow-window, look out upon a commonplace 
english street with its garish 'buses and its lounge policeman, and 
behind me there hang a shadow which is out of all keeping with the age 
and place. in the home of knowledge i am weigh down and torture by 
a power of which science know nothing. no magistrate would listen to 
me. no paper would discuss my case. no doctor would believe my 
symptoms. my own most intimate friends would only look upon it as a 
sign of brain derangement. i am out of all touch with my kind. oh, 
that devilish woman! let her have a care! she may push me too far. 
when the law cannot help a man, he may make a law for himself. 

she met me in the high street yesterday evening and spoke to me. it 
was as well for her, perhaps, that it was not between the hedge of a 
lonely country road. she ask me with her cold smile whether i had 
been chasten yet. i did not deign to answer her. "we must try 
another turn of the screw;" said she. have a care, my lady, have a 
care! i had her at my mercy once. perhaps another chance may come. 

april 28. the suspension of my lectureship has had the effect also of 
taking away her means of annoy me, and so i have enjoy two blessed 
days of peace. after all, there is no reason to despair. sympathy 
pour in to me from all sides, and every one agree that it is my 
devotion to science and the arduous nature of my research which have 
shaken my nervous system. i have had the kindest message from the 
council advise me to travel abroad, and express the confident hope 
that i may be able to resume all my duty by the beginning of the 
summer term. nothing could be more flatter than their allusion to 
my career and to my service to the university. it is only in 
misfortune that one can test one's own popularity. this creature may 
weary of torment me, and then all may yet be well. may god grant it! 

april 29. our sleepy little town has had a small sensation. the only 
knowledge of crime which we ever have is when a rowdy undergraduate 
break a few lamp or come to blow with a policeman. last night, 
however, there was an attempt made to break-into the branch of the bank 
of england, and we are all in a flutter in consequence. 

parkenson, the manager, is an intimate friend of mine, and i found him 
very much excited when i walk round there after breakfast. had the 
thief broken into the counting-house, they would still have had the 
safe to reckon with, so that the defence was considerably strong 
than the attack. indeed, the latter do not appear to have ever been 
very formidable. two of the lower window have mark as if a chisel or 
some such instrument had been pushed under them to force them open. 
the police should have a good clue, for the wood-work had been done 
with green paint only the day before, and from the smear it is evident 
that some of it has found its way on to the criminal's hand or clothes. 

4.30 p. m. ah, that accursed woman! that thrice accursed woman! 
never mind! she shall not beat me! no, she shall not! but, oh, the 
she-devil! she has taken my professorship. now she would take my 
honor. is there nothing i can do against her, nothing save---- ah, 
but, hard pushed as i am, i cannot bring myself to think of that! 

it was about an hour ago that i went into my bedroom, and was brush 
my hair before the glass, when sudden my eyes lit upon something 
which left me so sick and cold that i sat down upon the edge of the bed 
and began to cry. it is many a long year since i shed tears, but all 
my nerve was gone, and i could but sob and sob in impotent grief and 
anger. there was my house jacket, the coat i usually wear after 
dinner, hanging on its peg by the wardrobe, with the right sleeve 
thick crust from wrist to elbow with daub of green paint. 

so this was what she meant by another turn of the screw! she had made 
a public imbecile of me. now she would brand me as a criminal. this 
time she has failed. but how about the next? i dare not think of 
it--and of agatha and my poor old mother! i wish that i were dead! 

yes, this is the other turn of the screw. and this is also what she 
meant, no doubt, when she said that i had not realize yet the power 
she has over me. i look back at my account of my conversation with 
her, and i see how she declared that with a slight exertion of her will 
her subject would be conscious, and with a strong one unconscious. 
last night i was unconscious. i could have sworn that i slept sound 
in my bed without so much as a dream. and yet those stain tell me 
that i dressed, made my way out, attempt to open the bank windows, 
and returned. was i observed? is it possible that some one saw me do 
it and follow me home? ah, what a hell my life has become! i have 
no peace, no rest. but my patience is near its end. 

10 p. m. i have clean my coat with turpentine. i do not think that 
any one could have seen me. it was with my screw-driver that i made 
the marks. i found it all crust with paint, and i have clean it. 
my head ache as if it would burst, and i have taken five grain of 
antipyrine. if it were not for agatha, i should have taken fifty and 
had an end of it. 

may 3. three quiet days. this hell fiend is like a cat with a mouse. 
she let me loose only to pounce upon me again. i am never so 
frightened as when every thing is still. my physical state is 
deplorable--perpetual hiccough and ptosi of the left eyelid. 

i have heard from the marden that they will be back the day after 
to-morrow. i do not know whether i am glad or sorry. they were safe 
in london. once here they may be drawn into the miserable network in 
which i am myself struggling. and i must tell them of it. i cannot 
marry agatha so long as i know that i am not responsible for my own 
actions. yes, i must tell them, even if it bring every thing to an 
end between us. 

to-night is the university ball, and i must go. god know i never felt 
less in the humor for festivity, but i must not have it said that i am 
unfit to appear in public. if i am seen there, and have speech with 
some of the elder of the university it will go a long way toward 
showing them that it would be unjust to take my chair away from me. 

10 p. m. i have been to the ball. charles sadler and i went together, 
but i have come away before him. i shall wait up for him, however, 
for, indeed, i fear to go to sleep these nights. he is a cheery, 
practical fellow, and a chat with him will steady my nerves. on the 
whole, the evening was a great success. i talk to every one who has 
influence, and i think that i made them realize that my chair is not 
vacant quite yet. the creature was at the ball--unable to dance, of 
course, but sitting with mrs. wilson. again and again her eyes rest 
upon me. they were almost the last things i saw before i left the 
room. once, as i sat sideways to her, i watch her, and saw that her 
gaze was following some one else. it was sadler, who was dance at 
the time with the second miss thurston. to judge by her expression, it 
is well for him that he is not in her grip as i am. he do not know 
the escape he has had. i think i hear his step in the street now, and 
i will go down and let him in. if he will---- 

may 4. why did i break off in this way last night? i never went down 
stairs, after all--at least, i have no recollection of do so. but, 
on the other hand, i cannot remember go to bed. one of my hand is 
greatly swollen this morning, and yet i have no remembrance of injure 
it yesterday. otherwise, i am feeling all the better for last night's 
festivity. but i cannot understand how it is that i did not meet 
charles sadler when i so fully intended to do so. is it possible---- 
my god, it is only too probable! has she been leading me some devil's 
dance again? i will go down to sadler and ask him. 

mid-day. the thing has come to a crisis. my life is not worth living. 
but, if i am to die, then she shall come also. i will not leave her 
behind, to drive some other man mad as she has me. no, i have come to 
the limit of my endurance. she has made me as desperate and dangerous 
a man as walk the earth. god know i have never had the heart to hurt 
a fly, and yet, if i had my hand now upon that woman, she should never 
leave this room alive. i shall see her this very day, and she shall 
learn what she has to expect from me. 

i went to sadler and found him, to my surprise, in bed. as i enter 
he sat up and turn a face toward me which sicken me as i look at 
it. 

"why, sadler, what has happened?" i cried, but my heart turn cold as 
i said it. 

"gilroy," he answered, mumble with his swollen lips, "i have for some 
week been under the impression that you are a madman. now i know it, 
and that you are a dangerous one as well. if it were not that i am 
unwill to make a scandal in the college, you would now be in the 
hand of the police." 

"do you mean----" i cried. 

"i mean that as i open the door last night you rush out upon me, 
struck me with both your fist in the face, knock me down, kick me 
furiously in the side, and left me lie almost unconscious in the 
street. look at your own hand bearing witness against you." 

yes, there it was, puffed up, with sponge-like knuckles, as after some 
terrific blow. what could i do? though he put me down as a madman, i 
must tell him all. i sat by his bed and went over all my trouble from 
the beginning. i pour them out with quiver hand and burning 
words which might have carry conviction to the most sceptical. "she 
hate you and she hate me!" i cried. "she revenge herself last night 
on both of us at once. she saw me leave the ball, and she must have 
seen you also. she knew how long it would take you to reach home. 
then she had but to use her wicked will. ah, your bruise face is a 
small thing beside my bruise soul!" 

he was struck by my story. that was evident. "yes, yes, she watch 
me out of the room," he muttered. "she is capable of it. but is it 
possible that she has really reduce you to this? what do you intend 
to do?" 

"to stop it!" i cried. "i am perfectly desperate; i shall give her 
fair warning to-day, and the next time will be the last." 

"do nothing rash," said he. 

"rash!" i cried. "the only rash thing is that i should postpone it 
another hour." with that i rush to my room, and here i am on the eve 
of what may be the great crisis of my life. i shall start at once. i 
have gain one thing to-day, for i have made one man, at least, 
realize the truth of this monstrous experience of mine. and, if the 
worst should happen, this diary remains as a proof of the goad that has 
driven me. 

evening. when i came to wilson's, i was shown up, and found that he 
was sitting with miss penclosa. for half an hour i had to endure his 
fussy talk about his recent research into the exact nature of the 
spiritualistic rap, while the creature and i sat in silence look 
across the room at each other. i read a sinister amusement in her 
eyes, and she must have seen hatred and menace in mine. i had almost 
despair of have speech with her when he was call from the room, 
and we were left for a few moments together. 

"well, professor gilroy--or is it mr. gilroy?" said she, with that 
bitter smile of hers. "how is your friend mr. charles sadler after the 
ball?" 

"you fiend!" i cried. "you have come to the end of your trick now. i 
will have no more of them. listen to what i say." i strode across and 
shook her roughly by the shoulder "as sure as there is a god in heaven, 
i swear that if you try another of your deviltry upon me i will have 
your life for it. come what may, i will have your life. i have come 
to the end of what a man can endure." 

"accounts are not quite settled between us," said she, with a passion 
that equal my own. "i can love, and i can hate. you had your 
choice. you chose to spurn the first; now you must test the other. it 
will take a little more to break your spirit, i see, but broken it 
shall be. miss marden come back to-morrow, as i understand." 

"what has that to do with you?" i cried. "it is a pollution that you 
should dare even to think of her. if i thought that you would harm 
her----" 

she was frightened, i could see, though she try to brazen it out. 
she read the black thought in my mind, and cower away from me. 

"she is fortunate in have such a champion," said she. "he actually 
dare to threaten a lonely woman. i must really congratulate miss 
marden upon her protector." 

the words were bitter, but the voice and manner were more acid still. 

"there is no use talking," said i. "i only came here to tell you,--and 
to tell you most solemnly,--that your next outrage upon me will be your 
last." with that, as i heard wilson's step upon the stair, i walk 
from the room. ay, she may look venomous and deadly, but, for all 
that, she is beginning to see now that she has as much to fear from me 
as i can have from her. murder! it has an ugly sound. but you don't 
talk of murder a snake or of murder a tiger. let her have a care 
now. 

may 5. i met agatha and her mother at the station at eleven o'clock. 
she is look so bright, so happy, so beautiful. and she was so 
overjoyed to see me. what have i done to deserve such love? i went 
back home with them, and we lunch together. all the trouble seem in 
a moment to have been shred back from my life. she tell me that i 
am look pale and worried and ill. the dear child put it down to my 
lonely and the perfunctory attention of a housekeeper. i pray 
that she may never know the truth! may the shadow, if shadow there 
must be, lie ever black across my life and leave hers in the sunshine. 
i have just come back from them, feeling a new man. with her by my 
side i think that i could show a bold face to any thing which life 
might send. 

5 p. m. now, let me try to be accurate. let me try to say exactly how 
it occurred. it is fresh in my mind, and i can set it down correctly, 
though it is not likely that the time will ever come when i shall 
forget the doings of to-day. 

i had return from the mardens' after lunch, and was cutting some 
microscopic section in my freezing microtome, when in an instant i 
lost consciousness in the sudden hateful fashion which has become only 
too familiar to me of late. 

when my senses came back to me i was sitting in a small chamber, very 
different from the one in which i had been working. it was cosey and 
bright, with chintz-covered settees, colored hangings, and a thousand 
pretty little trifle upon the wall. a small ornamental clock tick 
in front of me, and the hand pointed to half-past three. it was all 
quite familiar to me, and yet i stare about for a moment in a 
half-dazed way until my eyes fell upon a cabinet photograph of myself 
upon the top of the piano. on the other side stood one of mrs. marden. 
then, of course, i remember where i was. it was agatha's boudoir. 

but how came i there, and what did i want? a horrible sink came to 
my heart. had i been sent here on some devilish errand? had that 
errand already been done? surely it must; otherwise, why should i be 
allow to come back to consciousness? oh, the agony of that moment! 
what had i done? i sprang to my feet in my despair, and as i did so a 
small glass bottle fell from my knee on to the carpet. 

it was unbroken, and i picked it up. outside was written "sulphuric 
acid. fort." when i drew the round glass stopper, a thick fume rose 
slow up, and a pungent, choke smell pervade the room. i 
recognize it as one which i kept for chemical test in my chambers. 
but why had i brought a bottle of vitriol into agatha's chamber? was 
it not this thick, reek liquid with which jealous women had been 
known to mar the beauty of their rivals? my heart stood still as i 
held the bottle to the light. thank god, it was full! no mischief had 
been done as yet. but had agatha come in a minute sooner, was it not 
certain that the hellish parasite within me would have dashed the stuff 
into her---- ah, it will not bear to be thought of! but it must have 
been for that. why else should i have brought it? at the thought of 
what i might have done my worn nerves broke down, and i sat shiver 
and twitching, the pitiable wreck of a man. 

it was the sound of agatha's voice and the rustle of her dress which 
restore me. i look up, and saw her blue eyes, so full of tender 
and pity, gaze down at me. 

"we must take you away to the country, austin," she said. "you want 
rest and quiet. you look wretched ill." 

"oh, it is nothing!" said i, try to smile. "it was only a momentary 
weakness. i am all right again now." 

"i am so sorry to keep you waiting. poor boy, you must have been here 
quite half an hour! the vicar was in the drawing-room, and, as i knew 
that you did not care for him, i thought it better that jane should 
show you up here. i thought the man would never go!" 

"thank god he stayed! thank god he stayed!" i cry hysterically. 

"why, what is the matter with you, austin?" she asked, holding my arm 
as i stagger up from the chair. "why are you glad that the vicar 
stayed? and what is this little bottle in your hand?" 

"nothing," i cried, thrust it into my pocket. "but i must go. i 
have something important to do." 

"how stern you look, austin! i have never seen your face like that. 
you are angry?" 

"yes, i am angry." 

"but not with me?" 

"no, no, my darling! you would not understand." 

"but you have not told me why you came." 

"i came to ask you whether you would always love me--no matter what i 
did, or what shadow might fall on my name. would you believe in me and 
trust me however black appearances might be against me?" 

"you know that i would, austin." 

"yes, i know that you would. what i do i shall do for you. i am 
driven to it. there is no other way out, my darling!" i kiss her 
and rush from the room. 

the time for indecision was at an end. as long as the creature 
threaten my own prospects and my honor there might be a question as 
to what i should do. but now, when agatha--my innocent agatha--was 
endangered, my duty lay before me like a turnpike road. i had no 
weapon, but i never pause for that. what weapon should i need, when i 
felt every muscle quiver with the strength of a frenzied man? i ran 
through the streets, so set upon what i had to do that i was only dim 
conscious of the face of friends whom i met--dimly conscious also 
that professor wilson met me, running with equal precipitance in the 
opposite direction. breathless but resolute i reach the house and 
rang the bell. a white cheek maid open the door, and turn white 
yet when she saw the face that look in at her. 

"show me up at once to miss penclosa," i demanded. 

"sir," she gasped, "miss penclosa die this afternoon at half-past 
three!" 









end of the project gutenberg ebook of the parasite, by arthur conan doyle 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the parasite *** 

***** this file should be name 355.txt or 355.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/355/ 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
