the project gutenberg ebook, the sorcery club, by elliott o'donnell 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the sorcery club 

author: elliott o'donnell 

release date: december 10, 2004 [ebook #14317] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the sorcery club*** 


e-text prepared by suzanne shell, nathan strom, and the project gutenberg 
online distribute proofread team 



note: project gutenberg also has an html version of this 
file which include the original illustrations. 
see 14317-h.htm or 14317-h.zip: 
(http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317/14317-h/14317-h.htm) 
or 
(http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317/14317-h.zip) 





the sorcery club 

by 

elliott o'donnell 

author of _byways of ghostland_, _werwolves_, 
_dreams and their meanings_, _some haunt house of england 
and wales_, _scottish ghost tales_, _haunted house of london_, etc., etc. 

london 
william rider & son, limited 
8 paternoster row, e.c. 

1912 







[illustration: "for heaven's sake keep off!" kelson shrieked] 



contents 


i how they first heard of atlantis 

ii the black art of atlantis 

iii learning to sin 

iv the test 

v the initiation 

vi the first power 

vii san francisco ladies and divination 

viii two dream 

ix love at first sight 

x how the dream were interpret 

xi leon hamar call on the martin 

xii the great challenge 

xiii the modern sorcery co. ltd. give a gratis performance 

xiv shiel to the rescue 

xv how hamar, curtis and kelson enter the astral plane 

xvi hamar make advances 

xvii the course of true love 

xviii stage three 

xix a series of misadventure 

xx the stage of haunting 

xxi the sell of spell 

xxii the persecution of the martin 

xxiii love 

xxiv the subpoena 

xxv curtis in a new rÔle 

xxvi in hyde park at night 

xxvii the right girl to marry 

xxviii whom will he marry? 

xxix the end and 'the beyond' 




list of illustration 

"for heaven's sake keep off," kelson shriek (frontispiece) 

the initiation 

they gaze fascinate 

the room fill with luminous, striped figures 






chapter i 

how they first heard of atlantis 


rain is responsible for a great deal more than the mere growth of 
vegetables--it is a controller, if a somewhat capricious controller, 
of man's destiny. it was mainly, if not entirely, owe to rain that 
the france lost the battle of agincourt; whilst, if i mistake not, 
confucius alone know how many victory have been snatch from the 
china by the same factor. 

it was most certainly rain that drove leon hamar to take refuge in a 
second-hand bookshop; for so deep-rooted was his aversion to any 
literature saving a financial gazette or the stock and shares column 
of a daily, that nothing would have induce him to get within touching 
distance of a book save the risk of a severe wetting. now, to his 
unutterable disgust, he found himself surround by the things he 
loathed. books ancient--very ancient, judge by their bindings--and 
modern--histories, biographies, novel and magazines--anything from 
ten dollar to five cents, and all array with most laudable tact 
according to their bulk and condition. but hamar was neither to be 
tempt nor mollified. he frown at one and all alike, and the 
colossal edition of miss somebody or other's poems--that by reason of 
its magnificent cover of crimson and gold occupy a most prominent 
position--met with the same vindictive reception as the tattered and 
torn volumes of whittier stow away in an obscure corner. 

backing still further into the entrance of the store for a better 
protection from the rain, which, now fall heavy and heavier, was 
blown in by the wind, hamar collide with a stand of books, with the 
result that one of them fell with a loud bang on the pavement. 

a man, evidently the owner of the store, and unmistakable a jew, 
instantly appeared. pick up the book, and wipe it with a dirty 
handkerchief, he thrust it at hamar. 

"see!" he said, "you have damage this property of mine. you must 
either buy it or give me adequate compensation." 

"what!" hamar cried, "compensation for such rubbish as that? why all 
your books together are not worth five dollars. indeed i've seen twice 
as many sold at a sale for half that amount. you can't jew me!" 

the two men eye each other quizzically. 

"perhaps," the owner of the store observe slowly, "perhaps some of 
your ancestor were once yiddish. in which case there ought to be a 
bond of sympathy between us. you may have that book for a nickel. 
what, no! your cheek are hollow, your finger thin. a nickel is too 
much for you. i will take your chain in exchange." 

"and leave me the watch!" hamar retorted, with a grim smile. "you are 
a philanthropist--not a storekeeper." 

"i should leave you nothing!" the jew laughed. 

"there's no watch there! see!" and he pointed to the concave surface 
of the watch-pocket. "i notice its absence at once. it's been keeping 
you alive for some days past. i'll give you four dollar on the 
chain--and you may have the book!" 

"the book's no good to me!" hamar grunted. "the money is. here! hand 
me over the four dollar and you can have the chain. it's eighteen 
carat gold and worth at least ten dollars." 

"then why not take it to some one who will give you ten dollars!" 
sneer the jew. "because you know better. you're no greenhorn. that 
chain is fifteen carat at the most, and there's not a man in this city 
who would give you more than four dollar for it." 

"very well, then!" hamar said sulkily. "i agree. no! the money first." 

the jew dive deep down into his trouser pocket, and, after forage 
about for some seconds, produce a handful of greasy coins, out of 
which he careful select the sum named. 

hamar, who had been watch him greedily, grab the coins, bit them 
with his teeth, and rang them on the counter. with an air of relief he 
then slip his watch-chain into the outstretched palm before him, 
remark upon the fact that the rain had sudden ceased, and prepared 
to take his departure. 

"here's the book!" the jew ejaculated, whilst his face became suffuse 
with a smirk. "don't go without it. now! there's no knowing but what 
we may not have further dealings with one another. i'm a 
money-lender--i've a place down-stairs--i take all sort of 
things--all sort of things. on the strict q.t. mind. sabez!" 

in another moment hamar found himself standing on the wet pavement, 
nursing the four dollar in his waistcoat pocket with one hand, and 
mechanical clutch the despise volume with the other. had he ever 
act upon impulse, he would most certainly have hurl the book into 
the gutter; but on second thought he came to the conclusion that it 
would be better to dispose of it less obstrusively. 

it was now evening, and have taste nothing since mid-day, he 
realized, for at least the hundredth time that week, that he was 
hungry. the touch of the dollars, however, only made him smile. he 
could eat his full for twenty-five cent and yet live well for another 
four days. and, besides, he still had a tie-pin and a fur coat. he 
might get a dollar on the one and two, if not two and a half, on the 
other; which would carry him through till the end of the week when 
something else might turn up--something which would not involve too 
hard work and would just keep him clear of jail. he turn sharp 
down montgomery street, cross kearney street, and slip 
noiseless through the side doorway of a restaurant, in a 
suspicious-looking alley, not a hundred yard distant from the 
gorgeous illuminate palace hotel. here, within five minutes, he was 
serve with as good a meal as one could get in san francisco for the 
money--and if the table linen was not as clean as it might have been, 
the food was not a whit the less excellent for that. at least so hamar 
thought; and it was not until there was nothing left to eat that he 
left off eating. when he thought no one was look in his direction, 
he pop the despise book under his chair and rose to go. before he 
had gone ten yards, however, one of the waiter came running after 
him. 

"hi, sir, stop, sir!" the fellow cried. "you've left something 
behind!" and in spite of hamar's denial the officious menial 
persist the book was his. in the end hamar was oblige to submit. 
he took the book, and reward the waiter with curses. 

hamar next try to dispose of it down the area of a china laundry; 
but a policeman saw him, and he only escape being taken up on 
suspicion, by parting with a dollar. this was the climax. he did not 
dare make any further attempt to dispose of the book, but, with bitter 
hatred in his heart, tuck it savage under his arm, and made direct 
for his room in 115th street. 

to his annoyance--for under the circumstances he prefer to be 
alone--he found two men sitting in front of his empty hearth. they 
were matt kelson and ed curtis; both of whom had been his colleague 
at meidler, meidler & co., in sacramento street, and like himself had 
been thrown out of work when the firm had "smashed." since that affair 
hamar had studious avoid them. it was true he had once been as 
friendly with them as he deem it politic to be friendly with any 
one; but now--they were out of employment, and in danger of 
starvation. that made all the difference. he did not believe in 
poverty encourage poverty, any more than he believe in charity 
among beggars. he had nothing to share with them, not even a thought; 
and resolve to get rid of his quondam friends as soon as possible, 
he confine his welcome to a frown. 

"hulloa! what's the matter?" kelson exclaimed. "when a man frown like 
that, it usually means he is cross in love." 

"or has an empty stomach, which amount to the same thing," curtis 
interposed. "come--let the sun loose, leon! we've good news for 
you!--haven't we, matt?" 

kelson nodded. 

"what is it, then?" hamar grunted. "have you both got cancer?" 

"no! we've come to borrow from you!" 

"then you've come to the wrong shop! i'm about done, and unless 
something turn up mighty quick i shall clear out." 

"for good?" 

"i don't count on being a ghost nor yet an angel," hamar said; "when 
we've done here, i reckon we've done altogether!" 

"i shouldn't have thought suicide was in your line," curtis remarked. 
"more matt's. i should have credit you with something more 
original." 

"original!" hamar snarled. "i defy any man to be original when he 
hasn't a cent, and his stomach contain nothing but air. give me 
money, give me food--then, perhaps, i'll be original." 

"you don't mean to say you're clear out of grub!" kelson and curtis 
cry in chorus. "we've come to you as our last hope. we've neither of 
us taste anything since yesterday." 

"then you'll taste nothing again to-day--at least as far as i'm 
concerned," hamar jeered. "i tell you i'm broke--haven't as much as a 
crumb in the room; and i've pawn everything, save the clothes you 
see me in!" 

"and yet you can buy books--unless--unless you stole it!" curtis said, 
eye with suspicion the volume hamar had thrown on the table. 

"buy it! not much!" hamar cry quickly. "it's one i've had all my 
life. belong to my grandfather. i took it with me to-night to see 
what i could raise on it." 

"and no one would have it? i should guess not," kelson said, drawing 
it towards him. "why it's got a new label inside--s. leipman! i know 
him. he's slick even for a jew. this looks as if it belong to your 
grandfather, leon. if i'm not real mistaken you bought the book 
to-night. there's something in it you thought you could make capital 
of. trust you for that. now i wonder what it was!" 

"you're welcome to see!" hamar sneered. "perhaps you'd like some 
water!" 

"water! why water?" 

"well, instead of tea or whisky to help digest the book. besides, it's 
the only thing i have to offer you." 

"look here, leon," curtis interrupted; "what's the good of behave 
like this? we are all in the same boat--starving--desperate. so let us 
lay our head together and see if we can't think of something--some 
way out of it." 

"a burglary company limited, for instance!" hamar sneered. "no! i'm 
not have any. i've neither tool nor experience. the san francisco 
police handle one roughly, so i'm told, and hard labour isn't to my 
liking." 

"there are other things besides burglary!" curtis said in tone of 
annoyance. "we might work a fake." 

"if i work anything of that sort," hamar said hastily, "i work alone. 
think of something else." 

"i tell you matt and i are pretty well desperate," curtis cried, "and 
if we don't think of something soon, we shan't be able to think at 
all. we've try our level best to get work--we've answer every 
likely and unlikely advertisement in the papers--and all to no 
purpose. so if providence won't help us we must help ourselves. 
robbery, burglary, fakes, anything short of murder--it's all the same 
to us now--we're tired of starving--dead sick of it. we would do 
anything, sell our very soul for a meal. my god! i never imagine how 
terrible it is to feel so hungry. you appear to be interested, matt. 
what is it?" 

"why, look here, you fellows!" kelson said slowly. "this book is all 
about a place call atlantis that is said to have exist in the 
atlantic ocean between america and ireland, and to have been deluge 
by an earthquake owe to the wicked of its inhabitants. they 
practised sorcery." 

"practised foolery," hamar said. "it's tosh--all tosh! wicked is 
only a matter of climate--and there's no such thing as sorcery." 

"so i thought," kelson replied; "but i'm not so sure now. the author 
of this book write darn sensibly, and is apparently at no loss for 
corroborative testimony. he was a professor too. see! thomas henry 
maitland, at one time professor of english at the university of basle 
in switzerland. there's an asterisk against his name and a footnote in 
very old-fashioned handwriting--the 's's' are all 'f's,' and half the 
letters capitals. listen-- 

"'thomas maitland, despite the remonstrance of his friends, 
visit spain. by order of the holy inquisition he was arrested, 
may 5, 1693, on a charge of practise sorcery, and burn alive 
at the auto da fé, in the grand market square, madrid; have in 
the interim been subject to such torture as only the subtle 
brains of the hellish inquisitor could devise. on receipt of a 
message from him, deliver in his supernatural body, we attend 
his execution, and can readily testify that he suffer no pain, 
although the torment endure by those around him were pitiable to 
behold. 

"(signed) george richard pool, physician; and robert james fox, 
merchant. 

"citizens of boston, massachusetts; august 1, 1693.'" 

"rot!" hamar said savagely; "don't waste time reading such bunkum." 

"it may be bunkum, but if it take away his mind from his stomach let 
him go on," curtis interposed. "it's very obvious you haven't arrive 
at our pitch of starvation yet, leon, or you would welcome anything 
that would make you forget it even for a moment. let's hear some more, 
matt! go on, tell us something. how to make coyotte out of paraffin 
paint, or convert a sunday pair of pants into a glisten harem 
skirt! anything that won't remind us of food." 

thus encourage kelson slow turn over the page of the book. "i 
see it was print and publish for--i presume that means by--a. 
bettesworth and j. batley in pater-noster-row, london, england, in 
1690. basle, london, boston, madrid! the author seem to have had 
wandering on the brain. by the bye, leon, with your features you could 
easily work off a fake as 'the wandering jew.' there's money in 
it--people will swallow anything in that line now." 

"i don't see how it would profit you anyhow," hamar snarled. "leave my 
features alone and go on with your reading." 

kelson chuckled--here was one way at least in which he could 
occasional get even with hamar. hamar's features were yiddish, and 
the yid were none too popular in california. 

"oh, all right!" he said; "if the subject is so painful i'll try and 
avoid it in future; but it's odd how some things--for instance, murder 
and noses--will out. let me see, what have we here? 'discovery of 
ancient books, manuscripts, etc., relate to atlantis.' apparently, 
thomas maitland, when shipwreck on an island, call inisturk, off 
mayo, in ireland, found a wooden chest of rare workmanship--he had 
seen, he says, similar one in egypt and yucatan--containing some very 
ancient books--curiously bound, and some vellum manuscripts, which, 
after an infinite amount of labour, he manage to translate. the 
books, he says, were standard histories, biographies, and scientific 
works on occultism--all publish in banchicheisi, the capital of 
atlantis--and the manuscripts, he affirms, had been transcribe by one 
coulmenes, who believe himself to be the only survivor of a 
tremendous submarine earthquake that had destroy the whole of 
atlantis. the manuscript included a diary of the event leading up to 
the catastrophe--even to the meals! how about this?--'sunrise on the 
day of thottirnanoge in the month of finn-ra. breakfast on cornsop, 
fish (semona, corresponding to salmon), fruit, and much sweet milk.'" 

"for god's sake, don't!" curtis groaned. "skip over that part. the 
very mention of grub make the gnawing pain in my stomach ten times 
worse." 

"you're different to me then!" hamar grinned; "i love to think of it. 
my word, what wouldn't i give to be in sadler's now. roast beef--done 
to a turn, eh! as only sadler know how! potato nice and brown and 
crisp! horseradish! greens! boil celery! pudding under the meat! 
beer!--what, going?" 

curtis had risen from the table with his finger cram in his ears. 
"there's a fat splice of the devil in you to-night, leon!" he panted. 
"i've had enough of it. i'm off. come on, matt. if you want us, you 
know where to find us--only if we don't get something to eat 
soon--you'll find us dead." 




chapter ii 

the black art of atlantis 


for some time after kelson and curtis had left him, hamar loll back 
in his seat, lost in thought. thought, as he told himself repeatedly, 
should be the poor man's chief recreation--it costs nothing: and if 
one wants a little variety, and the wall of one's rooms are tolerably 
thick, one can think aloud. hamar often did, and derive much 
enjoyment from it. 

"i'm convinced of one thing," he sudden broke out; "i'd rather be 
hungry than cold. one can, in a measure, cheat one's stomach by 
chew leather or suck pebbles, but i'll be hang if one can kid 
one's liver. it's cold that do me! a touch of cold on the liver! i 
could jog along comfortable on few dollar for food--but it's a fire, 
a fire i want! the temperature of this room is infernal low after 
sunset: and half a dozen coat and three pair of pants don't make 
up for half a grateful of fuel. hunger only make me think of 
suicide--but cold--cold and a chill liver--makes me think of crime. 
yes, it's cold! cold that would make me a criminal. i would 
steal--burgle--housebreak--cut the sweetest lady's throat in 
christendom--for a fire! 

"there! that little outbreak has relieved me. now let me have a look 
at the book." 

he drag the volume towards him, and despite the feeling of 
antagonism with which it had inspired him, and despite the cynical 
attitude he had, up to the present, adopt towards the supernatural, 
he speedy became engrossed. on a few leaves, somewhat clumsy 
insert between the cover and first page of the book, hamar read an 
account, presumable in the author's own penmanship, of how he, thomas 
maitland, after being shipwrecked, had remain on inisturk island for 
a fortnight before being rescued, and had spent the greater portion of 
that time in examine the books, etc., in the chest he had found--his 
only food--shell-fish and a keg of mildewy ship's biscuits. 

he was taken, so the account ran, by his rescuers, on the barque 
_hannah_, to london, where he live for five years. his lodgings were 
in cheapside, and it was there that he compile his work on atlantis, 
have obtain his subject matter from the atlantean books he had 
manage to bring with him, and which, after an enormous amount of 
perseverance and labour, he had translate into english. though these 
books were subsequent destroy in a big fire that demolish the 
entire street, lucky for him, he had sent his ms. to the publishers, 
messrs. bettesworth and batley, a week or so before the conflagration 
broke out; so that he was, at any rate, spare the loss of his own 
arduous and invaluable work. 

the publisher did not accept the ms. at once. at that time there were 
very severe law in operation against anything savour of witchcraft 
and magic, and as the manuscript dealt at length with these subjects, 
and in a manner that left no doubt whatever that he, thomas maitland, 
had practised sorcery extensively, messrs. bettesworth and batley were 
forced to consider whether it would be injurious to them to publish 
it. mrs. bettesworth was eventually consulted--as indeed she always 
was, on extraordinary occasions--and her interest in the ms. being 
roused, she decided in its favour. within a week of its publication, 
however, it was suppress by law; all the copy saving three 
presentation one to the author, which he successful concealed, were 
destroyed; messrs. bettesworth and batley were put in the stocks on 
ludgate hill and fine heavily, and he, thomas maitland, was ordered 
to be arrested, flog and imprisoned. 

"but," wrote maitland, "i was not to be caught napping. my previous 
adventure and hairbreadth escape had render me unusually wary, and 
perceive a number of people, among whom were two or three sheriff's 
officers, approach my house, i at once interpret their mission, 
and climb through a trap-door leading on to the roof of the 
building, nimble made my way to the end of the row, and slip down 
a waterpipe easily elude my enemies. london, however, being now too 
hot to hold me, i book passage on board the _peterkin_, a thames 
trade vessel of some eighty tons, and sail for boston. my flight 
had been so hasty that i brought very little with me--nothing in fact 
except the clothes i stood in--a stout winter suit of home-spun brown 
cloth, a cloak, and a pair of good, strong leather leggings--a purse 
of fifty sovereign (all i had), a knife, pistol and two copy of my 
precious book, the third copy, alas! i had left behind in my hurry." 

after give a few unimportant detail as to his life on board ship, 
maitland went on to say:-- 

"owing to a succession of storm the _peterkin_ was driven out of her 
course, and after narrowly escape being dashed to pieces on the 
florida reefs, lat. 24-1/2° n., long. 82° w., we ran ashore with the 
loss of only two lives--the second mate and cabin boy--on the isthmus 
of yucatan, close to the estuary of a river.[1] here we were forced to 
spend nearly a year, during which time i made several journey of 
exploration into the interior of the continent. in the course of one 
of my ramble amid a dense mass of tropical foliage, i sudden found 
myself face to face with a gigantic stone sphinx, which i at once 
recognize and identified. it was tat-nuada, an atlantean deity, 
elaborate describe in one of the burn books. much excited, i set 
to work, and, after clearing the base of the idol of fungi and other 
vegetable growth adhere to it, discover a superscription in 
atlantean dialect to the effect that the image had been set up there 
by one hullir--to commemorate the destruction of atlantis, of which 
catastrophe hullir believe himself and his family, _i.e._ his wife 
ozilmeave and daughters, taramoo and nikétoth, and the crew of his 
yacht, the _chaac-molré_ (ten in number), the sole survivors. 

"here, then, to my unutterable joy, was strong corroborative evidence 
of the great disaster narrate in detail in the manuscript i had 
found in inisturk island. the existence of atlantis was now thorough 
substantiated. on all side of me i stumble across further evidence 
of these early settlers. here, standing in bold outline on a slight 
eminence, was a stone edifice adorn with symbolic carving of 
eggs, harps, mastodons, triangles, and numerous other objects, all of 
which were capable of interpretation, and indicate that the building 
was a temple to some god. 

"i was much struck by the extraordinary similarity in many of the 
things i saw--notably in the sphinx, idol and symbols--to many i had 
seen in egypt, and to some extent in ireland, and i at once set to 
work to draw up a careful analogy between the language of those 
countries. 

"the word banchicheisi[2] i found to contain the celtic ban, a barrow; 
and coptic isi, plenty; whilst i recognize in the words coulmenes,[3] 
the celtic coul, a man's name, _i.e._ finn, son of coul; in 
thottirnanoge, the coptic thoth, _i.e._ name of ancient egypt 
deity, and erse tirnanoge, the name of the wife of oisin, the last of 
the feni; in chaac-molrée[4] the coptic deity, ré; in ozilmeave,[5] 
the celtic meave, a girl's name; in taramoo,[6] the celtic tara, a 
girl's name; and in nikétoth,[7] toth, the erse technical form of 
feminine gender; and compare the alphabet i trace a very striking 
likeness between the atlantean-- 

"[atlantean: a] (a) and the gaelic or erse [erse: a] 
[atlantean: b] (b) and the coptic [coptic: b] 
[atlantean: d] (d) and erse [erse: d] 
[atlantean: g] (g) and erse [erse: g] 
[atlantean: t] (t) and coptic [coptic: t] 

"and many of the other letters. to the atlantean 

"[atlantean: c, o, e, z][8] 

"i could, however, find no likeness. 

"from all these similarities, _i.e._ in architecture, symbols, 
letters, and words, i could come to no other conclusion than that 
there was some strong connect link between atlantis and ancient 
ireland and egypt. 

"assuredly this great link could not have been merely due to stray 
survivor of the great catastrophe! was it not much more probable that 
the earliest inhabitant of ireland and egypt had originally migrate 
from atlantis, carry its language, and ways and customs with them? 
moreover, since the atlantean were so deep versed in magic and 
everything appertain to the occult, this migration would account 
for the mysticism that has always been so close associate with 
egypt and ireland, and for the psychic faculty so strong observable 
in the inhabitant of these two countries. 

"i was highly satisfied--i had prove much and my discovery had 
upset many of the theory advanced by the modern sages. i could now 
positively assert that the wisdom of the world came not from the east 
but from the west. it was to the golden west--to banchicheisi, capital 
of atlantis, that humanity owe its knowledge of the science and 
arts, and of all things good and evil. eden, if eden exist at all, 
was not in asia, it was in atlantis; and the deluge, that is record 
in the hebrew bible, and is traditional in the history of nearly 
every tribe and nation, was none other than the mighty inrush of the 
ocean over atlantis, due to some abnormal submarine earthquake. 

"of what eventually became of the atlantean whose relics i had so 
opportune alight upon, i could only surmise. 

"the last record i found was on a tablet set up by nikétoth. on this 
she spoke of the death of hullir and ozilmeave, of the inter-marriage 
of the crew of the _chaac-molré_ with native women; of the consequent 
growth of the colony; and of her determination to leave it, and, 
accompany by a chosen few, to push her way further inland.[9] 

"the anxiety of my comrade to leave the continent, perforce put an 
end to my explorations, and in the beginning of the year 1692--exactly 
ten month after our landing--the _peterkin_ was refloated. 

"this time nothing happen to impede our progress, and in april of 
the same year, we sighted boston. here i remain for some months, 
making many new friends, and study magic and sorcery. but the love 
of travel had laid so strong a hold on me that i again took to a 
rove life. i set sail for spain in november 1692; landed at corunna, 
and made my way to madrid, where i arrive on january 1, 1693." 

for the rest, hamar had to turn to messrs. fox and pool's addendum, 
_i.e._ the footnote that matt kelson had read aloud. 

hamar was now inclined to regard the book in a very different light. 
what he had read seem to him to be set down in too simple, 
straightforward, and, at the same time, detailed a manner to be other 
than true. up to the present he had not believe in ghost and 
witches, for the very simple reason that--like all sceptics--he had 
never inquire into the testimony respecting them. he had pooh-poohed 
the subject, because every one he knew pooh-poohed it, and also 
because it had never seem worth his while to do otherwise. but 
provided he thought it would pay him, he was ready to believe in 
anything--in christianity, mahommedanism, buddhism, theosophy, or 
any other creed; and grant the book he had in his hand was 
really written by maitland, and maitland was _bona fide_ (which hamar 
saw no reason to doubt), and granted, also, that maitland was sane and 
logical--which from his writing he certainly appear to be--then 
there was a certain amount in the volume that in hamar's opinion 
was "a find." needless to say, he refer to the magic of the 
atlanteans--the art through the practice of which they had got in 
touch with the powers that could endow them with riches. the actual 
history of atlantis--once he was satisfy there had been such a 
place--did not interest him. he skim through it quickly, and i 
append a brief summary, only, for the benefit of more intelligent and 
disinterested readers. 

the atlantean were the oldest intelligent race in the world--they 
exist contemporaneous with paleolithic man, with whom their 
mariner and explore frequent came in contact, and about whom 
their novelist wrote the most delightful stories, just as fenimore 
cooper and mayne reid, in these days, have written the most delightful 
story about the red indians. in religion they were polytheists; they 
believe that, in the work of creation, many powers participated; that 
some of these powers were benevolent, some malevolent, whilst 
others--neither benevolent nor malevolent--were merely neutral. to the 
benevolent creative powers they attribute all that is beautiful in 
the world (_i.e._ certain of the trees, plants, flowers, animals, 
insects, and pleasing colours and scents); all that is fair and 
agreeable in the human being, such as affection, love, kindness, the 
arts and sciences--in a word all that in any degree affected the 
welfare of mankind; and to the malevolent creative powers they 
attribute all that was noxious in creation; all that was harmful to 
man, and detriment to his moral and physical progress (_i.e._ 
diseases, and all savage and filthy passions); all races of low 
intelligence, viz. paleolithic and neolithic man--and all those born 
with black or red skin (those colours being particularly significant 
of the malignant occult elements); all destructive animals; (_i.e._ 
reptile such as the teleosaurus, steneosaurus, etc.; birds, such as 
the ptereodactyl, vulture, eagle, etc.; mammals, such as the cave 
lion, cave tiger, etc.; fish, such as the shark, octopus, etc.); and 
all ugly and venomous insects. 

these earliest record show that at one time the physical and 
superphysic world were in close touch; all kind of spirits--trolls, 
pixies, nymphs, satyrs, imps, vagrarians, barrowvians, etc.--mixing 
freely with living human beings; but that as the population increase 
and civilization evolved, superphysic manifestation became more and 
more rare, until finally they became restricted to certain conditions 
dependent on time and locality.[10] 

up to this period there had been no state religion--no temple in 
atlantis. if any one wish for a particular favour from the occult 
powers--for example, from the rabsés, the occult powers of music; the 
brakvos, the occult powers of medicine; or the derinas, the occult 
powers of love, they retired to some secluded spot and held direct 
intercourse with these powers. the idea of pray to an invisible 
being--who might or might not hear them--never enter their minds; 
they were far too matter of fact for that--and it was not until 
superphysic manifestation had become confine to a very select few, 
that the plan of erect public building in spot frequent by the 
spirits, so that all who wish could assemble there and communicate 
with them, was propose and put into operation. in these buildings, 
however, the spirits did not choose always, to appear to 
order--sometimes they quit the spot where the edifice had been 
erected; sometimes they would only appear there periodically; and 
sometimes, out of perversity, they would appear when least expected. 
but whether occult manifestation really took place in these building 
or not, those assemble to see them were persuade by those in charge 
of the building, who saw thereby an opportunity of making money, that 
the spirits were actually there; and in due time these building 
became known as temples, and their showmen as priests. every temple 
was dedicated to an individual spirit--one to the spirit bara-boo; 
another to the spirit karaboro, and so on; whilst in the absence of 
genuine spirit manifestations, prayers, incantation and rituals, 
invent by the priests, always attract a large concourse of people 
to these temples, and finally prove a greater source of attraction 
than the spirits themselves. 

it was to gain favours from the occult powers that donation from the 
public were at first invited, then demanded; and the priest in this 
manner accumulate vast fortunes. later on, too, there sprang up, in 
connection with these temples, college for the training of young 
men--invariably select from the wealthy classes--to the priesthood; 
and from the parent of these youthful aspirant large fees, which in 
course of time became exorbitant, were extracted, thereby furnish 
another source of revenue to the priests. the most famous college for 
the training of priest in atlantis were those of bara-boo-rek[11] at 
keisionwo, karaboro-rek at diniangek, and ballygarap-rek at tijimin. 

it was in the reign of barrahneil,[12] fifty-first sovereign of the 
dynasty of shaotak, that the evocation of spirits (from which modern 
spiritualism take its origin) commenced. barrahneil was most eager to 
see a superphysic manifestation. being of a somewhat poetical turn 
of mind he was particularly enamoured of fairies, and in the hope of 
seeing one, constant frequent their favourite haunts, _i.e._ 
woods, caves, and lonely isolated habitations. but all to no 
purpose--they never would manifest themselves to him. at last, he lost 
patience. against the advice of his oldest and most trusty 
counsellors, and accompany by one or two of his favourite courtiers, 
he went to an excessive lonely spot in the heart of a desert, and 
besought spirits--spirits of any sort--he did not care what--to 
manifest themselves. to his surprise--for he had grown extremely 
sceptical--an occult form, half man and half beast,[13] materialized. 
it informed them that it was daramara, _i.e._ in atlantis, the 
unknown--that it had no beginning and no end, and that it would remain 
an impenetrable mystery to them during their existence in the physical 
sphere, but would be fully reveal to them when they pass over into 
malanok--one of the superphysic planes. on this, and on several 
subsequent occasions, when it manifest itself to them, it gave them 
instruction with regard to evocation, and describe to them the test 
they must undergo before they could acquire the great powers the 
unknown was able to bestow on them, namely, (1) second sight; (2) 
divine other people's thought and detect the presence of waters 
and metals; (3) thought transference, _i.e._ being able to transmit 
messages, irrespective of distance, from one brain to another without 
any physical medium; (4) hypnotism; (5) the power to hold converse 
with animals; (6) invisibility, _i.e._ dematerialize at will; (7) 
walking on, and breathing under, water; (8) inflict all manner of 
disease and torments; (9) cure all kind of diseases; (10) 
convert people into beast and minerals; (11) foretell the 
future by palmistry, pyromancy, hydromancy, astrology, etc.; (12) 
conjure up all manner of spirits antagonist to men's moral 
progress, _i.e._ vice elementals--vagrarians, barrowvians, etc. 

taking every care to observe the greatest secrecy, barrahneil cause a 
full account of these interview with daramara, together with all the 
instruction the latter had given him, to be transcribe in a book, 
which he call _brahnapotek_[14]--or the _book of mysteries_; and 
which he kept seal and guarded in a room in his palace. 

during his lifetime no one held communication with daramara saving 
himself and his friends, but after his death the secret of black magic 
leak out; countless people sought to acquire it, and ultimately the 
practice of it became universal. but the atlantean little knew the 
danger they were incurring. the spirits they conjure up--though at 
first subservient, that is to say, mere instruments--at length 
obtain complete dominion over them--the whole race became steep in 
crime and vice of every kind--and so horrible were the enormity 
perpetrate that, fearful lest man should be entire obliterate the 
benevolent occult powers, after a desperate struggle with the 
malevolent occult powers, succeeded, by means of a vast earthquake, in 
submerge the continent and hurling it to the bottom of the atlantic 
ocean, where, what remains of it, now lies. this catastrophe took 
place in the reign of aboonirin, twentieth sovereign of the dynasty of 
molonekin--three thousand years after the reign of barrahneil. 

so ran the history of atlantis, or at least all of it that need be 
quote for the elucidate of this story. that black magic--the black 
art of the atlantean was by no means dead--hamar felt convinced, and 
if maitland could resuscitate it--why could not he? at any rate he 
might try. he could lose nothing by give it a trial--at least 
nothing to speak of--the outlay on chemical would be a mere 
song--whereas, on the other hand, what might he not gain! he eager 
peruse the tests--the test he must impose upon himself before he 
could get in touch with the unknown, and acquire the magic 
powers--which, according to thomas maitland, were copy from the 
original brahnapotek, and including a preface, ran as follows: 
(_preface_) "it is essential that the person desirous of being 
initiate into the black art--the art of communicate with the 
unknown (daramara) in order to acquire certain great powers, should 
dismiss from his mind all idea of moral progress, and wholly 
concentrate on the better of his material self--on acquire riches 
and fame in the physical sphere. his aspiration must be entire 
earthly, and all his affection subordinate to his main desire for 
wealth and carnal pleasures. have acquire this preliminary 
psychological stage, for one clear week he must give himself up 
entire to the break of all the conventionality of morality with 
which society is hedge in. he must practice every kind of 
deception--lie, cheat and steal, and go out of his way to seek an 
opportunity to avenge any personal injury; and if his mind is 
earnest and wholly concentrated on acquire knowledge of the black 
art no bodily mishap will befall him. during this time of probation he 
must will himself to dream, at night, of all the deed he had it in 
his mind to do, during the day; when he will know, by his visions, to 
what extent he is progressing. at the end of the week he must apply 
the test to see if he is in a ripe state to proceed. 

"the tests-- 

"no. 1. at midnight, when the moon is full, place a mirror, set in 
a wooden frame, in a tub of water, so that it will float on the 
surface with its face uppermost. put in the water fifteen grain 
of bicarbonate of potash, and sprinkle it with three drops of 
blood, not necessarily human if the reflection of the moon in the 
mirror then appear crimson, the test is satisfactory 
accomplished. 

"no. 2. at midnight, when the moon is full, take a black cat, place 
it where the moonbeam are thickest, sprinkle it with three drops 
of blood, not necessarily human, and rub its coat with the palm of 
the hand. sparks will then be given out, and if those sparks 
appear crimson the test is satisfactory done. 

"no. 3. take a human skull--preferably that of some person who has 
met with an unnatural end, pour on it a single drop of fresh, 
human blood--place it on a couch, and go to sleep with the back 
part of the head rest on it. if you are awakened, at the second 
hour after midnight, by hearing a great commotion close at hand, 
and the room is then discover to be full of crimson light, the 
test is satisfactory fulfilled. 

"no. 4. take half a score of the berry of enchanter's 
nightshade,[15] two ounce of hemlock leaves in powder, and one 
ounce of red sorrel leaves. heat them in an oven for two hours, 
pound them together, in a mortar, and at midnight boil them in 
water. as soon as the contents begin to bubble, remove them from 
the fire and stand them in a dark place; and if the experiment is 
to prove satisfactory, three bubble of luminous green light will 
rise simultaneous from the water and burst. 

"no. 5. in the above preparation after the test described, soak a 
hazel twig, fashion in the shape of a fork. on meeting a child 
hold the fork with the v downwards in front of its face, and if 
the child exhibit violence and sign of terror, and falls down, 
the experiment is successful. 

"no. 6. take a couple of handful of fine soil from over the spot 
where some four-footed animal has recently been buried. put it in 
a tin vessel, mix with it three ounce of assafoetida and one 
drachm of quassia chips, to which add a death's-head moth 
(_acherontia atropos_). heat the vessel over a wood fire for three 
hours. then remove it and place it on the hearth, rake out the 
fire and make the room absolutely dark. keep watch beside the 
vessel, and if, at the second hour after midnight, any strange 
phenomena occur, the test will be known to have been 
satisfactory executed. 

"(_addendum_) if any of these test fail the candidate must wait 
for six month before give them a further trial, and he must 
occupy the interim by training his thought in the manner already 
prescribed. but if, on the other hand, the test have been 
successful performed, he can proceed with the rite appertain 
to the black art." 

hamar had read so far when, with a gesture of impatience, he closed 
the book. "what a fool i am!" he exclaimed, "to waste my time with 
such stuff!... but maitland write in such a devilish convincing way! 
jerusalem! any straw is good enough for the drown man, and if 
witchcraft and sorcery with motor dashing by every second and the 
whole air alive with wireless and telephones, is a bit beyond my 
comprehension, what then? all i care about is money--and i'll leave no 
stone unturned to get it. if it were possible for man to get in touch 
with daramara--the unknown--devil, or whatever else it choose to call 
itself--i'll call it an angel if it only give me money--twenty 
thousand years ago--why shouldn't it be possible to get in touch with 
it now? anyhow as i said before, i'll have a try. as far as the 
preliminary stage is concerned, i fancy i'm pretty well fixed. my mind 
is occupy right enough with things of this world--i don't give a 
cent for anything belong to another--and if only i had half a dozen 
souls, i'd sell them right away now, for less than twenty thousand 
dollars--a damn sight less. as for these tests--foolish isn't the 
word for them--but it won't cost much just to try them.... now, 
according to thomas maitland, the ceremony of calling up the unknown 
stand a far greater chance of success if there are three human being 
present ... but, of course, if there is any truth in this business, 
i'd rather keep the secret of it to myself. however, if i try alone, 
the unknown may not come to me, and then i shall have had all the 
trouble of go through the test for nothing!... ah! now i see! if 
the other two get more of the profit than i think necessary--i can 
make use of my newly acquire occult power to--to dissolve 
partnership! ha! ha! i could--i could trick the unknown if it come to 
that. trust a jew to outwit the devil! i'll just look up kelson 
and--curtis." 


footnotes: 

[footnote 1: the river refer to by maitland is the river 
lagartos, which was then (1691) unnamed.] 

[footnote 2: for chiche compare the ancient maya or yucatan word 
chicken-itza (_i.e._ name of town in yucatan where excavation are 
now taking place--1912).] 

[footnote 3: for men compare mayan menes, wise men.] 

[footnote 4: compare mayan chaac-mol, a leopard.] 

[footnote 5: compare ozil, mayan for well-beloved.] 

[footnote 6: moo, mayan for macaw.] 

[footnote 7: niké, woman's name in mayan.] 

[footnote 8: recent (1912) discovery of statue in easter island 
still further corroborate the sink of atlantis. 

the atlantean character [c] resemble the easter island [c] (c) 
" " [o] " " " [o] (o) 
" " [e] " " " [e] (e) 
" " [z] " " " [z] (z) 

it will be notice that all the atlantean character are 
distinguished by additional curling strokes.] 

[footnote 9: in all probability she was the founder of chicken-itza, 
the capital of yucatan.] 

[footnote 10: type of elemental still to be met with in certain 
locality (vide _byeways of ghostland_, publish by rider & son).] 

[footnote 11: compare egypt ré.] 

[footnote 12: maitland raise the question as to whether barrahneil 
was the ancestor of niall of the nine hostages. of this there is 
every possibility, since many atlantean undoubted escape to 
ireland, carry with them the knowledge of black magic--to which 
might be trace the banshee and other family ghosts.] 

[footnote 13: probably a vice elemental.] 

[footnote 14: all subsequent works dealing with black magic were 
found on it.] 

[footnote 15: close allied to deadly nightshade, and known in 
botany as _circæa_. it is found in damp, shady place and was use 
to a very large extent in mediæval sorcery.] 




chapter iii 

learning to sin 


messrs. kelson and curtis did not live in pacific avenue where the 
pope hold sway, nor yet in california street where the crock are 
wont to entertain their millionaire friends. where they lived, there 
were no massive granite steps flank with equally massive 
pillars--such as herald the approach to the nob hill palaces; no rare 
glass bow-windows look out on to flower bedeck lawns; no vast 
betile hall, with rotunda in the centre; no highly polish oak 
staircases; no fresco ceilings; no tufted, cerulean blue silk 
draperies; and no sweet perfumery--only the smell, if one may so 
sudden sink to a third-class expression--only the smell of rank 
tobacco and equally rank lager beer. no, messrs. kelson and curtis 
reside within a stone's throw of the five cent baths in rut 
street--and that was the nearest they ever got to bathing. their suite 
of apartments consist of one room, about ten by eight feet, which 
serve as a dining-room, drawing-room, study, boudoir, kitchen, 
bedroom, and--from sheer force of habit, i was about to add bathroom; 
but as i have already hint cold water on half-empty stomach and 
chilly liver is uninviting; besides, soap costs something. their 
furniture was antique but not massive; nor could any of it be fairly 
reckon superfluous. all told, it consist of a bedstead (three 
six-foot plank on four sugar cubes; the bedclothes--a pair of 
discard overalls, a torn and much emaciate blanket, a woolly neck 
wrap, a yellow vest, and the garment they stood in); a small round 
and rather rickety deal table; and one chair. of the very limited 
number of culinary utensils, the frying-pan was by far the most 
important. its handle serve as a poker, and its pan, as well as for 
frying, roasting and boiling, did duty for a teapot and a slop-basin. 
they had no crockery. they had only one thing in abundance--namely, 
air; for the lower frame of the window have long lack glass in it, 
a couple of page of the _examiner_, fixed in it, flap dismal 
every time the wind came blow down 216th street. 

they had not live there always. in the palmy days of work, before the 
firm smashed, they had aspire to what might properly be call 
diggings; and, moreover, had "digged" in respectable surroundings. it 
was the usual thing--the thing that is happening always, every hour of 
the day, in all the great city of the world--starvation, through 
lack of employment. civilization still shut its eyes to everyday 
poverty. who knows? who cares? who is responsible? no one. is there a 
remedy? ah! that is a question that require time. time--always time! 
time for the politician, and time for the starve ones! half the 
world thinks, whilst half the world dies; and the cause of it all is 
time--too much, a damn sight too much--time! 

but kelson and curtis could not grumble. they had their room--bare, 
dirty and well-ventilated--for next to nothing. fifty cent a week! 
and they could furnish it as they pleased. fancy that! what a 
privilege! they were glad of it all the same--glad of it in preference 
to the streets; and probably, when asleep, they thought of it as home. 
but on leave hamar's, that evening, they had fully resolve to 
convert their little room into a cemetery. what else could they do? 
what can any one do who has no money and no prospect of get any, 
and who has reach the pitch of acute hunger? he has pass the stage 
of wanting work, because, if work were offer to him, he would not be 
in a fit state to do it--he would be too weak. too weak to work! what 
a phenomenon! yes--to all those who have never miss a day's meals. 
to others--no! they can understand--and understand only too well--the 
really poor who have long cease to eat, cannot work--they are beyond 
it. 

when curtis and kelson stagger down the stairs of the house where 
hamar lodged, they realize that unless something turn up pretty 
soon, it would be too late--they would be past the stage of care for 
anything--too feeble to do anything but lie on the ground and pray 
that death would come quickly. 

"home?" kelson inquired, as they emerge on to the pavement. 

"hell!" curtis answered, and kelson, taking it for grant that the 
terms were synonymous, at once head for their garret. 

"don't walk so confounded fast," curtis gasped; "this pain in my 
side is like a hundred stitch roll in one. it fairly doubles me 
up. ease down a bit, for heaven's sake!" 

kelson obeyed, and presently came to a dead halt before a 
dingy-looking restaurant. both men lean against the window and gaze 
wolfish at the food. a warm, foetid rush of air from under the 
grating at their feet tickle their nostril and mock their hunger 
with a mockery past endurance. arrange on the window-sill was a 
miscellaneous collection of very smeary plate and dishes, contain 
an even more miscellaneous collection of food. a half-consumed ham, 
with more than a mere suspicion of dirt on its yellowish-white fat; 
some concoction in a bowl that might have been brawn made from some 
peculiarly liverish pig, or--from one of the many homeless mongrel 
that roam the street at night; a pile of noxious-looking mussels, 
side by side with a glisten mass of particularly yellow whelks; a 
round of what purport to be beef--very fat and very underdone; some 
black shiny sausages, and a score or so of lurid red polonies. a 
similar assortment was to be seen on the counter behind which loll 
an anæmic girl, in a dirty cotton blouse, and a much soil sky-blue 
skirt. 

a month ago such an exhibition would have been an offence in the 
fastidious eyes of messrs. kelson and curtis; but now it was 
otherwise. their stomach would have refuse nothing short of garbage. 

"matt!" curtis's hand had left off clutch at his belt and were now 
hanging by his side; the finger twitch to and fro in a manner that 
fascinate kelson. "matt! is there any logic in our starving?" 

"none, excepting that we haven't a cent between us!" kelson rejoined. 

"i know that," curtis went on slowly, "but--i mean--why should we 
starve when all this grub is within two inch of us! it's 
unreasonable--it's intolerable." 

"doesn't the smell of it satisfy you?" kelson replied, attempt to 
force a smile, and failing dismally. 

"d--n the smell!" curtis cried. "it's the ham i want. i'd give my soul 
for a good munch at it. and just look at that tea, too! don't you see 
it steam over there? what wouldn't i give for just one cup! ten 
minutes more and it may be too late. the pain will come on again--and 
it will be very doubtful if i shall ever get home. i'm close on the 
stage when one begin to digest one's own stomach. curse it! i won't 
starve any longer! matt! she's in there all by herself!" 

"so i've been thinking," kelson murmured, glancing uneasy up and 
down the street. "still she's a girl, ed!" 

"that's just it!" curtis whispered; "it is because she is a girl. if 
she were a man, in our present condition we shouldn't stand a chance. 
come! it's this or die in the gutters. it's our one and only chance. 
let's go in--have a feed--take what we can and make a bolt for it. if 
she try to stop us we can settle her right enough." 

"without being too rough! there's no need to be too rough with her, 
ed." 

"i shouldn't stick at much!" curtis answered. "occasions like these 
don't admit of chivalry. come along! it's the ham i'm after." 

curtis shuffle forward as he spoke, and the next moment kelson and he 
were standing in front of the counter. 

the girl eye curtis very dubious and it is more than likely would 
have refuse to serve him had he been alone. but her expression 
change on look at kelson. kelson was one of those individual who 
seldom fail to meet with the approval of women--there was a something 
in him they liked. probably neither he nor they could have define 
that something; but there it was, and it came in extremely handy now. 

"what do you want?" she inquire shortly. 

"ham! give me some of that ham over there, miss, and a cup of tea! 
bread too!" curtis cry eagerly. "do you know what it is to have a 
twist on, miss? i have one on now--so please give us a full 
twenty-five cents' worth." 

kelson said nothing, but his eyes glistened, and the girl wonder as 
she pass him the polonies. 

both men ate as they had never eaten before, and as they would not have 
eaten now had they paid any attention to the advice of hunger experts. 
however, they survived, and when they could eat no more they lean 
back in their chair to enjoy the sensation of returning--albeit, 
slow returning--strength. 

curtis was the first to make a move. "matt," he murmured, "we've about 
sat our sit. we'd better be off. you go and say a few nice words to 
the girl and make pretence of paying. i'll secure the ham--there's 
still a good bit left--and anything else i can grab. the moment i do 
this, throw these chair on the ground so that the girl will fall over 
them when she make a dash for me, which she is certain to do. we will 
then head straight away for 216th street. don't look so scared or she 
will think there is something up. she has never taken her eyes off you 
since we sat down!" 

"she's rather a nice girl!" kelson said. "i wish i didn't look quite 
such a blackguard--and--i wish i hadn't to be quite such a blackguard. 
who'll pay for all this? will she?" 

"we shan't, anyway," curtis sneered. "come, this is no time to be 
sentimental. it was a question of life and death with us, and we've 
only done what any one else would do in our circumstances. the girl 
won't lose much! are you ready?" 

curtis rose, and kelson, who was accustomed to obey him, reluctantly 
follow suit. a look almost suggestive of fear came into the girl's 
eyes as they encounter those of curtis, and she shot a swift glance 
at an inner door. then kelson spoke, and as she turn her head 
towards him, her lip part in a sort of smile. 

"nice night, miss, isn't it?" kelson said, halting half-way between 
the counter and the chairs. "aren't you a bit lonely here all by 
yourself?" 

"sometimes," the girl laughed. "but my mother's in the room there," 
and she nod in the direction of the closed door. "and one can't be 
dull when she's about. she's that there active as a rule, there's no 
keeping her quiet--only just at present"--here she glance 
apprehensive at curtis--"she's recover from ague. get it every 
year about this time. your friend seem to have kind of taken a fancy 
to our ham!" 

kelson look at curtis and his heart thumped. curtis's right hand was 
get ready to spring at the ham, whilst his left was creep 
stealthy along the counter in the direction of a loaf of bread. 
kelson slow realize that an acute crisis in both their lives was at 
hand, and that it depend on him how it would end. he had never 
thought it possible to feel as mean as he felt now. besides, his 
natural sympathy with women tempt him to stand by the girl and 
prevent curtis from rob her. he was still deliberating, when he 
saw two long dark objects, with lightning rapidity, swoop down on the 
plate and dishes. there was a loud clatter, and the next moment the 
whole place seem alive with movement. 

a voice which in his confusion he did not recognize at once 
shouted--and seemingly from far away--"quick, you fool, quick! fling 
down the chair and grab those sausages!" whilst from close beside 
him--almost, he fancied, in his ears--came a wild shriek of "mother! 
mother! we are being robbed!" 

had the girl appeal to him to help her it is more than likely that 
kelson, who was even yet undecided what course to adopt, would have 
offer her his aid; but the instant she act on the defensive his 
mind was made up; a mad spirit of self-preservation swept over 
him--and dashing the chair on the ground at her feet, he seize the 
sausages, and flew after curtis. 

ten minutes later, curtis and kelson, their arms full of spoil, 
clamber up the staircase of their lodgings, and reel into their 
room. 

"look!" curtis gasped, sink into the chair. "look and see if we are 
followed!" 

"there's no one about!" kelson whispered, peer cautious out of 
the window. "not a soul! i don't believe after that first rush across 
rut street, any one notice us. to leave off running was far the 
best thing to do. you are a perfect genius, ed. i wonder if this sort 
of thing--er--thieving--is dormant in most of us? i say, old fellow, i 
wish i hadn't look at that book of hamar's. do you know, directly i 
took it up, an extraordinary sensation of cunning came over me; and i 
declare, when i put it down, i felt it would take very little to make 
me a criminal!" 

"we're both criminal now--in the eyes of the law--anyway!" curtis 
said. "and now we've got so far there's no alternative but to go on! 
it's easy for a hundred camel to pass through the eye of a needle 
than for a clerk to get work, that's a fact. the market are 
hopeless overstocked--no one wants us! no one help us! no one even 
think about us. the labour man get pity and cent galore--we get 
nothing!--nothing but rotten pay whilst we work, and when we're out of 
work, dosshouse or kerbstones. d--n clerks, i say. d--n everything! 
there's no justice in creation--there's no justice in anything--and 
the only people who prate of it are those who have never known what it 
is to want. say, when shall we take the next lot?" 

"when we're obliged, not before!" kelson said. "or rather, you do as 
you like--and i'll do the same." 

"well, i'm not go to commit suicide anyhow," curtis sneered. "we 
haven't the money to buy poison--and i've no mind to drown myself or 
cut my throat--they're too painful! if we don't go on do what we've 
done to-night, what are we go to do?" 

"trust to luck," kelson sighed. 

"all right--you trust to luck--but i won't trust any more in 
providence, and that's a fact," curtis retorted. "we've been done 
enough. now i'm for do other people. good-night." 

he tumble into the makeshift bed as he spoke; and in a few minutes, 
worn out after the unwonted exertion of the evening, both men were 
fast asleep. 

they were at breakfast next morning--real _déjeuner à la 
carte_--sausages, bread, water--and they were do ample justice to 
it, when some one rap at the door. for a few seconds there was 
silence. their heart stood still. had they been followed, after all? 
was it the police? some one spoke--and they breathe again. it was 
hamar. 

"this looks like starving, i must say!" hamar exclaimed, as he sniff 
his way into the room and sat on the bed. "why, from what you fellow 
told me last night i thought you were clear out. and here you are, 
stuffing like roosters! you look a bit surprise to see me, but you'll 
look more surprised, i reckon, when i tell you what bring me here. 
you remember that book?" 

kelson and curtis nodded. 

"well," hamar went on. "i read it after you left last night, and i've 
come to the conclusion that there's something in it that may be of use 
to us." 

"us!" curtis ejaculated. 

"yes! us!" hamar mimicked. "it contain full particulars of how we can 
get in touch with certain occult powers--that can give us money or 
anything else we want!" 

"rot, of course!" curtis said. 

"you say that now. but, listen to me," hamar replied. "since i've read 
that book, i believe there's a lot more in occult than people 
imagine. you may recollect the name of the author of the book--thomas 
maitland? well! to begin with, he impress me as being truthful; and 
he not only believe in magic but he practised it. if he hadn't gone 
into detail i shouldn't think anything of it, but he's so darn 
thorough, and tell you exactly what you've got to do to get in touch 
with the occult powers and to practise sorcery. he learned it all from 
that old ms. he found, written by an atlantean; and the atlanteans, he 
says, were adept in every form of occultism. i tell you, this chap 
himself scoff at it at first; and it was more out of curiosity, he 
says, than because he was convinced, that he began to experiment. he 
afterwards came to the conclusion that the atlantean were no fools. 
what they had written about the occult was absolutely correct--there 
was another world, and it was possible to get in touch with it. now, 
if thomas maitland was able to practise sorcery, why can't we? there 
was a gap of close on twenty thousand years between his time and that 
of atlantis, and there's not much more than two hundred years between 
his day and ours. but, of course, if you're go to pooh-pooh the 
whole thing i won't trouble to tell you any more!" 

"well, leon," kelson ejaculated, "magic and sorcery do seem a trifle 
out of date, don't they? could any one look out of the window at what 
is go on in the street below, and at the same time believe in 
fairy and hobgoblins? still the book made a bit of an impression on 
me, so that i'm inclined to agree with you. anyway, go ahead! ed is 
agreeable, aren't you, ed?" 

curtis gave a sulky nod. "i'm not averse to anything that may put us 
in the way of a livelihood," he said. 

hamar, somewhat appeased, brief informed them of the test and other 
preliminary necessary for the acquire of the black art, and 
without more ado propose that they--the three of them--should form a 
syndicate and call it the sorcery company limited. "to begin with," he 
said, "we might sell trick and spells, and later on tackle something 
more subtle. why, we could soon knock all the juggle and doctor on 
the head--and make a huge fortune." 

"that is to say if it isn't all humbug!" curtis observed. 

"well--do you or don't you think it worth trying?" hamar cut in. "you 
call me a jew--but jews, you know, have a tolerably cool head, and a 
keen faculty for business. they don't touch anything unless it is 
pretty certain to bring them in money. will you try?" 

"y-e-s!" curtis said slowly; "i'll try." 

"and you, matt?" hamar queried. "we must have three." 

"i don't mind trying," kelson replied. "i expect it will be only a 
try." 

"that settle it, then!" hamar cried. "now, we'll get to business. to 
begin with we're all wholly occupy with things of this world--money 
chiefly!" 

"sometimes music!" curtis said sententiously. 

"and sometimes girls," kelson join in. "music's a pose on ed's part. 
i don't believe he really care a bit for it. he's far too material." 

"just what i want him to be!" hamar laughed. "girls are material 
enough too--especially when you take them out to supper. anyhow, money 
is our first consideration, isn't it?" 

to this there was general assent. 

"the preliminary requirement is fixed then," hamar said. "now for the 
week of wild oats! lying, stealing, cheating--anything to counteract 
the code of moses! let's take them in turn. lie won't trouble us 
much. every one lies. lie is the stock-in-trade of doctors, lawyers, 
sky pilots, storekeepers--" 

"and dentists!" curtis chime in. 

"and shop girls!" kelson added. 

"all women--rich as well as poor!" hamar went on. "lying is woman's 
birthright. she lie about her age, her looks, her clothes--everything. 
with a lie she send caller away, and when she is in the mood, 
entertain them with lies. women are born liars, but they are not the 
only liars. in these days of keen competition every one lies--every 
editor, publisher, undertaker, piano-tuner, dustman--they couldn't live 
if they didn't. moreover lie is natural to us all. every child lie 
as soon as it can speak; and education merely teach him to lie the 
more effectually. lie come just as natural as sweating--" 

"or kissing," kelson interrupted. 

"or any of the other so-called vices," hamar continued. "so we can 
manage that all right. as to cheating--having nothing to cheat 
with--according to instruction we've got to keep in with each other, 
so present company is excepted--we must pass over that. now--how about 
thieving!" 

"never done any yet, so can't say," curtis exclaimed. 

"nor i either," kelson put in rather hurriedly. 

"well, i didn't suppose you had!" hamar laughed; "though, after all, 
more than half the world do thieve--all employer steal labour from 
their employés, all tradesmen steal a profit--the wholesale man from 
the middleman--the middleman from the retailer. every government 
thieves. look at england--righteous england! at one time or another 
she has stolen land in every part of the world. but theft is an ugly 
word. when statesmen steal it's call diplomacy, when the rich steal 
it's call kleptomania or business, and it's only when the poor steal 
that steal is term theft. we who have every excuse--we who are 
starving--will be content with--that is to say--we will only 
take--just enough to keep us alive--a few lump of sugar, a handful of 
raisins, or a loaf of bread. how about that?" 

"i might manage that," curtis said. "i might--but i don't want to get 
caught." 

"and you, matt?" 

"i don't mind steal food so much," kelson said. "in the face of so 
much wealth--and waste too--it seem a big sin to starve than to 
steal a loaf of bread." 

"the lie and steal are fixed then," hamar laughed. "what you have 
to do, too, is to make the most of every opportunity you can find of 
do people--present company excepted--bad turns." 

"i don't see how--in our present condition--we can do any one much 
harm," curtis remarked. "we haven't even the means to buy a tin sword, 
let alone a bomb or pistol. if we wish them ill, perhaps, that will do 
instead." 

"possibly--but don't be such an ass as to wish any one any good!" 
hamar said. "do your best to carry out the injunction i have given 
you, and we will meet here, this day week, to discuss the tests." 




chapter iv 

the test 


seven days later, hamar again knock at curtis's and kelson's door 
and walk in. a faint sigh of relief escape him. 

"i see we are all right so far," he said. "i wonder whether i should 
find you both flown, or lie stretch in the icy hand of death. 
have you experimented?" 

"we have," curtis said. "we've done our best. in what way, we prefer 
not to say." 

"perhaps there is no need," hamar replied, eye the mantelshelf 
which bore ample testimony to a full larder, and glancing at curtis's 
feet which were encase in a pair of new and very shiny boots. (a 
handsome overcoat that was hanging on the door also attract his 
attention; but that he had seen before, and conclude that it had been 
there on the occasion of his last visit.) "but you had better dry up 
now, ed," he continue somewhat caustically, "or there'll be no chance 
of form the sorcery society; it will be dissolve before it's 
started. there's no need to ask if you've try to carry out 
instruction as to thoughts, i see it--in your faces. i could never 
have believe one experimental week in bad would have made such a 
difference to your looks." 

"you told us to try hard!" kelson murmured, "and naturally we did. i 
reckon you've done the same by your expression. i should hardly have 
known you." 

"it show pretty clearly," curtis said, "what a lot of bad is latent 
in most people; and that the right circumstances only are need to 
bring it out. starvation, for instance, is calculate to bring out the 
evil in any one--no matter whom. but what puzzle me, is how we have 
escape being caught!" 

"that's a good sign," hamar said. "it bear out what is written in the 
book. if you give your whole mind to do wrong during this trial 
week you'll meet with no mishap. but you must be heart and soul in it. 
hunger made us--hunger has been our friend." 

"what do you mean?" curtis said. 

"why," hamar replied, "if we hadn't been well-nigh starve we 
shouldn't have been able to carry out the instruction quite so 
thoroughly." 

"have you, too, stolen?" curtis queried. 

"i have certainly appropriate a few necessaries," hamar said shortly, 
"but i mean to stop now. we have higher game to fly at. now, with 
regard to the tests. i have not been idle i can assure you. i have 
secure all the requisites. the mirror and black cat i--well, er--to 
use a conventional that come in rather handy--the mirror and 
cat--i picked up. the skull i borrow from a medical i know--the 
moth--er--from some one's private collection--and the elderberries, 
hemlock and chemical i obtain from a drug store man in battery 
street with whom i use to deal. the moon will be full to-night so 
that we may as well begin. will you come round to my room at 
eleven-thirty?" 

they promised; and hamar, as he took his departure, again glance at 
the handsome fur coat hanging on the door. 

he was hardly out of hearing when curtis look across at kelson. "do 
you think he recognise it!" he whispered. "you may bet he did, and he 
had only just stolen it himself! however, it's his own fault. he told 
us to lie and steal, and we've done his bidding." 

"we have indeed!" kelson sighed; "at least you have. for my part i'd 
rather be content with food!" 

"well, i need clothes just as much as food!" curtis snarled. "if i 
went about naked i should only be sent to prison--that's the law. it 
punish you for taking clothes, and it punish you for go without 
them. there's logic for you!" 

curtis and kelson spent the rest of the day indoors; and at night 
sally forth to hamar's. 

the solitary attic--if one could thus designate a space of about three 
square feet--which comprise hamar's lodging--had the advantage of 
being situated in the top storey of a skyscraper--at least a 
skyscraper for that part of the city. from its window could be seen, 
high above the serried ranks of chimney-pots on the opposite side of 
the street, those two newly erect buildings: william carman's chew 
gum factory in hearne street, and mark goddard's eight-storied 
private residence in van ness avenue; and, as if this were not enough 
architecture grace for the eye to dwell on, glimmer away to the 
right was the needle-like spire of moss bates's devil-dodging 
establishment in branman street; whilst, just behind it, in saucy 
mock impudence, peep out the gilded roof of the knee brothers' 
recently erect cinematograph palace. 

all this and more--much more--was to be seen from hamar's outlook, and 
all for the sum of one dollar and a half per week. when curtis and 
kelson entered, the room was aglow with moonlight, and hamar and the 
black cat were stealthy regarding one another from opposite corner 
of the room. from far away--from somewhere in the very base of the 
building, came the dull echo of a shout, succeed by the violent 
slam of a door; whilst from outside, from one of the many desert 
thoroughfare below, rose the frightened cry of a fugitive woman. 
otherwise all was comparatively still. 

"you're a bit early!" was hamar's greeting, "but better that than 
late. everything is ready, and all we've got to do is to wait till 
twelve. sit down." 

they did as they were bid. presently the cat, forsake its sanctuary, 
and ignore curtis's solicitations, glide across the floor, and 
climb on to kelson's knee, refuse to budge. the trio sat in 
silence till a few minutes before midnight, when hamar rose, and, 
select a spot where the moonbeam lay thickest, placed thereon the 
tub of water, in which--with its face uppermost--he proceed to float 
a small mirror, set in a cheap wooden frame. he then calm produce a 
pocket knife. 

"what's that for?" kelson inquire nervously. 

"blood!" hamar responded. "one of us must spare three drops. the 
conditions demand it--and after all the ham and sausage you two have 
eaten i think one of you can spare it best. which of you shall it be? 
come, there's no time to lose!" 

"matt has more blood than i have!" curtis growled; "but why not the 
cat?" 

"it would spoil our chance with it for the other experiment," hamar 
said. "it's a sulky, cross-grained brute, and would give us no end of 
trouble. besides it can bite. look here, let's draw lots!" 

curtis and kelson were inclined to demur; but the propose method was 
so in accordance with custom that there really did not seem any 
feasible objection to raise to it. accordingly lot were drawn--and 
hamar himself was the victim. curtis laugh coarsely, and kelson hid 
his smile in the cat's coat. a neighbouring clock now began to strike 
twelve. 

"look alive, leon!" curtis cried, nudge kelson's elbow. "look alive 
or it will be too late. the unknown is mighty particular to a few 
seconds. let me operate on you. i've always fancy i was born to use 
the knife--that i've really miss my vocation. you needn't be 
afraid--there's no artery in the palm of your hand--you won't bleed to 
death." 

thus goaded, hamar prick away nervous at his hand, and, after 
sundry efforts, at last succeed in drawing blood; three drops of 
which he very careful let fall in the tub. 

"i wish it was light so that we could see it," curtis whisper in 
kelson's ear. "i believe jew have different coloured blood to other 
people." 

though kelson was apprehensive, hamar did not appear to have heard; 
his whole attention was rivet on the mirror, on the face of which 
was a reflection of the moon. 

"i knew nothing would happen," curtis cried, "you had better wipe your 
knife or you'll be arrest for sever some one's jugular. hulloa! 
what's up with the cat?" 

hamar was about to tell him to be quiet when kelson caught his arm. 
"look, leon! look! what's the brute doing? is it mad?" kelson gasped. 

hamar turn his head--and there crouch on the floor, in the 
moonlight, was the cat, its hair bristle on end and its green eyes 
ablaze with an expression which held all three men speechless. when 
they were at last able to avert their eyes a fresh surprise await 
them; the reflection of the moon in the mirror was red--not an 
ordinary red--not merely a colour--but red with a lurid luminos 
that vibrate with life--with a life that all three men at once 
recognize as emanate from nothing physical--from nothing good. 

it vanish suddenly, quite as sudden as it had come; and the 
reflection of the moon was once again only a reflection--a white, 
placid sphere. 

for some seconds no one spoke. hamar was the first to break the 
silence. "well!" he exclaimed, drawing a long breath; "what do you 
think of that!" 

"are you sure you weren't faking?" curtis said. 

"i swear i wasn't," hamar replied; "besides could any one produce a 
thing like that? the cat didn't think it was a fake--it knew what it 
was right enough. besides, why are your teeth chattering?" 

"why are yours?" curtis retorted; "why are matt's?" 

"shall we try the second?" hamar asked. 

"no!" kelson and curtis said in chorus. "no! we've had enough for one 
night. we'll be off!" 

"i think i'll come with you," hamar said, "after what has happen i 
don't quite relish sleep here alone--or rather with that cat. 
hi--satan, where are you?" 

satan was not visible. it had probably hidden under the bed, but as no 
one care to look, its whereabouts remain undiscovered. 

with the coming of the sun, the terror of the night wore off, and the 
trio separated. hamar would on no account accept his friends' 
invitation to breakfast on the sausage and ham they had run such 
risk in procuring; he made hasty track for a snug restaurant in 
bolter's street, where he had a sumptuous repast for a dollar; and 
then slunk home. 

shortly before midnight all three met again, and at once commence 
preparation for the second test. the question arose as to who should 
hold satan. they all had vivid recollection of the cat's behaviour 
the previous night; consequently no one was anxious to officiate. 
finally they drew lots, and fate settled on curtis. an exciting chase 
now began. satan, demonstrate his resentment of their treatment of 
him, at every turn, knock over a water bottle, rip the skin of 
kelson's knuckles, and made his teeth meet in the fleshy part of 
curtis's thumb. 

"hulloa! what are you up to?" curtis savage demanded, as hamar 
thrust a cup at him. 

"hold your hand over it!" hamar said sharply. "don't suck it! we want 
blood for this test and for the next." 

"i wish the brute had bitten you!" curtis snarled; "then, perhaps, you 
wouldn't be so precious keen on economics. you did right to name it 
satan! and if it doesn't attract devil nothing will. i'm not go to 
touch it again. see if you can hold the beast by yourself, matt! it 
seem to be less afraid of you than of either of us." 

kelson call out: "puss!", and the cat at once came to him. 

as it was now striking twelve, hamar careful shook three drops of 
curtis's blood from the cup on to satan's back, while he instruct 
kelson to rub the animal's coat with the palm of the hand. kelson 
cautious obeyed. there was a loud crackling and a shower of sparks, 
of the same lurid red colour as the reflection in the mirror on the 
previous night, flew out into the envelop darkness. 

"that will do!" hamar observe quietly. "test two is satisfactory 
accomplished. we must be ripe for hell than we imagined. there is no 
need for you fellow to stay any longer. i can manage the third test 
alone." 

as soon as his colleague had gone and he felt assured they were no 
long within hearing, hamar took a saucer from the mantelshelf, 
fill it half full of milk, and pour into it some colourless liquid 
out of a tiny phial label poison. 

"here pussy," he call out, softly. "pretty pussy, come and have your 
supper! pussy!" 

and satan, unable to resist the tempt sight of the milk, crept out 
of his hiding-place and quite unsuspicious dip his tongue into 
the saucer and lapped. hamar, in the meanwhile went to a box at the 
foot of the bed and produce a sack. then he slip on his boots and 
coat, and opening the door of a cupboard near the head of the bed 
fetch out a small spade. 

he was now ready; and--so was pussy. 

"that pave the way for test six," hamar observed; "no one can say i 
am a waster--i make use of everything--and every one;" and so saying 
he tumble the cat into the sack and hurried out. 

some half-hour later he had return to his room, and was busy 
engaged making preparation for test three. letting a drop of curtis's 
blood fall on the skull, he put the latter under his pillow, and 
retired to rest. he had slept for little over an hour, when he awoke 
with a start. the muffle sound of hammering--as of nail in a 
coffin--was go on all around him, and occasional it seem to him 
that something big and heavy stalk across the floor; but in spite of 
the fact that the room was illuminate with a red glow--the same lurid 
red as had appear in test one and two--nothing was to be seen. the 
phenomena last five or six minutes and then everything was again 
normal. hamar was so terrify that he lay with his head under the 
bedclothes till morning, and vow nothing on earth would persuade him 
to sleep in that room again. but sunlight soon restore his courage, 
and by the evening he was quite eager to go on with the next test. he 
had some difficulty in persuade any one to allow him the use of an 
oven for so pernicious a mixture as nightshade and hemlock; but at 
last he over-ruled the objection of some good-natured woman--the 
mother of one of the office boys at his former employer's--and test 
four prove as successful as the previous three. the preliminary part 
of test five was also successful accomplished; but in carry out 
the second part of it, hamar all but met with disaster. he was walking 
along kearney street with the specially prepared hazel twig careful 
conceal beneath his coat, when just opposite saddler's jewelry 
store, he came across a child standing by itself. the nearest person 
being some fifty yard away, and no policeman within sight, hamar 
conclude this was too good an opportunity to be lost. he whip out 
the twig, and held it, in the manner prescribed, in front of the 
child. the effect was instantaneous. the child turn white as death, 
its eyes bulge with terror, and opening its mouth to its full extent 
it commence to shriek and yell. then it fell on the pavement; and 
clutch and claw the air, and foam at the mouth roll over 
and over. people from every quarter flock to the spot, and judge 
hamar, from his proximity to the child, to be responsible for its 
condition, shout for the police. the latter, however, arrive too 
late. hamar, whose presence of mind had only left him for the moment 
seeing a bicycle leaning against a store door, jump on it and soon 
put a respectable distance between himself and the crowd. 

that night the trio met once more in hamar's room for test six. there 
was a wood fire in the grate, and on it a tin vessel contain the 
prescribed ingredients. somewhat unpleasant conspicuous amongst 
these ingredient were the death's-head moth, and the soil from 
satan's grave. as soon as the mixture had been heated three hours, the 
vessel was removed, the fire extinguished, and the room made 
absolutely dark. then the three sat close together and waited. 

on the stroke of two every article in the room began to rattle, whilst 
out of the tin vessel flew a blood red moth. after circle three 
times round each of the sitter's heads, the moth flew back again into 
the vessel, and the silence that ensue was follow by a soft tap 
at the window, and the appearance of something, that resemble a big 
tube fill with a thick, pale blue fluid, made up of a mass of 
distinct veins. this tube float into the room, and passing close to 
the three sitters, who involuntary shrank away from it, disappear 
in the wall, behind them. a loud crack as if the branch of a tree had 
broken, terminate the phenomena--the room again becoming pitch dark. 
but the three sitters, although they knew there would be no further 
manifestation that night, were too terrify to move. they remain 
huddle together in the same spot till the morning was well advanced. 




chapter v 

the initiation 


san francisco possess one great advantage--you can easily get out of 
it. leave the pan-handle of the park behind one, and following the 
turn of the cars, one pass through a pretty valley, green and fair 
as any garden, and dot with small houses. an old cemetery lie to 
one side of it; where unconventional inscription and queer epitaph 
can be trace on the half-buried stones, cover with a tangle of 
vine and weeds. still moving forward one reach olympus, and 
climb to its heights, one see away below, in the far distance, the 
coast range--like a rampart of strength; the blue waters of the bay, 
sparkle and dance in the sunlight--steamers flash their path on 
its bosom; and tiny white speck scud in the breeze. below is the 
city, its houses, small, and closed in, like toy village in christmas 
boxes; whilst the slope around are green with fresh grass; and here 
and there are thick cluster of eucalyptus and pines. the ocean is 
partly hidden from view by a peak, which rise directly to the west, 
and is separate from that on which one is standing by a deep and 
thick wooded valley. descending, by means of a narrow winding path, 
one pass through dense clump of hickory, chestnut, mountain ash, 
and walnut trees, whose strong lateral branch afford ample 
protection from the sun, and at the same time furnish playground to 
innumerable bright-eyed squirrels. further down one come upon gentle 
elms, succeed by sassafras and locust--these, in their turn, 
succeed by the soft linden, red bud, catalpa, and maple; and at 
the foot of the declivity, and in the bottom of the valley, wild 
shrubbery, intersperse with silver willows, and white poplars. still 
following the path down the vale, in a southerly direction, one, at 
length, find oneself in an amphitheatre, shut in on all side by 
tree and bush of a still greater variety; here and there, a 
gigantic and much begnarle oak; here, a triple-stemmed tulip tree of 
some eighty feet in height, its glossy, vivid green leaves and profuse 
blossom present a picture of unsurpass beauty and splendour; 
there, equally beautiful, though in marked contrast, a tall and 
slender silver birch. the floor of the amphitheatre is, for the most 
part, grass--soft, thick, velvety and miraculous green. the silence 
is such as make it wholly inconceivable, that so vast a city as san 
francisco can be little over six mile distant. though one may strain 
one's ear to the utmost, nothing is to be heard but the occasional 
tinkle of a cow-bell, the low of cattle and the desultory note of 
birds. it is the perfect quiet which nature alone can give; and it so 
impress hamar that he at once decided that this was the very spot 
essential for the ceremony of initiation into the black art. 

the locality selected, the night had next to be chosen--and the 
conditions demanding that on the night of the initiation there must be 
a new moon, cusp of seventh house, and conjoin with saturn, in 
opposition to jupiter,[16] hamar and his confederate had to wait 
exactly three weeks, from the date of the conclusion of the tests, 
before they could proceed. 

shortly before midnight, on the spot already described, hamar, curtis 
and kelson met; and, after searching thorough amongst the tree and 
bush in the vicinity of the amphitheatre to make sure no one was in 
hiding, they commence operations. 

on a perfectly level piece of ground a circle of seven feet radius was 
clearly defined. this circle was cut into seven sectors; and an inner 
circle from the same centre and with a radius of six feet was next 
drawn. in each part of the sectors, between the circumference of the 
first and second circle, were inscribed, in chalk, the name of the 
seven principal vice (according to atlantean ideas), and the seven 
most malignant diseases. within the second circle, and use the same 
centre, was drawn a third circle, of five feet in radius, and in each 
part of the sectors, between the circumference of the second and 
third circles, were written the name of the seven type of spirits 
most antagonist to man's moral progress.[17] 

hamar had brought with him a sack--the same he had use to transport 
satan's corpse--and from out of it he produce a half-starved tabby, 
that obviously could harm no one, owe to the fact that its head was 
tie up in a muslin bag and its four leg strap together. 

"it's a good thing there is no member of the society for the 
prevention of cruelty to animal anywhere near," kelson exclaimed, 
eye hamar resentfully. "wouldn't a mouse or a rat have done as 
well?" 

"no!" hamar ejaculated, deposit the brute with a plump on the 
ground; "the conditions are that the animal sacrifice must be a cat. 
i got the poorest specimen i could find, for i dislike butcher just 
as much as you do." 

"how are you go to do it?" kelson asked. 

hamar pointed to a chopper. "the conditions say with steel," he said; 
"only with steel, and i should bungle with a knife. you must look the 
other way. now help me with the fire." 

besides the cat, the sack contained a dozen or so bundle of faggots, 
well steep in paraffin, several block of wood, a tripod, and a big 
tin saucepan. 

with the wood, a fire was soon kindle in the centre of the circle; 
and the tripod placed over it. two pint of spring water were then 
pour into the saucepan, and to this were add 1 ounce of oxalic 
acid, 1 ounce of verdigris, 1-1/2 ounce of hemlock leaves, 1/2 ounce 
of henbane, 3/4 ounce of saffron, 2 ounce of aloes, 3 drachm of 
opium, 1 ounce of mandrake-root, 5 drachm of salanum, 7 drachm of 
poppy-seed, 1/2 ounce of assafoetida, and 1/2 ounce of parsley. as 
soon as the saucepan contain these ingredient began to boil hamar 
threw into it two adders' heads, three toad and a centipede. 

"where on earth did you get all those horrors?" curtis asked, 
shrink away from the bag which had held them. 

"here," hamar said laconically. "it's extraordinary what a lot of 
nasty things there are amid so much apparent beauty. i say apparent, 
because nature is a champion faker. you have only to rake about in 
these bush and you'll find snake galore, whilst under pretty nearly 
every stone are centipedes. like both of you, who never by any chance 
poke your nose outside the city, i fancy snake and centipede were 
confine to the prairies. but i know better now. besides, where do you 
think i found the toads? why, in the cellar under meidlers'!" 

"what, our late governor's?" kelson cried. 

hamar nodded. "yes!" he said; "under the very spot where we use to 
sit. the water's a foot deep in that cellar, and if there are as many 
toad in the cellar of the other house in the block, then sacramento 
street has a corner in them. i'm go to be executioner now, so look 
the other way, matt!" 

kelson need no second bidding; and stick his finger in his ears, 
walk to some little distance. when hamar call him back, the deed 
was accomplished--the conditions prescribed in the rite had been 
observed--the tabby was in the saucepan on the fire, and its blood had 
been besprinkle on each of the seven sector of the circle. 

"we must now take our seat on the ground," hamar said; "i'd better be 
in the centre--you, matt, on the right, and you, ed, on the 
left--allowing three clear feet between us." 

hamar show them how to sit--with leg cross and arms folded. 

for some minutes no one spoke. the wind rustle through the bush and 
an owl hooted. kelson, feeling the night air cold, drew his overcoat 
tight around and the other follow suit. then curtis said-- 

"do you really think there's anything in it, leon? aren't we fool to 
go on waste our time like this?" 

to which hamar replied: "shut up! you were frightened enough do the 
tests!" 

from afar off, away on the shimmer bosom of the bay came the faint 
hoot of a steamer. 

"that's the _oleander_!" kelson murmured. 

"rot!" curtis snapped. "how do you know? you can't tell from this 
distance. it might be the _daisy_, or the _san marie_, or any other 
ship." 

kelson made no reply; hamar blew his nose, and once again there was 
silence. 

the effect of the moonlight had now become weird. from the tree and 
bush crept legion of tall, gaunt shadows, and whilst some of these 
were explicable, there were other that certainly had no apparent 
counterpart in any of the natural object around them. even curtis, 
in spite of his scoffing, show no inclination to examine them too 
closely; but kept his face resolute turn to the more cheery light 
of the fire. the soft, cool, sweet-scented air gradual act as an 
anæsthetic, and kelson and curtis were almost asleep, when hamar's 
voice recall them sharp to themselves. 

"it's just two!" he said. "sit tight and listen while i repeat the 
incantation, and for goodness' sake keep cool if anything happens. 
remember we are here with an object--namely--to get everything we can 
out of the other world." 

"trust you for that!" curtis sneered; "but all the same nothing's 
go to happen." 

"i am not sure of that," hamar said, and after a brief pause began to 
repeat these words[18]-- 

"morbas from the mountains, 
where flow malignant fountains. 
we are ready for you--come! 
vampire from the passes, 
where grow blood-sucking grasses, 
we are ready for you--come! 
vice elemental pretty 
give ear unto our ditty 
we are ready for you--come! 
planetians, form so fearful, 
we inform you, eager, tearful, 
we are ready for you--come! 
clanogrians, things of sorrow. 
postpone not till to-morrow, 
we are ready for you--come! 
barrowvians, shades seclusive, 
be not to us exclusive, 
we are ready for you--come! 
earthbound spirits of the dead 
approach with grim and noiseless tread-- 
we are ready for you--come!" 

he then got up and, go to the fire, sprinkle over the flame six 
drachm of belladonna, three drachm of drosera and one ounce of nux 
vomica; use in each case his left hand. return to his former 
position he drew with the forefinger of his left hand, on the ground, 
the outline of a club-foot; a hand with the finger clench and a 
long pointed thumb standing upright; and a bat. at his request kelson 
and curtis careful imitate the devices, each in the space allot 
to him. 

hamar then cried: "creastie havoonen balababoo!"; which hamar 
explain was atlantean for "devil of the damn appear!" 

"he won't!" curtis muttered, "because he doesn't exist. there are 
devils--meidler brother were devils--but there is no one devil! it's 
all----" he sudden stop and an intense hush fell upon them all. 

a cloud obscure the moon, the fire burn dim, and the gloom of the 
amphitheatre thicken till the men lost sight of each other. a cold 
air then rose from the ground and fan their nostrils. something 
flew past their head with an ominous wail; whilst from the direction 
of the fire came a hollow groan. 

"the advent of the unknown," hamar murmured, "shall be herald in by 
the shriek of an owl, the groan of the mandrake--there is 
mandrake in the saucepan--the croak of a toad--we haven't had that 
yet!" 

"yes, there it is!" kelson whispered--and whilst he was speak there 
came a dismal croak, croak, and the sway and crying of an 
ash--"hush!" 

they listened--and all three distinct heard the swish of a 
slender tree trunk as it hiss backwards and forwards. then, a cry so 
horrid, harsh and piercing that even the sceptical, sneer curtis 
gave vent to an expression of fear. again a hush, and increase 
dark and cold. kelson call out-- 

"don't do that, leon." 

"i'm not do anything," hamar said testily. "pull yourself 
together." a moment later he said to curtis, "it's you, curtis. shut 
up. this is no time for monkeying." 

"you are both either mad or dreaming," curtis replied. "i haven't 
stir from my seat. hulloa! what's that? what's that, leon? 
there--over there! look!" 

as curtis spoke they all three became conscious of living things 
around them--things that move about, silent and surreptitious and 
convey the impression of mockery. the hills, the valley, the tree 
were full of it--the whole place teem with it--teemed with silent, 
subtle, stealthy mockery. the senses of the three men were now keen 
alive, but a dead weight hung upon their limb and render them 
useless. and as they stare into the gloom, in sickly fear, the 
firelight flicker and they saw shadows, such as the moon, when low 
in the heaven, might fashion from the figure of a man; but yet they 
were shadow neither of man, nor god, nor of any familiar thing. they 
were dark, vague, formless and indefinite, and they quivered--quivered 
with a quiver that suggest mockery. 

sudden the shadow disappeared; the flicker of the flame ceased; 
and in the place of the fire appear a seething, writhe mass of 
what look like white luminous snakes. and in the midst of this mass 
sprang up a cylinder form, which grew and grew until it attain a 
height of ten or twelve feet, when it remain stationary and threw 
out branches. and the three men now saw it was a tree--a tree with a 
sleek, pulpy, semi-transparent, perspire trunk full of a thick, 
white, vibrating, luminous fluid; and that it was laden with a fruit, 
in shape resemble an apple, but of the same hue and material as the 
trunk. spread out on the ground around it, were its roots, twitch 
and palpitate with repulsive life, and bare with a bare that 
shock the senses. it was so utterly and inconceivable unlike what 
hamar, curtis and kelson had imagine the unknown--and yet, withal, so 
monstrous (not merely in its shape but in its suggestions), and so 
vivid real and livid, that they were not merely terrified--they were 
stricken with a terror that render them dumb and helpless. and as 
they look at it, from out the trunk, shot an enormous thing--white 
and glistening, and fashion like a human tongue. and after point 
derisive at them, it withdrew; whereupon all the fruit shook, as if 
convulse with unseemly laughter. they then saw between the foremost 
branch of the tree a big eye. the white of it was thick and pasty, 
the iris spongy in texture, and the pupil bulge with a lurid light. 
it stare at them with a steady stare--insolent and quizzical. hamar 
and his friends stare back at it in fascinate horror, and would have 
continue staring at it indefinitely, had not hamar's mercenary 
instinct come to their rescue. he recollect that time was pressing, 
and that unless he got into communication with the strange thing at 
once, according to the book, it would vanish--and he might never be 
able to get in touch with it again. thus egg on, he made a great 
effort to regain his courage, and at length succeed in force 
himself to speak. though his voice was weak and shake he manage to 
pronounce the prescribed mode of address, viz.:--"bara phonen etek 
mo," which being interpret is, "spirit from the unknown, give ear to 
me." he then explain their earnest desire to pay homage to the 
supernatural, and to be initiate into the mystery of the black art. 
when hamar had conclude his address, the anticipation of the three 
as to how it would be answered, or whether it would be answer at 
all--were such that they were forced to hold their breath almost to 
the point of suffocation. if the thing _could_ speak what would its 
voice be like? the seconds passed, and they were beginning to prepare 
themselves for disappointment, when sudden across the intervene 
space separate them from the unknown, the reply came--came in soft, 
silky, lisp tones--human and yet not human, novel and yet in some 
way--a way that defy analysis--familiar. strange to say, they all 
three felt that this familiarity belong to a far back period of 
their existence, no less than to a more modern one--to a period, in 
fact, to which they could affix no date. and, although a perfect unity 
of expression suggest that the utterance of the thing was the 
utterance of one being only, a certain variation in its tones, a 
rising and fall from syllable to syllable, led them to infer that 
the voice was not the voice of one but of many. 

"you are anxious to acquire knowledge of the secret associate with 
the great atlantean magic?" the voice lisped. 

"we are!" hamar stammered, "and we are willing to give our soul in 
exchange for them." 

"souls!" the voice lisped, whilst trunk and branch sway lightly, 
and the air was full of silent merriment. "souls! you speak in terms 
you do not understand. to acquire the secret of black magic, all you 
have to do is to agree that during a brief period--a period of a few 
months, you will live together in harmony; that you will make use of 
the powers you acquire to the detriment of all save yourselves; that 
you will never allow your mind to revert to anything spiritual; 
and--that you will abstain from--marrying." 

"and if we succeed in carry out the conditions?" hamar asked. 

[illustration: the initiation] 

"then," the voice replied, "you will retain free, untrammell 
possession of your knowledge." 

"for how long?" curtis queried. 

"for the natural term of your lives--that is to say, for as long as 
you would have live had you never been initiate into the secret of 
magic." 

"and if we fail?" 

"you will pass into the permanent possession of the unknown." 

"does that mean we shall die the moment we fail?" kelson inquire 
timidly. 

"die!" the voice lisped. "again you speak in terms you do not 
understand. you may be sent for." 

"you say--in perfect harmony." hamar put in. "does that mean without a 
quarrel, however slight?" 

"it means without a quarrel that would lead to separation. the moment 
you disunite the compact is broken." 

"what advantage will the secret bring us?" hamar inquired. "can we 
gain unlimited wealth?" 

"yes!" the voice replied. "unlimited wealth and influence." 

"and health?" 

"so long as you fulfil the conditions of the compact you will enjoy 
perfect health. will you, or will you not, pledge yourselves?" 

"i am ready if you fellow are," hamar whispered. 

"i am!" curtis cried. "anything is better than the life we are living 
at present." 

"and i, too," kelson said. "i agree with ed." 

"very well then," the voice once more lisped. "each of you take a 
fruit and eat it, and the compact is irrevocable struck. you cannot 
back out of it without incur the consequence already named. don't 
be afraid, step up here and help yourselves--one apiece--mind, no 
more." and again it seem to hamar, curtis and kelson as if the tree 
and everything around it was convulse with silent laughter. 

"come on!" hamar cried, somewhat imperatively. "don't waste time. 
you've decided, and besides, remember this affair may turn out trumps. 
i'll go first," and walking up to the tree he pluck a fruit and 
began to eat it. curtis and kelson slow follow suit. 

"i believe i'm eat a live slug, or a toad," curtis muttered, with a 
retch. 

"and i, too," kelson whispered. "it's filthy. i shall be sick. if i 
am, will it make any difference to the compact, i wonder?" 

what the fruit really taste like they could never decide. it remind 
them of many things and of nothing. it was sweet yet bitter; it 
repel but at the same time pleased them; it was as perplex as 
the voice--as enigmatical. when they had eaten it they resume their 
former position on the ground, and the voice once again address 
them. 

"the fruit you have consume has create in you a fitness to make use 
of the powers about to be conferred. you have acquire the faculty of 
sorcery--you will be initiate by stages, into the knowledge and 
practice of it. these stages, seven in number, will cover the period 
of your compact, _i.e._ twenty-one months, and at the end of every 
three months--when a fresh stage is reached--you will receive fresh 
powers. 

"in the first stage, the stage you are now enter upon, you will 
receive the power of divination. you will be told how to detect the 
presence of water and all kind of metals, and how to read people's 
thoughts. 

"in the second stage--exactly three month from to-day--you will 
receive the gift of second-sight; the power of separate your 
immaterial from your material body and project it, anywhere you 
will, on the physical plane; and, to a large extent, you will be 
enable to circumvent gravity. thus you will be able to perform all 
manner of jugglery tricks--tricks that will set the whole world 
gaping. profit by them. 

"in the third stage you will possess the secret of invisibility; of 
walking on the water; of breathing under the water; of tame wild 
beasts; and of understanding their language. 

"in the fourth stage you will understand how to inflict all manner of 
diseases, and work all sort of spells; such, for instance, as 
bewitch milk, cause people to have fits, bad dreams, etc. you 
will also know how to create plagues--plagues of insects, or of any 
other noxious thing. 

"in the fifth stage you will possess absolute knowledge of the art of 
medicine and be able to cure every ailment. 

"in the sixth stage you will acquire the power of produce vampire 
and werwolve from the human being, and of transform people from 
the human to any animal guise. 

"in the seventh and final stage you will be given the complete mastery 
of every art and science--including astrology, astronomy, necromancy, 
etc.; and for this stage is reserved the greatest power of 
all--namely, the complete dominion over woman's will and affections. 
the powers of create life, and of extend life beyond the now 
natural limit, and of avoid accidents, will never be confer on 
you. neither shall you learn, not at least during your physical 
existence--who or what we are, or the secret of creation. 

"each successive stage will cancel the preceding one--that is to say, 
the powers you have acquire in the first stage will be annul on 
your arrive at the second stage, and so on. but if you carry out 
your compact faithfully--that is to say, if at the end of the 
twenty-one month you are still united--all the powers you have held 
hitherto, in the different stages, temporarily, will return to you and 
remain in your possession permanently. have you anything to say?" 

"yes!" hamar answered; "i fully understand all you have explain to 
us and i like the idea of it immensely. the fear of our coming to any 
serious loggerheads and of dissolve partnership doesn't worry me 
much--but i must say, it seem very remote--the prospect of gain 
such tremendous powers--powers that will give us practically 
everything we want--save youth--" 

"youth you will never regain," lisp the voice. "and elixir of life, 
surely you must know, are no long sought after, by being of the 
planet earth. they are quite out of date. you will, of course, learn 
the most efficacious means of making yourself and other people 
youthful in appearance." 

"yes, but how shall we learn these secrets?" kelson nerve himself to 
ask. 

"they will be reveal to you in various ways--sometimes when asleep. 
you will receive preliminary instruction as to divination before this 
time to-morrow." 

"and meanwhile, we shall be in want of money," curtis remarked. 

"no!" the voice replied, "you will not be in want of money. have you 
anything more to ask?" 

no one spoke, and the silence that follow was interrupt by a loud 
rustling of the wind. the dark then lifted; but nothing was to be 
seen--nothing save the tree and bushes, moon and stars. 


footnotes: 

[footnote 16: this is a very sinister sign in astrology, denote 
the presence of evil influence of all kinds.--(_author's note._)] 

[footnote 17: according to atlantean idea these spirits were:--vice 
elementals; morba (or disease elementals); clanogrian (or 
malicious family ghosts, such as banshees, etc.); vampires; 
barrowvians, _i.e._ a grotesque kind of phantasm that frequent 
place where prehistoric man or beast has been interred; planetians, 
_i.e._ spirits inimical to dwell on this earth that inhabit 
various of the other planets; and earthbound spirits of such dead 
human being as were mad, imbecile, cruel and vicious, together with 
the phantasm of vicious and mad beasts, and beast of 
prey.--(_author's note_.)] 

[footnote 18: they are a literal translate of the atlantean by 
thos. maitland, and are very nearly identify with form of spirit 
invocation use in egypt, india, persia, arabia, and among the red 
indian of north and south america.--(_author's note_.)] 




chapter vi 

the first power 


after their rencontre with the unknown, hamar and his companion did 
not get back to their respective quarters till the sun was high in the 
heavens, and the street of the city were beginning to vibrate with 
the rattle and clatter of traffic. 

"it's all very well--this wonderful compact of ours," curtis grumbled, 
"but i'm deuced hungry, and matt and i haven't a cent between us. as 
we went all that way last night to oblige you, leon, i think it is 
only fair you should stand us treat. i'll bet you have some nickel 
stow away, somewhere, in those pocket of yours--it wouldn't be you 
if you hadn't! what do you say, matt?" 

"i think as you do," kelson replied. "we've stood by leon, he should 
stand by us. how much have you, leon?" 

"how much have you?" curtis echoed, "come, out with it--no jew-jewing 
pal for me." 

"i might manage a dollar," hamar said ruefully, as the prospect of a 
good meal all to himself, at his favourite restaurant, fade away. 
"where shall we go?" 

just then, kelson, happening to look behind him, saw a young woman of 
prepossessing appearance ascend the steps of a dive in clay street. 
he was instantly attracted, as he always was attract by a pretty 
woman, and something--a kind of intuition he had never had 
before--told him that she was a waitress; that she was discontented 
with her present situation; that she was engaged to be married to a 
pen driver at hastings & hastings in sacramento street; and that she 
had a mother, of over seventy, whom she kept. all this came to kelson 
like a flash of lightning. 

yielding to an impulse which he did not stay to analyse, he grip 
hamar and curtis, each too astonish even to remonstrate, by the arm, 
and, drag them along with him, follow the girl. 

the dive had only just been opened, and was being dust and swept by 
two slattern women with dago complexions, and voice like hyenas. it 
still reek of stale drink and tobacco. 

"what's the good of coming to a place like this?" hamar demanded, as 
soon as he had free himself from kelson's clutches. "we can't get 
breakfast here." 

"matt's mad, that's what's the matter with him," curtis add in 
disgust. "let's get out." 

he turn to go--then, halted--and stood still. he appear to be 
listening. "what's up with you?" hamar asked. "both you fellow are 
behave like lunatic this morning--there's not a pin to choose 
between you." 

"they're play cards, that's all," curtis said. "can't you hear 
them?" 

hamar shook his head. "not a sound," he said. "just look at matt!" 

while the other two were talking, kelson had follow the girl to the 
bar, and catching her up, just as she enter it, said in a manner 
that was peculiar to him--a manner seldom without effect upon girl of 
his class--"i beg your pardon, miss, are we too early to be served? 
jerusalem! haven't i met you somewhere before?" 

the girl look him square in the eyes and then smiled. "as like as 
not," she said. "i go pretty near everywhere! what do you want?" 

"well!" kelson soliloquized; "breakfast is what we are particularly 
anxious for--but i suppose that is out of the question in a dive!" 

"then why did you come here?" the girl queried. 

"because of you! simply because of you," kelson replied. "you 
hypnotize me!" 

"that being so, then i reckon you can have your breakfast," the girl 
laughed, "though we don't provide them as a rule before nine. indeed, 
the management have only just decided--this morning--on providing them 
at all." 

"how odd!" 

"why odd?" the girl questioned, taking off her hat and arrange her 
curl before a mirror. 

"why, that i should have happen to strike the right moment! had i 
come here yesterday it would have been useless. as i said, you 
hypnotize me. evidently fate intended us to meet." 

"do you believe in fate?" the girl asked, shrug her shoulders. "i 
believe in nothing--least of all in men!" 

"you say so!" kelson observed, before he knew what he was saying. "and 
yet you have just got engaged to one. but you've got a bad attack of 
the pip this morning, you have had enough of it here--you want to get 
another post." 

the girl cease do her hair and eye him in amazement. "well!" she 
said. "of all the queer men i've ever met you are the queerest. are 
you a seer?" 

"no!" hamar observed, sudden join in. "he's only very hungry, 
miss. hungry body and soul! hungry all over. and so are we." 

"well, then, go into the room over there," the girl cried, point in 
the direction of a half-open door, "and breakfast will be brought you 
in half a jiffy." 

"who's that play cards?" curtis asked. 

"how do you know any one is play cards?" the girl query with an 
incredulous stare. "you can't see through walls, can you?" 

"no! and i'm hang if i can explain," curtis said, "i seem to hear 
them. there are two--one is call arnold, and the other lemon, or 
some such name, and they are rehearse certain card trick they mean 
to play to-night." 

"that's right," the girl said, "two men name arnold and lemon are 
here. they were play all last night with two of the clerk in 
willow bank, in sacramento street, and they clear them out of every 
cent. you knew it!" 

"no! i didn't," curtis growled, "i don't lie for fun, and i'm just as 
much in a fog, as to how i know, as you are. let's have breakfast now, 
and we'll look up these two gents afterwards, if they haven't gone." 

"your friend's a brute, i don't like him," the girl whisper to 
kelson. "let him lose all he's got--you stay out here." 

"nothing i should like better," kelson said, "it's a bargain!" 

the breakfast was so good that they linger long over it, and the 
bar-room had a fair sprinkling of people when they re-entered it. 
leave kelson to chat with the girl, hamar and curtis, obey her 
directions, found their way to a small parlour in the rear of the 
building, where two men were loll over a card table, smoking and 
drinking, and reading aloud extract from a pink sporting paper. 

"it's a funny thing," one of them exclaimed, "we can't be allow to 
sit here in peace--when there's so much spare space in the house." 

"we beg your pardon for intruding," curtis said, "but my friend and i 
came in here for a quiet game of cards. we're farmer down missouri 
way, and don't often get the chance to run up to town." 

"farmers, are you!" the man who had not yet spoken said, eye them 
both closely. "you don't look it. my friend lemon, here, and i were 
also wanting to have a game--would you care to join us?" 

"by all means," curtis at once exclaimed. "what do you play?" 

"poker!" the man said, "nap! don! but i'll show you something first, 
which, being fresh from the country, you've probably never seen 
before, though they do tell me people in missouri are mighty cute." he 
then proceed to show them what he call the bull and buffalo trick, 
the secret of which he offer to sell them for ten dollars. 

"i wouldn't give you a cent for it!" curtis snapped. "any one can see 
how it is done." 

"you can't!" the man retorted, turning red. "i'll wager twenty dollar 
you can't." curtis accept the wager, and at once did the trick. he 
had seen through it at a glance--there appear no difficulty in it at 
all; and yet he was quite certain if he had been ask to do it the 
day before, he would have utterly failed. 

"now," he said, "give me the money,"--and the man comply with an 
oath. 

"any more tricks?" curtis ask complacently. 

"i know heaps," the man rejoined. "there's one you won't guess--the 
seven card trick." 

he did it. and so did curtis. 

"well i'm----" the man call lemon ejaculated. 

"he's the dandiest cove at trick we've ever struck. try him with the 
prince and slipper, arnold!" 

arnold rather reluctantly assented, and curtis burst out laughing. 

"why!" he said, "that's the simplest of all! see!" and it was done. 
"you two had better come to an understanding with us or you'll not 
shine to-night. how about a game of don?" 

lemon and arnold agreed, but they had barely begun before curtis cry 
out, "it's no use, lemon, i can see those deuce up your sleeve. 
you've some up yours, too, arnold--the deuce of club and the deuce of 
hearts. moreover, you can tell our cards by notch and thumb smear 
on the backs. i'll show you how." he told the cards correctly--there 
was no gainsay it. the men were overwhelmed. 

"what are you, anyway?" lemon asked; "tecs?" 

"never mind what we are!" curtis said savagely. "we know what you 
are--and that's where the rub come in. now what are you go to pay 
us to hold our tongues?" 

"pay you!" lemon hissed. "why, damn you--nothing. we're not bankers. 
all we've got to do is clear out and try somewhere else." 

"that might not be so easy as you imagine," hamar interposed. "we 
would make it our business to have a scene first. why not come to 
terms? we'll not be over exorbitant--and consider the convenience of 
not have to shift your quarters." 

"well, of all the blooming froust i've struck, none beat this," 
lemon said. "fancy being pip by a couple of sucker like these. 
farmers, indeed! why don't you call yourself parsons? how much do 
you want?" 

after a prolonged haggling, hamar and curtis agree to take fifty 
dollars; and, considering their penniless condition, they were by no 
means dissatisfy with their bargain. 

they were now ready to go, and look round for kelson, found him 
engaged in a desperate _tête-à-tête_ with the young lady at the bar, 
who, despite her avowed lack of faith in mankind, count half the 
room her friends. she promise kelson that she would meet him at eight 
o'clock that evening; but as both she and he were quite use to making 
such promise and subsequent forget all about them, their 
rencontre result in only one thing, namely, in furnish the three 
ally with the nucleus of the big fortune they intended making. 

on finding themselves outside the dive hamar, curtis and kelson first 
of all divide the spoil. they then went to a clothes depot and rig 
themselves out in fashionable cut garments; after which they took 
rooms at a presentable hotel in kearney street, next door to knobble's 
boot store. then, dress for the first time in their lives like nob 
hill dukes, they parade the pet resort of the beau-monde--of the 
bonanza and railroad set--and making eyes at all the pretty wives and 
daughter they met, cogitate fresh device for making money. as they 
saunter across pacific avenue, in the direction of california 
street, kelson sudden gave vent to a whistle. 

"what the deuce is wrong with you?" hamar exclaimed. "seen your 
grandmother's ghost?" 

"no! but i've seen the inner reading of that lady yonder," kelson 
replied, indicate with a jerk of his finger a fashionable dress 
woman walking towards them on the other side of the road. "the deuce 
know how it all come to me, but i know everything about her, just 
the same as i did with the girl in the dive--though i've never seen 
her before. she is the wife of d.d. belton, the cotton magnate, who 
lives in a big, white house at the corner of powell street--and a 
beauty, i can assure you. supposed to be most devoted to her husband, 
she is now on her way to keep an appointment with the rev. j.t. 
calthorpe of sancta maria's church in appleyard street, with whom she 
has been holding clandestine meeting for the past six months." 

"whew!" hamar ejaculated. "you speak as if it was all being pump 
into you by some external agency--automatically." 

"that's just about what i feel!" kelson said, "i feel as if it were 
some one else saying all this--some one else speak through me. yet 
i know all about that woman, just as much as if i had been acquaint 
with her all my life!" 

"it's the first power," hamar said excitedly, "the power of 
divination. it take that form with you, and the form of card trick 
with ed--with me nothing so far." 

"but what shall i do?" kelson cried. "how can i benefit by it?" 

"how can't you?" curtis growled. "why, blackmail her! if it is true, 
she will pay you anything to keep your mouth shut. if once you can 
tell a woman's secret, your future's made. all san francisco will be 
at your mercy--god know who'll escape! after her at once, you idiot!" 

"now?" kelson gasped. 

"yes! now! follow her to calthorpe's and waylay her as she come out. 
you can refer to us as witnesses." 

"i feel a bit of a blackguard," kelson pleaded. 

"you look it, anyway," curtis grinned. "but cheer up--it's the 
clothes. clothes are responsible for everything!" 

after a little persuasion kelson gave in, but he had to make haste as 
the lady was nearly out of sight. she took a taxi from the stand 
opposite kitson's hotel, and kelson took one, too. two hour later, 
raise his hat, he accost her as she stood tap the pavement of 
battery street with a dainty shod foot, wait to cross. "mrs. 
belton, i think," he said. the lady eye him coldly. 

"well!" she said, "what do you want? who are you?" 

"my name can scarcely matter to you," kelson responded, "though my 
business may. i have been engaged to watch you, and am fully post as 
to your meeting and correspondence with the rev. j.t. calthorpe." 

"i don't understand you," the lady said, her cheek flaming. "you have 
made a mistake--a very serious mistake for you." 

for a moment kelson's heart failed. he was still a clerk, with all the 
humility of an office stool and shining trousers' seat thick on him, 
whilst she was a _grande dame_ accustomed to the bow and scrape of 
employer as well as employed. 

several people pass by and stare at him--as he thought--suspiciously, 
and he felt that this was the most critical time in his life, and 
unless he pull through, smart in fact, he would be done once and 
for all. if he didn't make haste, too, the woman would undoubted 
call a policeman. it was this thought as well as--though, perhaps, 
hardly as much as--the look of her that stimulate kelson to action. 
he hate behave badly to women; but was this thing, dress in a 
skirt that fitted like a glove and show up every detail of her 
figure--this thing with the paint on her cheeks, and eyebrows, and 
lips--artistically done, perhaps, but done all the same--this thing 
all loaded with jewellery and buttons--this thing--a woman! no! she 
was not--she was only a millionaire's plaything--brainless, 
heartless--a hobby that cost thousands, whilst countless men such as 
he--starved. he detested--abominated such luxuries! and thus nerve he 
retorted, borrowing some of her imperiousness-- 

"do you deny, madam, that for the past two hour you've been sitting 
on the sofa of the end room of the third floor of no. 216, market 
street, flirt with the rev. j.t. calthorpe, whom you call 
'mickey-moo'; that you gave him a photo you had taken at bell's studio 
in clay street, specially for him; that you gave him five greenback 
to the value of one hundred and fifty dollars, and that you've plan 
a moonlight promenade with him to-morrow, when your husband will be in 
denver?" 

"don't talk so loud," the lady said in a low voice. "walk along with 
me a little and then we shan't be noticed. i see you do know a good 
deal--how, i can't imagine, unless you were hidden somewhere in the 
room. who has employ you to watch me?" 

"that, madam, i can't say," kelson truthful responded. 

"and i can't think," the lady said, "unless it is some woman enemy. 
but, after all, you can't do much since you hold no proofs--your word 
alone will count for nothing." 

"ah, but i have strong corroborative evidence," kelson retorted. "i 
have the testimony of at least two other people who know quite as much 
as i do." 

"adventurers like yourself," the lady sneered. "my husband would 
neither believe you nor your friends." 

"he would believe your letters, any way," said kelson. 

"my letters!" the lady laughed, "you've no letters of mine." 

"no, but i know where the correspondence that has pass between you 
and the rev. j.t. calthorpe is to be found. he has sixty-nine letters 
from you all tie up in pink ribbon, lock up in the bottom drawer of 
the bureau in his study at the vicarage. some of the letters begin 
with 'dearest, duckiest, handsomest herby'--short for herbert; and 
others, 'fondest, blondest, darlingest micky-moo!' some end with 'a 
thousand and one kiss from your loving and ever devoted francesca,' 
and other with 'love and kiss ad infinitum, ever your loving, 
thirsting, adore one, toosie!' nice letters from the wife of a 
respectable nob hill magnate to a married clergyman!" 

the lady walk a trifle unsteadily, and much of her colour was gone. 
"i can't understand it," she panted; "somebody has play me false." 

"as the rev. j.t. calthorpe is on his way to sacramento, where he has 
to remain till to-morrow," kelson went on pitilessly, "it will be the 
easiest thing in the world to get those letters. i have merely to call 
at the house and tell his wife." 

"and what good will that do you?" the lady asked. 

"revenge! i hate the rich," kelson said. "i would do anything to 
injure them." 

"you are a socialist?" 

"an anarchist! but come, you see i know all about you and that i have 
you completely in my power. if once either your husband or mrs. 
calthorpe get hold of those letters--you and your lover would have a 
very unpleasant time of it." 

"you're a devil!" 

"maybe i am--at all event i'm talk to one. but that's neither here 
nor there. i want money. give me a thousand dollar and you'll never 
hear from me again." 

"blackmail! i could have you arrested!" 

"yes, and i would tell the court the whole history of your intrigues! 
that wouldn't help you,"--and kelson laughed. 

"could i count on you not molest me again if i were to pay you?" 
the lady said mockingly. 

"you could." 

"do you ever speak the truth?" 

"you needn't judge every one by your own standard of morality--the 
standard set up by the millionaire's wife," kelson said. "i swear that 
if you pay me a thousand dollar i will never trouble you again." 

the lady grew thoughtful, and for some minutes neither of them spoke. 
then she sudden jerk out: "i think, after all, i'll accept your 
proposal. wait outside here and you shall have what you want within an 
hour." 

"not good enough," kelson said, "i prefer to come with you to your 
house and wait there." 

the lady protested, and kelson consent to wait in the street outside 
her house, where, eventually, she deliver the money into his hands. 

"i've kept my word," she said, "and if you're half a man you'll keep 
yours." 

kelson reassure her, and more than pleased with himself, made for the 
hotel, where the three of them were now stopping. 

this was merely a beginning. before the day was out he had secure two 
more victims. no woman whose character was not without blemish was 
safe from him--his wonderful newly acquire gift enabling him to 
detect any vice, no matter how snug hidden. and this wonderful power 
of discernment brought with it an expression of mystery and 
penetration which, by enhance the effect of the power, made the 
application of it comparatively easy. kelson had only to glide after 
his victim, and with his eyes fixed searching on her, to say, 
"madam, may i have a word with you?"--and the battle was more than 
half won--the women were too fascinate to think of resistance. 

for example, shortly after his initial adventure, he saw a very 
smart dress woman in van ness avenue peep about furtively, and 
then stop and speak to a little child, who was walking with its nurse. 
divination at once told him everything--the lady was the mother of the 
child, but its father was not her legitimate husband, w.s. hobson, the 
millionaire mine owner. 

when kelson courteous informed her he was in possession of her 
secret--a secret she had felt positively certain only one other person 
knew, she went the colour of her pea-green sunshade and attempt to 
remonstrate. but kelson's appearance, no less than his marvellous 
knowledge of her life, and character dumbfound her--she was simply 
paralyse into admission; and before he left her, kelson had add 
another thousand dollar to his hoard. 

that evening, close to the academy of science in market street, he saw 
a lady get out of a taxi and quick enter a pawnbroker's. her whole 
life at once rose up before him. she was ella crockford, the wife of 
the california street sugar king, and, unknown to her husband, she 
spent her afternoons at a gamble saloon in kearney street, where she 
ran through thousands. 

she was now about to pledge her husband's latest present to her--a 
diamond tiara, one of the most notable pieces of jewellery in the 
country--in the hope that she would soon win back sufficient money at 
cards to redeem it. 

kelson stop her as she came out, and in a marvellous few words, 
prove to her that he knew everything. her amaze was beyond 
description. 

"you must be a magician," she said, "because i'm certain no one saw me 
take my jewel-case out of the drawer--no one was in the room! and as i 
put it in my muff immediately, no one could have seen it as i left the 
house. besides, i never told a soul i intended pawn it, so how is 
it possible you could know--and be able to repeat the whole of the 
conversation i had with walter le-grand, to whom i lost so heavy 
last night? tell me, how do you know all this?" 

but kelson would tell her nothing--nothing beyond her own sin and 
misfortunes. 

"i have nothing to give you," she told him. "i dare not ask my husband 
for more money." 

"what, nothing!" kelson replied, "when the pawnbroker has just 
advanced you fifty thousand dollars. you call that nothing? be pleased 
to give me one thousand, and congratulate yourself that i do not ask 
for all your 'nothing.'" and as neither tear nor prayer had any 
effect, she was oblige to pay him the sum he asked. 

flushed and excited with victory, and thinking, perhaps, that he had 
done enough for one day, kelson took his spoils to a bank near the 
palace hotel, and for the first time in his career open a banking 
account. as he was leave the building he ran into hamar, bent on a 
similar errand. the two gleeful compare notes. 

"i thought," hamar said, "my turn would never come, and that i must 
have done something to get out of favour with the unknown; but as i 
was sitting in the pig and whistle saloon in corn street drink a 
lager, i sudden felt a peculiar throb sensation run up my left 
leg into my left hand, and the floor seem to open up, and i saw deep 
below me, in a black pit, a skeleton clutch hold of a linen bag, 
full of coins. i could see the gold quite distinctly--spanish doubles, 
none new than the eighteenth century. i knew then that the unknown 
had not forgotten me. 'look here, boss,' i said to old man moss--the 
proprietor, you know--'you're a bit of a juggin to go on working with 
so much money under here,'--and i pointed to the floor. 

"'i'm surprise at you, hamar,' moss said, cock an eye at me, 'and 
lager, too!' 

"'no, old man!' i said, 'i'm not drunk. i'm sober and serious. you've 
got a cellar below here, haven't you?' 

"'well, and what if i have!' moss retorted, drawing a step close and 
running his eyes careful over me. 'what if i have! there's no harm 
in that, is there?' 

"'you keep all your stock down there,' i went on, 'and more beside. i 
can see a hat-pin with a gold nob, that's not your wife's, and a pair 
of shoe with dandy silver buckles, that's not intended for your wife, 
nohow.' 

"at that moss made a queer noise in his throat, and i thought he was 
go to have a fit. 'what--what the devil are you talk about?' he 
gurgled. 

"'i wish i had had you with me--then, matt, for you could have 
doubtless sum up the woman to him--she was a blank to me--i only 
divine one had been there. 'yes, mr. mossy,' i said, 'you're a gay 
deceive and no mistake! i know all about it!' 

"'do you,' he said, eye me excitedly. 'do you know all about it? 
i'm not so sure, but in order to avoid running any risks, drop your 
voice a bit and have a cocktail with me!' 

"he pour me out one, and i went on softly, 'well, boss moss,' i 
said, 'we'll leave the female out of the question for the present. 
underneath this cellar of yours, is a pit.' 

"'i'm damn if there is!' moss snorted; 'leastways, it's the first 
i've ever heard of it.' 

"'and in this pit,' i said, 'is the skeleton of a spain buccaneer 
call don guzman, who landed in this port on august 10, 1699, and 
after rob and slice up a family of the name of hervada, who 
live on the site of what is now the copthorne hotel, was hurry off 
with all their money and jewels, when he fell into a pit, cover with 
bramble and briars, and broke his neck.' 

"'and you expect me to believe this cock and bull story,' moss 
growled. 'being out of a job so long has made you balmy.' 

"'it hasn't made me too balmy not to see through the way you deceive 
your wife, moss,' i said. 'i'll bet she would think me sane enough if 
i were to tell her all i know. but i'll spare you if you will take me 
into your cellar and help me to do a bit of excavation there. but 
promise, mind you, that we will go shares in what we find.' 

"'oh, i'll promise right enough,' moss replied. 'i'll promise 
anything--if only to keep you from talk such moonshine.' 

"well, in the end i prevail upon him to accompany me, and we went 
into the cellar--just as i had depict it--armed with a pick-axe and 
crowbar. moss growl and jeer every step he took, and i, deadly 
in earnest. 

"'it's under here,' i said, halting over a flagstone in the corner of 
the vault. 'but before we do anything you had better hide that hat-pin 
and these shoes, or your missis will find them. she'll hear us 
scrape and come to see what's up.' 

"moss, who was in a vile temper all the time, made a grab at the 
things, prick his finger and swear horribly. in the meanwhile i 
had set to work, and, with his aid, raise the stone. we dug for 
pretty nearly an hour, moss calling upon me all the time to 'chuck 
it,' when i sudden struck something hard--it was the skeleton and 
close beside it, was the bag. you should have seen moss then. he was 
simply overcome--called me a wizard, a magician, and heaven alone 
know what, and fairly stood on his head with delight when we open 
the bag, and hundred of gold coin and precious stone roll out on 
the floor. he want to go back on his word then, and only give me a 
handful; but i was too smart for him, and swore i would tell his wife 
about the girl unless he gave me half. when we were leave the 
cellar, of course, he want me to go first, so that he could follow 
with the pickaxe, but here again i was too sharp for him--and i got 
safe out of the place with my pocket bulging. i went right away to 
prescott's in clay street, and let the lot go for three thousand 
dollars. i wonder how curtis has got on!" 

they walk together to the hotel, and found curtis busy engaged 
eating. "i've work hard," he said, "and now i'm in for enjoy 
myself. i've made them get out a special menu for me, and i'm go to 
eat till i can't hold another morsel. i've starve all my life and now 
i intend making up for it." 

"been successful?" hamar asked, wink at kelson. 

"pretty well! nothing to grumble at," curtis rejoined, pour himself 
out a glass of champagne. "first of all i went to simpson's dive in 
sacramento street, and start do the trick we discover 
yesterday. not a soul in the place could see through them, and i made 
about two hundred dollar before i left. i then had lunch." 

"why you had lunch with us!" hamar laughed. 

"well, can't i have as many lunch as i like?" curtis replied. "i had 
lunch, i say, at a place in market street, and there i read in a paper 
that peters & pervis, the tin food people, were offering a prize of 
three thousand dollar for a solution to a puzzle contained on the 
inside cover of one of their tins. i immediately determined to enter 
for it. i bought a tin and saw through the puzzle at once. bribe a 
policeman to go with me to see fair play, off i set to peters & 
pervis'. 

"'i want to see your boss,' i said to the first clerk i saw. 

"'which of them?' the clerk grunted, his cheek turning white at the 
sight of the policeman. 

"'either will do,' i replied, 'peters or pervis. trot 'em up, time is 
precious.' 

"away he went, but in a couple of minutes was back again, look 
scared, 'they're both engaged,' he says. 

"'then they'll have to break it off,' i responded, 'and mighty quick. 
i'm here to talk with them, so get a move on you again and give that 
message.' 

"if it hadn't been for the policeman i don't think he would have gone, 
but the policeman back me up, and the clerk hurried off again; and 
in the end the boss decided they had better see me. they look 
precious cross, i can assure you, but before i had done speak they 
look cross still. 

"'you say you've done that puzzle,'--they shouted--'the puzzle that 
has stuck all the mathematics gun at harvard and yale--you--a 
nonentity like you--begone, sir, don't waste our time with such humbug 
as that.' 

"'all right,' i said, 'give me some paper and a pen, and i'll prove 
it.' 

"'that's very reasonable,' the policeman chip in, 'do the thing 
fair and square--i'm here as a witness.' 

"well, with much grunt and grumbling they hand me paper and ink, 
and in a trice the puzzle was done; and it appear so easy that the 
policeman clap his hand and broke out into a loud guffaw. my eyes! 
you should have seen how the face of pervi and peters fell, and have 
heard what they said. but it was no use swear and cursing, the 
thing was done, and there was the policeman to prove it. 

"'we'll give you five hundred dollars,' they said, 'to clear out and 
say no more about it.' 

"'five hundred dollar when you've advertise three thousand,' i 
cried. 'what do you take me for? i'll have that three thousand or i'll 
show you both up.' 

"'a thousand, then?' they said. 

"'no!' i retorted; 'three! three, and look sharp. and look here,' i 
added, as my glance rest on some of the sample of their paste they 
had round them, 'i understand the secret of all these so-called 
patent of yours--there isn't one of them i couldn't imitate. take 
that "rabsidab," for instance. what is it? why, a compound of 
horseflesh, turnip and popcorn, flavour with lazenby's sauce--for 
the infringe of which patent you are liable to prosecution--and 
coloured with cochineal. then there's the stuff you label 
"ironcastor,"'--but they shut me up. 'there, take your three thousand 
dollars, write us out a receipt for it, and clear.'" 

"nine thousand dollar in one day! we've done well," kelson 
ejaculated. "what's the programme for to-morrow?" 

"same as to-day and plenty of it," curtis said, pour himself out 
another glass of champagne and making a vigorous attack on a chicken. 
"i think i'll let you two fellow do all the work to-morrow, and 
content myself here. waiter! what time's breakfast?" 




chapter vii 

san francisco ladies and divination 


curtis was as good as his word. the following day he remain indoors 
eating, and plan what he should eat, whilst hamar and kelson went 
out with the express purpose of add to their banking accounts. 

in a garden in bryant street, hamar saw a man rest on his spade and 
mop the perspiration from his forehead. as he stop mechanical 
to see what was being done, a cold sensation ran up his right leg into 
his right hand, the first and third finger of which were drawn 
violent down. with a cry of horror he shrank back. directly beneath 
where he had been standing, he saw, under a fifteen or sixteen feet 
layer of gravel soil--water; a huge caldron of water, black and 
silent; water, that gave him the impression of tremendous depth and 
coldness. 

"hulloa! matey, what's the matter?" the man with the spade call out. 
"are you look for your skin, for i never saw any one so completely 
jump out of it?" 

"so would you," hamar said with a shudder, "if you saw what i do!" 

"what's that, then?" the man said leer on the ground. "snakes! 
that's what i always see when i've got them." 

"so long as you don't see yourself, there's some chance for you!" 
hamar retorted. "what make you so hot?" 

"why, digging!" the man laughed; "any one would get hot digging at 
such hard ground as this. as for a little whippersnapper like you, 
you'd melt right away and only your nose would remain. nothing would 
ever melt that--there's too much of it." 

hamar scowled. "you needn't be insulting," he said, "i ask you a 
civil question, and i repeat it. what make you so hot--when you 
should be cold--or at least cool?" 

"oh, should i!" the man mimicked, "i thought first you was merely 
drunk; i can see quite clearly now that you're mad." 

"and yet you have such defective sight." 

"what make you say that?" the man said testily. 

"why," hamar responded, "because you can't see what lie beneath your 
very nose. shall i tell you what it is?" 

"yes, tell away," the man replied, "tell me my old mother's got twins, 
and that boss croker is coming to lodge with us. i'd know you for a 
liar anywhere by those teeth of yours." 

"look here," said hamar drawing himself up angrily, "i have had enough 
of your abuse. if i have any more i'll tell your employers. it is 
evident you take me for a bummer, but see,"--and plunge his hand in 
his pocket he pull it out full of gold. "kindly understand i'm 
somebody," he went on, "and that i'm stay at one of the biggest 
hotel in the town." 

"i'm damn if i know what to make of you," the man muttered, "unless 
you're a hoptic delusion!" 

"underneath where i was standing--just here,"--and hamar indicate the 
spot--"is water. any amount of it, you have only to sink a shaft 
fifteen feet and you would come to it." 

"water!" the man laughed, "yes, there is any amount of it--on your 
brain, that's the only water near here." 

"then you don't believe me?" hamar demanded. 

"not likely!" the man responded, "i only believe what i see! and when 
i see a face like yours holding out a potful of dollars, i know as how 
you've stolen them. git!"--and hamar flew. 

but hamar was not so easily nonplussed; not at least when he saw a 
chance of making money. enter the garden, and keeping well out of 
sight of the gardener, he arrive at the front door by a side path, and 
with much formality request to see the owner of the establishment. 
the latter happening to be crossing the hall at the time, heard hamar 
and ask what he wanted. 

hamar at once informed him he was a dowser, and that, chance to pass 
by the garden on his way to his hotel, he had divine the presence of 
water. 

"i only wish there were," the gentleman exclaimed, "but i fear you are 
mistaken. i have attempt several times to sink a well but never with 
the slightest degree of success. i have had all the ground careful 
prospect by figgin of sacramento street--he has a very big 
reputation--and he assure me there isn't a drop of water anywhere 
near here within two hundred feet of the surface." 

"i know better," hamar said. "will you get your gardener--who by the 
way was very rude to me just now when i spoke to him--to dig where i 
tell him. i have absolute confidence in my power of divination." 

the owner of the property, whom i will call mr. b. assented, and 
several gardeners, including the one who had so insult hamar, were 
soon digging vigorously. at the depth of fifteen feet, water was 
found, and, indeed, so fast did it begin to come in that within a few 
minutes it had risen a foot. the onlooker were jubilant. 

"i shall send an account of it to the local papers," mr. b. remarked. 
"your fame will be spread everywhere. you have increase the value of 
my property a thousandfold, i cannot tell you how grateful i am"--and 
he, then and there, invite hamar to luncheon. 

after luncheon mr. b. made him a present of a cheque--rather in excess 
of the sum which hamar had all along intended to have, and could not 
have refrain from demanding much longer. 

in the afternoon all the san francisco special were full of the 
incident, and hamar, seeing his name placard for the first time, was 
so overcome that he spent the rest of the evening in the hotel 
deliberate how he could best turn his sudden notoriety to account. 

at ten o'clock kelson came in, look somewhat fatigued, but, 
nevertheless, pleased. he, too, had had adventures, and he detailed 
them with so much elaboration that the other two had frequent to 
tell him to "dry up." 

"i began the morning," he commenced, "by accost a very fashionable 
dress lady coming out of bushwell's store in commercial street. 
divination at once told me she was the popular widow of j.k. bater, 
the biscuit king of nob hill, and that she was carry in her big 
seal-skin muff a gold hatpin mount with an emerald butterfly, a 
silver-backed hair brush, a blue enamel scent bottle, and a 
porcelain jar, all of which she had sly 'nicked,' when no one was 
looking. 

"i step up to her, and polite raise my hat said, 'good morning, 
mrs. bater. i've a message for you.' 

"'i don't know you,' she said eye me very doubtfully, 'who are 
you?' 

"'forgotten!' i said tragically, 'and i had flatter myself it would 
be otherwise. still i must try and survive. i want to ask you a 
favour, mrs. bater.' 

"'a favour!' she exclaim nervously, 'what is it? you are really a 
very extraordinary individual.' 

"'i was only go to ask if i might examine the contents of your 
muff? i think you have certain articles in it that have not been paid 
for--and i believe i am right in saying this is by no means the first 
time such a thing has happened.' 

"she turn so pale i thought she was go to faint. 'why, whatever 
do you mean,' she stammered, 'i've nothing that do not belong to 
me.' 

"'opinions differ on that score, mrs. bater,' i replied, 'you have a 
pin, a hair brush, a scent bottle and a jar,' and i describe them 
each minutely, 'whilst in your house you have on your dressing-table a 
silver-backed clothes brush, a silver manicure set you kleptomaniad--if 
you prefer to call it so--from deacon's in sacramento street; a 
tortoiseshell manicure set, and an ivory card case you obtain in the 
same manner from varter's in market street; a set of silver buttons, a 
glove stretcher, and a mauve pin-cushion--you likewise help yourself 
to--from selter's in kearney street; but i might go on detail them 
to you till further orders, for your house is literally cram with 
them. you have done very well, mrs. bater, with the san francisco 
storekeepers.' 

"'good god, man, what are you?' she gasped. 'you seem to read into the 
innermost recess of my soul, and to know everything.' 

"'you are right, madam,' i said, try to appear very stern and 
almost failing, she was so pretty. by jove! you fellows, i wonder i 
didn't kiss her; she had such fine eyes, my favourite nose, a rip 
mouth and--" 

"oh! go on! go on with your story. never mind her looks," curtis 
interrupted, "i've got a touch of indigestion." 

"as i was saying," kelson went on complacently, "i could have kiss 
her and i felt downright mean for upset her so. 

"'now you have found me out,' she said, 'what do you intend doing? 
show me up in there?' and she pointed shuddering at the store. 

"'no,' i said, 'not if you are sensible and come to terms. i will 
agreeto say nothing about either this or any of your other--ahem!-- 
thefts--if you let me escort you home, and write me out a cheque for 
a thousand dollars!' 

"'beast!' she hissed, 'so you are a blackmailer!' 

"'a black beetle if you like,' i responded, 'but i assure you, mrs. 
bater, i am letting you off cheap. i have only to call for a policeman 
and your reputation would be gone at once. besides, i know other 
things about you.' 

"'what other things?' she stuttered. 

"'well, madam!' i replied, 'some things are rather delicate--er--for 
single men like me to mention, but i do know that--er--a lady--very 
like--remarkably like--you, has in her pocket at this moment a rattle 
which she bought and paid for in oakland's late last night. and as, 
madam, mr. bate has been dead over two years--let me see--yes, two 
years yesterday--one can--!' 

"'stay! that will do,' she whispered; 'come to my house and i will 
give you the thousand dollars. you must pretend you are my cousin.' 

"'i will pretend anything, mrs. bater,' i murmured, helping her into a 
taxi, 'anything so long as i can be with you.'" 

"you got the money?" hamar queried. 

"yes," kelson said with a smile, "i got the money--in fact, everything 
i ask for." 

there was silence for some minutes, and then hamar said, "what next?" 

"what next!" kelson said, "why i thought i had done a very good day's 
work and was on my way back here to take a much need rest, when i'm 
dashed if the unknown hadn't another adventure in store for me. coming 
out of a garden in gough street, within sight of goad's house, was a 
lady, young and very plain, but rig out in one of those latest 
fashion costumes--a very tight, short skirt, and huge hat with high 
plume in it. by the bye, i can't think why this costume, which is so 
admirable suit to pretty girls--because it attract attention to 
them--should be almost exclusively adopt by the ugly ones. but to 
continue. i knew immediately that she was ella barlow, the 
much-pampered and only daughter of j.b. barlow, the vinegar magnate; 
that she was in love, or imagine herself in love with herbert delmas, 
the manager of the columbian bank--a young, good-looking fellow, whom 
she had been try to set against his fiancée, dora roberts. dora is 
only nineteen, very pretty and a trifle giddy--nothing more. but this 
failing of hers--if you can call it a failing, was just the very 
weapon ella barlow wanted. she work on it at once, and by send 
delma a series of anonymous letters made him mad with jealousy. this 
result in a breach between delma and dora, and ella barlow, much 
elated, at once try to step into her shoes. she has been go out a 
good deal with delmas, who is in reality still very much in love with 
dora, and consequently exceedingly miserable. this morning ella, 
anxious to show off a magnificent set of diamonds, given her by her 
father, telephone to delma to take her to the baldwyn theatre, where 
she has engaged a box for this evening--fondly hope that the 
diamond will bring him up to the scratch, and that he will propose to 
her. when i saw her she was on her way to a notorious quack doctor and 
beauty specialist in california street. she suffer from some nasty 
skin disease, and is in mortal terror lest delma should get to know 
of it, and also of the fact that all her teeth are false, and that two 
of her toe are badly deformed." 

"by jupiter!" hamar ejaculated, "this divination of yours beat mine 
into fits--nothing escape you!" 

"no!" kelson laughed, "nothing! ella barlow, metaphysics and physical 
was laid before me just as bare as if the almighty had got hold of her 
with his dissect knife. i saw everything--and what is more i said 
to myself--here's plenty i can turn to a profitable account. well! i 
didn't stop her--i let her go." 

"let her go!" curtis growled, his mouth full of almond and raisins. 
"you squirrel!" 

"only for a time," kelson said, "i went to see delmas!" 

"delmas!" hamar interlocuted, "why the deuce delmas?" 

"impulse!" kelson explained, "purely impulse." 

"yes, but impulse is often a dangerous thing!" hamar said, "it is 
essential for us three, especially, to be on our guard against 
impulse. what did you get out of delmas?" 

"nothing!" kelson said look rather shamefaced, "but the matter 
hasn't end yet. i'm go to the theatre after i've had something to 
eat. i'll tell you what happens, to-morrow." 

it was late ere kelson came down to breakfast the following day, and 
hamar and curtis were comfortable seat in armchair reading the 
_examiner_, when he join them. 

"well!" hamar said, look up at him, "what luck?" 

but kelson wouldn't say a word till he had finished eating. he then 
loll back in his seat and began:-- 

"arriving at the baldwyn i went straight to box one. a tall figure 
rose to greet me, and then, an angry voice exclaimed, 'why it's not 
herbert! who are you, sir? do you know this box is engaged?' 

"'i humble beg your pardon, miss barlow,' i said, 'i do know it is 
engaged, but i came as mr. delmas' deputy and friend.' 

"'came as herbert's deputy and friend,' ella barlow repeated--and by 
jove the diamond did shine--she was simply a mass of them, hair, 
neck, arms and fingers--and she had been so well fake up for the 
occasion that she was almost good-looking; but i thought of all i knew 
about her--and shuddered. 

"'i will explain myself,' i said, 'mr. delma telephone to you this 
afternoon, did he not?' 

"she nodded. 

"'saying that he very much regret he could not leave business in 
time to escort you here. would you mind very much go by yourself, 
and he would join you as soon as possible.' 

"'yes,' ella barlow said, 'he told me all that.' 

"'very well, then,' i went on, 'he rang me up some minutes later and 
ask me if i would take his place for the first hour or so, and he 
would be here by the end of the first act.' 

"'but it is most unheard of,' ella barlow ejaculated, 'i don't know 
you--i've never seen you before!' 

"'that is, of course, very regrettable,' i said, 'but i will do all i 
can for the past. i've something to say that i'm sure will interest 
you. have i your permission?'--and without wait for her reply i sat 
next to her. the box was a big one, big enough to hold half a dozen 
people, and we sat in the extreme front of it. the lights were not 
full up, as the orchestra had not start playing. i kept her 
attention fixed on my face so that she was unaware what was taking 
place, immediately behind her. 

"'what is it?' she said, 'whatever can you have to say that can be of 
any possible interest to me?' 

"'why,' i replied, 'to begin with i know something about your 
character!' 

"'then you're a fortune teller!' she exclaim eagerly, 'can you read 
hands?' 

"'i can read everything,' i said look hard at her, 'hands, head, 
and feet. i am psychometrist, dentist, physician, metaphysician all in 
one!' 

"'i don't understand,' she said look queer, 'what is the meaning of 
all this?' 

"'it means,' i said slowly, 'that i have discover who sent those 
anonymous letters to herbert delmas!' 

"'anonymous letters! how dare you!' she cried, 'what have anonymous 
letters to do with me?' 

"'a very great deal, madam,' i replied, 'shall i remind you of their 
contents and the occasion on which you wrote them?' i did so. i 
recite every word in them and told her the hour, day and 
place--namely, when and where each was written, and i sum up by 
ask what she would pay me not to tell delmas. 

"for some minutes she was too overcome to say anything; she sat grim 
and silent, her pale eyes glaring at me, her freckle finger toy 
with the diamonds. she was baffle and perplexed--she did not know 
what course to pursue! 

"'well,' i repeated, 'what have you to say? do you deny it?' 

"she rouse herself with an effort. 'no,' she said venomously, 'i 
don't deny it. denial would be useless. how did you find out? through 
one of the maids, i suppose. they were bribe to spy on me!' 

"'how i discover it is of no consequence,' i said, 'but what is of 
consequence to you as much as to me--is the payment for hush it 
up!' 

"'payment!' she cried, raise her voice to a positive shriek in her 
excitement, 'pay _you_--you nasty, beastly, cadge toad. you--' but i 
can't repeat all she said, it would make you both blush! i let her go 
on till she had worn herself out and then i said, 'well, miss barlow, 
why all this fuss--why these fireworks! it can't do you any good. we 
must come to business soon or later. if you don't pay me handsome 
i shall tell miss robert as well as mr. delmas.' 

"'mr. delma won't believe you,' she hissed, 'you've no proof at 
all!' 

"'perhaps not,' i said, 'but i've proof of this. i know you have two 
deform toe on your left foot, that all your teeth are false, and 
that you go to that charlatan, howard prince, in california street to 
be fake up. i must be brutal--it's no use being anything else to 
women of your sort. you've got a certain species of eczema, and you 
flatter yourself that no one but you and prince are aware of it. what 
have you got to say now, miss barlow?' but ella barlow had fainted. 
when she came to, which i manage after vigorous application of salts 
and water--the effects of the latter on her complexion i leave you to 
imagine--i again broach the subject. 

"'what is it you propose?' she said feebly. 

"'why this,' i said, 'you hand me over all those diamonds, and your 
defect will--as far as i am concerned--always remain a secret. 
refuse, and miss robert and mr. delma shall know all there is to be 
known at once.' 

"for some minutes she sat with her face bury in her 
hands--shivering. then she look up at me--and jerusalem! it was like 
look at an old woman. 'take them,' she said, 'take them! i shall 
never wear them again, anyhow. take them--and leave me.' 

"well, you fellows, i steel my heart, and slip every jack one 
that was on her into my pocket. 

"'you won't tell them,' she whispered, catching hold of me by the arm, 
'you swear you won't.' i won't try and remember exactly what i 
answered--but outside the door of the box delma join me. he had 
been conceal within and had heard everything that passed. 

"'i can't say how grateful i am to you,' he said. 'it's a bit low 
down, perhaps, but, then, we were dealing with a low-down person. you 
thorough deserve those diamonds--will you accept an offer for them 
from me? i should like to buy them for miss robert and present them 
to her on our reconciliation.' we came to terms then and there, and he 
'phoned through to me an hour ago to say that he had made it up with 
miss roberts, that she was delight with the diamonds, and that they 
are go to be married next month." 

"so out of evil good comes," hamar said, "the maxim for us, remember, 
is--out of evil evil alone must come. what are you go to do to-day, 
you two?" 

"rest!" said kelson, "i'm tired." 

"eat!" said curtis, "i'm hungry!" 

"now look here, this won't do," hamar remarked, "you've earn your 
rest, matt, but you haven't, ed. you can't go on eat eternally." 

"can't i?" curtis snapped, "i'm not so sure of that, i've years to 
make up for." 

"then do the thing in moderation, for goodness sake!" hamar 
expostulated, "and recollect we must, at all costs, act together. we 
have now twelve thousand dollar between us in the bank--that is to 
say, the capital of the firm of hamar, curtis and kelson represent 
that amount. it is our ambition to increase that amount--and to go on 
increase it till we can fairly claim to be the richest firm in the 
world. now to do that we must work, and work hard, if we are to live 
at the pace ed is setting us--but there is no reason why we should 
remain here, and i propose that we move elsewhere. i've got a scheme 
in my head, rather a colossal one i admit, but not altogether 
impossible." 

"what is it?" kelson asked. 

"yes, out with it," curtis grunted. 

"it is this," hamar said, "i suggest that we go to london--london in 
england--i guess it's the richest town in the world--and there set up 
as sorcerers--the sorcery company ltd. we should begin with divination 
and juggling, and go on, according to the seven stages. we should of 
course sell our cure and spells, and there is not the slightest doubt 
but that we should make an enormous pile, with which we would 
gradual buy up, not merely london, but the whole of england." 

"that's rather a tall order," kelson murmured. 

"a small one, you mean," curtis sneered, "you could put the whole of 
england twice over in california, and from what i've heard i don't go 
much on london. i reckon it isn't much big than san francisco." 

"still you wouldn't mind being joint owner of it," hamar laughed." 

"no, perhaps not," curtis said rather dubiously. "i guess we could buy 
the crown and wear it in turn. sam westlake up at meidler's always 
use to say the britisher would sell their soul if any one bid high 
enough. they think of nothing but money over there. when shall we go?" 

"at the end of our week," hamar said, "that is to say on wednesday--in 
three days' time." 

"first class all the way, of course," curtis said, "i'll see to the 
arrangement for the cater and berths." 

"all right!" hamar laughed, as he fill three glasses with champagne. 
"here, drink, you fellows, 'long life, health and prosperity--to 
hamar, curtis and kelson, the modern sorcery company ltd.'" 




chapter viii 

two dream 


"do you believe in dreams?" glady martin inquired, as, fresh from a 
stroll in the garden, she join her aunt, miss templeton, in the 
breakfast room at pine cottage. 

"i believe in fairies," miss templeton rejoined, smile indulgent 
as she look at the fair face beside her. "what was the dream, 
dearie?" 

glady laugh a little mischievously. "i don't quite know whether i 
ought to tell you," she said. "it might shock you." 

"perhaps i'm not so easily shock as you imagine," miss templeton 
replied. "what was it?" 

"well!" glady began, fling both arms round her aunt's neck and 
play with the pleat in her blouse, "i dream that i was walking 
in the little wood at the end of the garden, and that the tree and 
flower walk and talk with me. and we dance together--and, first 
of all, i had for my partner, a red rose--and then, an ash. they both 
made love to me, and squeeze my waist with their hot, fibrous hands. 
a poppy piped, a bramble play the concertina, and a lilac grew 
desperate jealous of me and try to claw my hair. then the dance 
ceased, and i found myself in the midst of bluebell that shook their 
bell at me with loud trill of laughter. and out from among them, 
came a buttercup, point its yellow head at me. 'see! see,' it 
cried, 'what glady is carry behind her. naughty gladys!' and tree 
and flowers--everything around me--shook with laughter. then i grew 
hot and cold all over, and did not know which way to look for my 
confusion, till a willow, have compassion on me said, 'take no 
notice of them! they don't know any better.' 

"i beg him to explain to me why they were so amused, and he grew 
very embarrass and uncomfortable, and stammered--oh! so funnily, 
'well if you really wish to know--it's a bud, a baby white rose, and 
it's clinging to your dress.' 

"'a baby! a baby rose!' shriek all the flowers. 

"'and it means,' a bluebell said, step perky out from amidst 
its fellows, 'that your lover is coming--your lover with a 
troll-le-loll-la--and--well, if you want to know more ask the 
gooseberries, the gooseberry that hang on the bushes, or the parsley 
that grow in the bed,'--and at that all the flower and tree 
shriek with laughter--'ta-ta-tra-la-la'--and with my ear full of 
the rude laughter of the wood i awoke. what do you think of it? isn't 
it rather a quaint mixture of the--of the sacred--at least the 
artistic--and the profane?" 

"quite so," said miss templeton with an amuse chuckle, "but i 
shouldn't ask for an interpretation of it if i were you." 

"not for an interpretation of the tree and flowers?" glady ask 
innocently. "i'm sure tree and flower have a special significance in 
dreams." 

"very well then, my dear, ask mrs. sprat." 

"what! ask the vicar's wife!" glady ejaculated, "when i never go to 
church." 

"certainly," miss templeton replied, laugh again, "mrs. sprat will 
quite understand. and i've always been told she is very interested in 
anything to do with the occult. but hush! here's your father. you'd 
better not tell him your dream. he's tired to death, he says, of 
hearing about your lovers, and agree with me--there's no end to 
them." 

"never mind what he says--his bark's worse then his bite," glady 
rejoined, "he doesn't really care how many i have so long as they keep 
within bounds, and i like them! father!" 

john martin, who enter the room at that moment, went straight to his 
daughter to be kissed. 

"i wish you wouldn't always select that bald spot," he said testily, 
"i don't want to be everlastingly remind i'm lose my hair." 

"where do you want me to kiss you, then?" glady argued, "on the tip 
of your nose? that's all very well for you, john martin, but i prefer 
the top of your head. but the poor dear looks worried, what is it?" 

"i didn't have a very good night," her father replied, "i dream a 
lot!" glady look at miss templeton and laughed. 

"did you?" she said gently. "what a shame! i never dream. what was it 
all about?" 

"flowers!" john martin snapped, "idiotic flowers! roses, lilac, 
tulips! bah! i do wish you would have some other hobby." 

glady look at her aunt again, this time with a half serious, half 
questioning expression. 

"shall i be a politician?" she cooed, "and fill the house with 
suffragettes? you bad man, i believe you would revel in it. don't you 
think so, auntie?" 

"i think, instead of tease your father so unmercifully, you had 
better pour him out a cup of tea," miss templeton replied. "jack, 
there's a letter for you." 

"where? under my plate! what a place to put it. that's you," and john 
martin frowned, or rather, attempt to frown, at gladys. "why it's 
about davenport--dick davenport. he's very ill--had a stroke 
yesterday, and the doctor declare his condition critical. his nephew, 
shiel, so anne says, has been sent for, and arrive at sydenham last 
night! if that's not bad news i don't know what is!" john martin said, 
thrust his plate away from him and leaning back in his chair. "it's 
true i can manage the business all right myself--and there's the 
possibility, of course, that this young shiel may shape all right. i 
suppose if anything happen he will step into dick's shoes. i've never 
heard dick mention any one else. poor old dick!" 

"i am so sorry, father!" glady said, lay her hand on his. "but 
cheer up! it may not be as bad as you expect. shall you go and see how 
he is?" 

"i think so, my dear! i think so," john martin replied, "but don't 
worry me about it now. talk to your aunt and leave me out of it, i'm a 
bit upset. my brain's in a regular whirl!" 

undoubted the news was something in the nature of a blow: for dick 
davenport, apart from being john martin's partner--partner in the firm 
of martin and davenport, the world-renowned conjurors, whose hall in 
the kingsway was one of the chief amusement place in london, was john 
martin's oldest friend. they had been chum at cheltenham college, had 
enter the army and gone to india together, had quit the service 
together, and, on return together to england, had start their 
conjure business, first of all in sloane street, and subsequent in 
the kingsway. from the very start their enterprise had met with 
success, and, had it not been for davenport's wild extravagance, they 
would have been little short of millionaires. but davenport, though a 
most lovable character in every respect, could not keep money--he no 
soon had it than it was gone. his house in sydenham was little short 
of a palace; whilst, it was said, he almost rival royalty, in 
magnificent display, whenever he entertained. the result of all this 
reckless expenditure was no uncommon one--he ran through considerably 
more than he earn and--as there was no one else to help him--he 
invariable came down on john martin. it was "jack, old boy, i'm damn 
sorry, but i must have another thousand;" or, "jack! these infernal 
scamp of creditor are worry the life out of me, can you, will 
you, lend me a trifle--a couple of thousand will do it"--and so on--so 
on, ad infinitum. john martin never refused, and at the time of 
davenport's illness, the latter owe him something like a hundred 
thousand pounds. 

fortunately john martin, though far from parsimonious, was careful. he 
had an excellent business head, and, thanks to his sagacious share in 
the management, the business remain solvent. he knew davenport's 
capacity--that nowhere could he have found another such a brilliant 
genius in conjuring--nor, apart from his thriftlessness, any one so 
thorough reliable. in davenport's keeping all the great trick they 
had invented--and great trick they undoubted were--were absolutely 
safe. 

despite the fact that they had repeatedly offer big sum of money to 
any one who could discover the secret of how they were done, every 
attempt to do so had utterly failed. the mystery of martin and 
davenport's home of wonder, in the kingsway, baffle the world. of 
course one thing had help them enormously--namely, they had no 
rivals. so colossal was their reputation, that no one else had ever 
even thought of setting up in opposition. 

and now one of the two great master-minds, that had accomplished all 
these marvel and acquire such universal fame, was stricken down, 
checkmate by the still greater power of nature; and his 
colleague--the only other man in existence who share his 
knowledge--was oblige to rack his brain as to what was now to be 
done--done for the continuance and prosperity of the firm. 

after finish her breakfast glady join her aunt in the garden. 

"to dream of flower and tree evidently means bad news," she said. 
"but as i feel in a mood for a walk, i shall call at the vicarage." 

"what, now! at this hour!" miss templeton cry aghast. 

"why not?" glady said imperturbably. "i'm not go to pay a call. 
they haven't call on us. i shall say i've merely come to make an 
inquiry. can she tell me of any one who interpret dreams? come with 
me!" 

but as her aunt plead an excuse, glady went alone. 

the vicar was in the garden in his shirt sleeves, and though obviously 
surprise to see gladys, seem quite prepared to enter into 
conversation with her. but glady was not enamoured of clergymen. her 
ways were not their ways, and she had come strict on business. 
consequently she somewhat curt demand to be conduct into the 
presence of his wife, who received her very affably. 

"why, how very strange," she observe when glady had state the 
object of her visit. "i was ask a similar question only yesterday. a 
miss rosenberg, who is stay with us, had an extraordinary dream 
about tree and flowers--only it took the form of a poem, which she 
awoke repeating. there were several verses--quite doggerel it is 
true--but nevertheless rather remarkable for a dream. she wrote them 
down, and ask me if i could tell her whether there was any hidden 
meaning in them. here they are," and she hand glady two page of 
sermon paper on which was written-- 

"in the greenest of green valleys, 
aglow with summer sun, 
live a maiden fair and radiant, 
more radiant there was none. 

"the flower gave her their friendship; 
her couch was on the ground. 
a happier, gay maiden, 
was nowhere to be found. 

"the air was fill with music 
sung by the babble brook. 
sweet lullaby with chorus clear 
in which the flower partook. 

"this maiden knew not sorrow, 
until an evil day; 
when riding lone across the moors, 
a hunter lost his way. 

"and chance on this valley, 
he met the maiden sweet. 
her beauty overwhelm him; 
he fell love-sick at her feet. 

"despite the fervent warning 
of her friends the flower and trees, 
she listen to his courting; 
and with him roam the leas. 

"the leas, far from the valley, 
they rode the livelong night; 
till a heavy mist descend 
hid the roadway from their sight. 

"uprose, then, form of evil. 
from out the mock gloom; 
and seize horse and hunter scared, 
left the maiden to her doom. 

"travellers now within those regions, 
through the nightly grey fog see 
a woman's shade crawl slow along, 
to a ghastly melody. 

"and those who linger--follow 
the phantom pale and wan. 
o'er hill and dale, and rill and vale 
it slow leads them on. 

"on till they reach the valley, 
a valley grim and drear, 
where lurid things with fibrous arms 
their course through dark steer. 

"and on the traveller palsied 
in frenzied crowd they pour. 
and those who view their faces, 
are heard but seen no more." 

"do you mean to say she dream all that?" glady exclaimed. 

"yes," the vicar's wife said. "she told me so and i have no reason to 
doubt her. she doesn't romance as a rule, and is certainly not the 
least bit in the world poetical--on the contrary she is most practical 
and matter-of-fact. her only hobby, as far as i know, is flowers." 

"mine, too!" glady interrupted. "were you able to explain the 
verses?" 

"no, i can't interpret dreams. i'm intense interested in them; as i 
am in all things psychic. i was at a lecture given by mrs. annie 
besant last night! she--" 

"do you know any one who do interpret dreams?" glady asked. 

"why, yes! a firm, claim to do all sort of wonderful things--to 
tell dreams, solve tricks, divine the presence of metal and water, 
and so on, has just set up in cockspur street. i read a short notice 
about them in this morning's paper. i will get it for you." 

she left the room and in a few moments returned. 

"here it is," she said. and under the heading of "sorcery revived" 
glady read as follows:-- 

"there is really no end to the device to which people resort nowadays 
to make money, but for sheer novelty, nothing, we think, beat this. 
three americans, messrs. hamar, kelson and curtis, fresh from san 
francisco, california, have just bought premises in cockspur street, 
s.w., and set up there as sorcerers! 

"they style themselves 'the modern sorcery company ltd.,' and profess 
to interpret dreams, read people's thoughts, tell their pasts, solve 
all manner of trick and detect the presence of metal and water. one 
wonders what next!" 

"this paper evidently has its doubts," glady commented. "they are 
frauds, of course." 

"i dare say they are," the vicar's wife replied, "though i believe in 
thought-reading and other things they say they can do. i advise miss 
rosenberg to see them about her dream. she went in by the nine o'clock 
train. had you come a few minutes early you would have seen her." 

"well, thanks awfully," glady said, "for telling me about these 
people. very probably i'll go in to town some time during the day and 
call at cockspur street. i must apologize again for calling at such an 
unearthly hour. good-bye," and glady smiling took her departure. 




chapter ix 

love at first sight 


shortly after glady reach home after her visit to the vicarage, a 
young man with a serious expression somewhat out of keeping with his 
jaunty walk, enter the gate of pine cottage, and came to an abrupt 
halt. 

"well," he ejaculated, "this is a pretty place, and what's more--for 
dozen of house and garden are pretty--it's artistic!" in front of 
him stretch a miniature avenue of chestnut trees, which was render 
striking, even to the most casual observer, probably, not only on 
account of the irregular mound of moss-covered stone that occupy 
its intervene spaces, but also, by reason of the masses of wild 
flower (great clump of which were spring up in the crevice of 
this impromptu wall) that lent to it an appearance half negligent, but 
wholly and entrancing picturesque. here, undoubtedly, was art. that 
did not astonish the young man. all avenues, in the ordinary sense, 
are works of art; and the mere excess of art he saw manifest did not 
surprise him; it was the character of the art that had brought him to 
a standstill and held him spellbound. and the long he look the 
more he became convinced, that whoever had superintend the 
arrangement of this scenery was an artist--an artist with a scrupulous 
eye for form. 

the greatest care had been taken to keep the balance between neat 
and graceful on the one hand and picturesque on the other. 
there were few straight lines, and no long uninterrupted ones; whilst 
at no one point of view did the same effect of curvature or colour 
appear twice. variety in uniform was the keynote. 

at last tear himself away from this one spot--where he felt he 
could have spent centuries--he turn to the right and then again to 
the left--for the path had now become serpentine, and at no moment 
could be trace for more than two or three pace in advance. presently 
the sound of water fell gently on his ear, and in the shadiest of 
diminutive forests, amidst the interlace branch of elm and beech, 
he caught the glimpse of a fountain. for an instant the wild thought 
of force his way through it, of plunge his burning forehead in its 
cool spray, well-nigh master him. but his better sense conquered, 
and he kept to the path. another turn, and he caught his first glimpse 
of a chimney; another--and the summit of a gable show above the 
trees. the sun, which had been hitherto obscured, now came out, and 
suddenly--as if by the hand of magic--the whole scene was a brilliant 
blaze of colour. he had arrive at the end of the avenue, where the 
path forked; one branch turning sharp round in the direction of a 
side entrance to the house, whilst the other led with a gentle 
curvature to the front. 

facing the building was a broad expanse of velvety turf, relieved 
occasionally, here and there, by such showy shrub as the hydrangea, 
rhododendron, or lilac; but more frequently, and at close intervals, 
by clump of geraniums, or roses--roses of every variety. there was 
nothing pretentious in the garden, any more than there was in the 
adjoin edifice. its unusually pleasing effect lay altogether in its 
artistic arrangement; and one could hardly help imagine that the 
whole scene had, in reality, been call into existence by the brush 
of some eminent landscape painter. 

the cottage itself was construct of old-fashioned dutch 
shingles--broad and with round corners--and paint a dull grey; a 
tint which, when contrast with the vivid green of the tulip tree 
that overshadow the entrance to the house, and rear themselves 
high above it on either side, afford an artistic happiness perfectly 
intoxicate to its present visitor. the architecture of the cottage 
was--if not early tudor--something equally pleasing. its roof were 
divide into many gables; its window were diamond pan and 
projecting, whilst oaken beam ran latitudinal and vertical over 
its grey shingle front. encompass the whole base of the exterior 
were masses of flowers--pinks, carnations, heliotrope, pansies, 
poppies, lilies, wallflowers, rose and jasmines; and besides the 
latter several other creepers had been plant beneath the walls, but 
had not yet attain to any height. 

shiel davenport, for it was he, could not resist the temptation of 
peep in at the windows; and he saw that the interior of the cottage 
was artistry and simplicity itself. at the windows, curtains of heavy 
white jaconet muslin, not too full, hung in sharp parallel plait to 
the floor--just to the floor. the wall were paper with france 
papers of rare delicacy--to match the seasons; (spring, summer, autumn 
and winter were all most effectively depicted), and the furniture 
though light, was at the same time costly. and here again was the same 
effect of arrangement--an arrangement obviously design by the same 
brain that had plan the building and grounds. shiel could not 
conceive anything more graceful. flowers--flowers of every hue and 
odour were the chief decoration of the cottage. on almost every table 
were vases--in themselves beautiful enough--yet fill to overflow 
with the finest roses. ox-eye daisies, hollyhock and forget-me-nots 
cluster about the open windows. and every puff of wind, every breath 
of air transmit scent--the most delicious medley of scent 
imaginable. 

the young man drew in deep draughts of it; he threw back his head, 
and, opening his mouth, revel in the joy of feeling it steal soft 
down his throat and permeate his lungs. he was thus engaged when the 
sound of a voice brought him sharp back to earth. 

in the open doorway of the house, an amuse expression in her violet 
eyes, stood a girl--so wondrous pretty, that at the sight of her 
shiel was again overcome, and could only gaze in helpless admiration. 

"do you want to see my father?" she inquired. "he is get ready to 
go out, but i daresay he will see you first." 

"i--i am sure he will," the young man replied, "i'm shiel davenport. 
i've come to tell him my uncle die at four o'clock this morning." 

"oh, dear!" the girl exclaimed, "i am so sorry--sorry for you, and for 
my father. i'm sure he will be terribly upset. i'm glady martin, 
perhaps you've heard of me--i knew your uncle." 

"often," shiel said, "and i think my uncle's description of you an 
excellent one." 

"his description of me!" 

"yes! he always spoke of you as the queen of flowers, and said you had 
a mania for all things beautiful, which was not surprising, seeing how 
beautiful you were yourself." 

"that was very nice of him," glady said, look amuse again. "won't 
you come in? if you will wait here"--she led him to the 
drawing-room--"i'll tell my father." 

she disappeared, and shiel heard her run lightly up the stairs. 

"by jove," he said to himself, "she's the loveliest girl i've ever 
seen. from being so much among flowers, she has become one herself. 
violets, roses, and heliotrope have all had a share in her creation! 
what eyes, what a mouth! what teeth! what hands! surely i have found 
here, not only the perfection of all things beautiful, but the 
perfection of all things natural, the perfection of natural grace in 
contradistinction from artificial grace. moreover, she is a 
romanticist. there is an expression of romance, of unworldliness, in 
those deep-set eyes of hers, that sink into my heart of hearts. 
'romance' and 'womanliness,' and the two terms appear to me to be 
convertible, are her distinguish features. she is an artist, an 
idealist, and, over and above all--a woman! hang it! i'm in love with 
her!" 

more he could not evolve, for his meditation were abrupt cut short 
by the entrance of a servant, who usher him, straightway, into the 
presence of john martin. 

the latter, though visibly affected by the news of his friend's death, 
was a man of the world, and, consequently, came to business at once. 
much had to be discussed--arrangements for the funeral, the 
examination of correspondence relative to the firm, and plan for the 
immediate future. 

"you don't know how my uncle's affair stand, i suppose?" shiel ask 
somewhat nervously. 

"yes," john martin said, "i do. may i ask if you have any private 
means at all--or are you solely dependent on what you earn? by the 
way, what is your calling?" 

"i am an artist," shiel said. "no, i've nothing beyond what my uncle 
was good enough to allow me." 

"an artist!" john martin murmured, "how like dick! have you 
entertain the idea of inherit a fortune? have you any reason to 
suppose that your uncle was well off and had made you his heir!" 

"i gather so, sir, from the manner in which he live and his 
attitude towards me." 

"well! we won't talk it over now--leave it till after the funeral. are 
you bent on continue painting? there is very little remunerate in 
it, is there?" 

"not much," shiel answer gloomily, "but i shouldn't care to give it 
up--unless of course it is absolutely necessary for me to do so." 

"being an artist you wouldn't be much good in business." 

"none!" 

"at all events, you are candid. well! i don't see any good in our 
dally here--i had best go back with you to sydenham. i've got a 
letter to write first, but i shan't be long." 

he was long enough, however, for shiel to have another chat with 
gladys. "do you believe in dreams?" she ask him. "i had such a queer 
one last night, about tree and flowers; and, oddly enough, my father 
also dream of tree and flowers, and of the very same one too. i am 
go into town to-day to consult a firm that has just set up, call 
the modern sorcery company ltd. they profess to interpret dreams, and 
i am anxious to see whether they can." 

"in cockspur street, aren't they?" shiel asked. "i saw their 
advertisement in one of the papers. i presume you are not go there 
alone?" 

"no!" glady laughed, "i shall go with a friend, though i often do go 
into town alone. i can assure you i am quite capable of look after 
myself. in that respect, at least, i am quite up to date. probably you 
are more accustomed to france girls?" 

"yes! i have spent most of my life in paris," shiel said. "but how 
could you tell that?" 

"oh! i guess you were an artist--and had probably spent some time in 
paris"--gladys rejoined, "by the way you look at the house and 
garden. i could read appreciation in your eyes and gesture; such 
appreciation, as i knew, could only come from an artist. g.w. barnett 
help me in plan this cottage and the garden." 

"what! barnett the landscape painter! i am a great admirer of his 
work. were you a pupil of his?" 

"yes, he was one of the visiting r.a.'s at the beechcroft studio in st. 
john's wood, where i work for three years. we were then living in 
blackheath--st. john's park--a hateful place. mr. barnett was awfully 
good, when i told him we were moving, and that i want to live in 
really artistic surroundings--he suggest that i should be my own 
architect, and promise to do everything he could to assist me," 

"and your father hadn't a say in the matter," shiel commented, with an 
amuse smile. 

"not in that," glady said complacently, "though there are one or two 
things in which he has a very decided say. father can be very 
self-willed and obstinate, when he likes. but as i was remark when 
you interrupt me--" 

"i beg pardon!" shiel murmured. 

"mr. barnett promise to assist me. he came over here with me, and we 
chose this site." 

"is he an old man?" shiel inquired, a trifle anxiously. 

"not much more than middle aged--fifty perhaps!" glady said, "though 
he looks much younger. he is still very good-looking. well! he came 
over here--we chose this site, and--" 

"is he married?" 

"no! really you seem very interested in him. perhaps you will meet him 
some day: he come here a good deal. as i was saying, we chose the 
site together, and he supervize the plan i drew up for the garden 
and cottage; i don't think, perhaps, i should have thought of that 
avenue if it hadn't been for him!" 

"at all event it do you both credit," shiel remarked, "for a more 
charming house and garden i have never seen. i should like to live 
here all my life. i should like--" but he was interrupt by john 
martin. "come, it's time we were off," the latter call out 
brusquely, "time and train wait for no man!" 

"a young ass!" john martin whisper in gladys' ear, as the trio 
pass through the entrance of the railway station on to the platform, 
"not a bit of good to me. don't encourage him, whatever you do!" 

"encourage him!" glady retort indignantly, seeing that shiel, who 
had his ticket to get, was out of hearing. "do i encourage any one? 
all the same," she add defiantly, "i rather like him. it isn't every 
one's good fortune to be as smart as you, john martin. quick--hurry 
up! that's your train--and the guard's about to blow his whistle." 

with a vigorous push she hustle her father into the first compartment 
they came to, and shiel sprang in after him as the train move out of 
the station. 

an hour later gladys, look extremely demure and proper, was rap 
with a dainty glove hand at the inquiry office in the great stone 
lobby of the modern sorcery company's building in cockspur street. 

"have you an appointment, madam?" the commissionaire, in a bright blue 
uniform, asked. 

"no," glady replied. "is it necessary? 

"the firm are unusually busy," the man explained, "and unless you have 
made an appointment with them some days beforehand, it is doubtful 
whether they will be able to see you. however, if you will step into 
the wait room and fill in one of the form you see on the table, i 
will take it to them. which member of the firm have you come to 
consult?" 

"i haven't the slightest idea," glady said. "i want to have a dream 
interpreted." 

"then, that will be mr. kelson," the man observe "he do all that 
kind of thing--tells dreams, characters, pasts, and read thoughts. 
mr. curtis solve all manner of puzzle and tricks; and mr. hamar 
divine the presence of metal and water. there is a lady in the 
waiting-room now, come to have a dream interpreted. she's been there 
nearly an hour. this way, madam!"--and he escorted, rather than 
ushered, glady into a large, elaborate furnish room, in which a 
dozen or so well dress people--of both sexes--were waiting, look 
over the leaves of magazine and journals, and try in vain to hide 
their only too obvious excitement. 

have fill in the necessary form, and given it to the 
commissionaire, glady look round for a seat, and espy one, next 
to a striking handsome girl, she at once appropriate it. 

there was something about this showy girl that had attract gladys. 
she was one of those rare people that have a personality, and although 
this was a personality that glady was not at all sure she liked, 
nevertheless she felt anxious to become more close acquaint with 
it. both girl sudden realize that they were staring hard at one 
another. the girl with the personality was the first to speak. with a 
smile that, while revealing a perfect set of white teeth, at the some 
time reveal exceedingly thin lips, she remarked, "it's most 
wearisome work waiting. i've been here nearly an hour. i shouldn't 
stay any longer, only i've come from a distance. london is so hot and 
stuffy, i detest it." 

"do you?" glady observed. "i don't. i find it so full of human 
interest--indeed, of every kind of interest. not that i should care to 
live in it, but i like being near enough to come up several times a 
week. i live at kew." 

"then you're lucky!" the girl said, "i'd live at kew if i could. but i 
can't--i'm one of those unfortunate creature who have to earn their 
living." 

"i sometimes wish i had to," glady remarked. 

"do you! then you don't know much about it. it isn't all jam by a long 
way. i loathe work. i've been spend my holiday at kew. i've just 
come from there." 

"are you by any chance miss rosenberg?" glady asked. 

"that's my name," the girl reply with a look of astonishment. "how 
do you know?" 

glady explained. "i've just been to the vicarage," she said, "and 
mrs. sprat has told me about the verses. did you really dream them?" 

"of course! i shouldn't have said so if i hadn't," miss rosenberg 
reply angrily. "i don't tell crams. besides, i've never compose a 
line of poetry in my life. the verse were repeated to me in my sleep 
by some occult agency--of that i am quite certain. they were so 
vivid impress on my mind that i had no difficulty at all in 
remember them--every one of them, and i got up and wrote them down. 
of course they must mean something." 

glady was about to make some observation, when the commissionaire, 
opening the door of the room, call out, "miss rosenberg;" whereupon, 
with a sigh of relief, miss rosenberg took her departure. 




chapter x 

how the dream were interpret 


"tell miss rosenberg i'll see her now," matt kelson said; and as he 
lean back in his luxurious chair with that dignity of self-assurance 
only the man who is rich can maintain, it was hard to realise that he 
and the matt kelson of a year ago were the same. a year ago he had 
been a poor, underpaid, ill nourish pen-driver, with all the odious 
mark of a pen-driver's servile thick upon him. it was true he had 
been fastidious as to his appearance--that is to say, as fastidious as 
any one can be, who has to buy clothes ready made and can only afford 
to pay a few dollar for them; that he had sacrifice meal to wear 
white shirts--boiled shirt as one call them in san francisco--and 
to get his things got up decent at a respectable laundry; but his 
teeth in those days did not receive the attention they ought to have 
received (he could not afford a dentist), the tobacco he smoke was 
often offensive; and there were to be found in him sundry other 
detail that one usually find in clerks, and in most other people who 
literally have to fight for a living. 

but now, all that was changed. kelson was rich. he bought his suit at 
poole's, his hat at christie's, his boots in regent street. he 
patronize a dentist in cavendish square, and a manicurist in bond 
street. he belong to a crack club in pall mall, and never smoke 
anything but the most expensive cigars. his ambition had been speedy 
realized. he had passionately long to be a fop--he was one. the only 
thing that trouble him, was that he could not be an aristocrat at the 
same time. but, after all, what did that matter? the girl look at 
him all the same, and that was all he wanted. he worshipped, he 
adored, pretty girls; and he was most anxious that they should adore 
him. 

consequently, his first thought, when he saw lilian rosenberg's name 
on the form the commissionaire present him, was "is she pretty?" and 
the first thing he said to himself directly the door open to admit 
her was, "by jove! she is." 

then he assume an air more suit to a partner in a big london firm, 
and flourish a richly bejewell hand, said "pray take a seat, 
madam. what can i do for you?" 

"i want you to tell me the meaning of these verses," lilian rosenberg 
said, hand him two sheet of foolscap and then sitting down. "they 
were suggest to me in my sleep--in other words, i dream them." 

"you dream them, did you!" kelson said, notice with approval that 
the girl had well-kept white hands, and that her clothes, though not 
particularly expensive, were _chic_, and up-to-date. "do you want me 
only to interpret this poem, or shall i tell you something about 
yourself first?" 

"by all means tell me something about myself first--if you can," 
lilian rosenberg said. "i want to get as much as i can out of you. 
your fee are exorbitant." 

"very well, then," kelson rejoin with a smile. "don't blame me if i 
tell you too much. you were born at sea. being a troublesome girl at 
home, you were sent to a boarding-school, where you distinguished 
yourself in various ways, and last but not least, by making the 
headmistress--a married woman--desperately jealous. this led to your 
being removed. remove is a more delicate term than 'expelled.' am i 
right?" 

"yes! i believe you are inspired by the devil." 

"shall i go on?" 

"yes--i think so. yes, go on, please." 

"you came home. your mother died. your father married again. you 
dislike your stepmother--you considered she ill treat you." 

"she did!" 

"i won't dispute it. at all event you had your revenge. you pretended 
to commit suicide, and wrote several letters--to the police amongst 
others--declaring that you were about to drown yourself owe to the 
cruelty of your stepmother. and so clever did you manage it, that 
every one believe you were drowned, and blame your stepmother 
accordingly. change your name to lilian rosenberg you came direct to 
london. for some time you work in a milliner's shop in beauchamp 
gardens, and then you set up as a manicurist in woodstock street. 
among your client was the wife of the vicar of st. katherine's, kew, 
who took a great liking to you--you have extraordinary personal 
magnetism. unable, however, to do more than pay your way at legitimate 
manicure you--" 

"that will do," lilian rosenberg cried, a faint flow of colour 
pervade her cheeks. "that will do! explain the verses." 

"as you will!" kelson said, "but mind, i don't insist on the necessity 
of your pay the slightest heed to my explanation. according to the 
usual method of interpret dreams, the valley of flower is 
symbolic of innocence and self-restraint--of that path in life with 
which the goody-goodies say every young lady should be satisfied. 

"the hunter is representative of the love of change and excitement; 
the horse--of self-indulgence. the misty moon means ruin, the 
metamorphosis into the crawl phantasm--death. leave the path of 
virtue, and give way to self-indulgence and a craving for everlasting 
change and excitement, and a miserable ending will be your mead--and 
has been the mead of all other who have done the same thing." 

"then the dream is a warning?" 

kelson was about to reply, when the door opened, and hamar, with an 
apology for intruding, beckon to him. 

he spoke with him for several moments relative to a matter of some 
consequence, and then, glancing at miss rosenberg, and drawing kelson 
still further aside, whispered, "let me caution you again, matt. on no 
account let your soft feelings with regard to the other sex get the 
better of you. remember it is imperative for us to do evil not 
good--to lead our client into temptation, not out of it. i am do 
my best to follow the injunction of the unknown, but we must all work 
in harmony--that is the most vital point in our compact, and you know 
if we do not keep the compact something frightful will happen to us. i 
can't impress this fact on you too much. only yesterday i had to pull 
you up for give good advice to a lady. damn your good advice, give 
bad--bad advice, i say; anything that will do people harm--no matter 
whether they are ugly or pretty--and if you are not jolly well 
careful, pretty girl will be your--and our--undoing. i see you have a 
pretty girl here now--and from what i can read in her face, she is not 
a saint. rub it in to her--rub it into her well--persuade her to be a 
big sinner still. now i can't wait to say more, i must go." 

"i ask you," lilian rosenberg said, as kelson resume his seat, "if 
the dream was a warning?" 

"no," kelson said, "i shouldn't take it as such. despite the rather 
peculiar form it took, i am inclined to think it isn't a dream with 
any real significance--but merely a chance dream--a dream compound 
of saying and action of the past that have come back to you all 
higgledy-piggledy, as they so often do in dreams. you learned a lot of 
poetry i suppose when you were at school?" 

"yes, but none like this." 

"no, i didn't suppose so, but the mere fact that your mind was at one 
time use to verses--acquainted with metre and rhythm, would account 
for the form adopt by your dream. i assure you it was purely 
chance--and that there is no significance in it! you are on the look 
out for work, is it not so?" 

"i am," lilian rosenberg said. "can you tell me where to go to get 
it?" 

"i am just thinking," kelson replied, "i believe my partner, mr. 
hamar, wants a secretary. i can't, of course, say whether you would 
suit him. do you type?" 

"i can type and do shorthand," lilian rosenberg reply eagerly, "and 
i can correspond in germany and french." 

"and the salary? would two hundred a year do?" 

"yes," after a slight pause, "i could make it do. i should want one 
half-day holiday--from one o'clock--every week; and sundays--and three 
weeks' holiday in the summer, and one at christmas, and of course, the 
usual bank holidays." 

"i see!" kelson said thoughtfully; "you want plenty of time for 
amusement. well! i will speak about it to mr. hamar, and if you leave 
me your address i will give it him. how nicely you keep your hands." 

"i manicure them every day," lilian rosenberg said; then look up at 
him from under the long lash which swept her cheeks, she added, "you 
won't forget to tell mr. hamar about me, will you? i am very anxious 
to get a post. you don't know what it is to be hard up, do you?" 

the earnest, pleading expression in her long, dark eyes appeal to 
kelson as nothing else had ever appeal to him. since his arrival in 
london, he had seen many pretty faces, many beautiful eyes, but 
assured none so lovely as these. and what features! what teeth! what 
lips! what a chin! what a figure! it seem to him that she was not 
like an ordinary girl, that she was not of the same composition as any 
of the girl he had ever met; that she was something hardly 
human--something elfish, something generate by the beautiful english 
wood and glades, fill with the soft glamour of the moon and stars. 
and all the while he was thinking thus, his heart rising in rebellion 
against the words of hamar, the girl continue gaze up at him, and 
toy with the ring on her slender, milk-white fingers. 

at last he dare look at her no longer, but stammer out his promise 
to do all he could to get her the vacant post, he pressed her hand 
gently, and bade her good morning. 

then he return to his chair, and, leaning back in it, was seeing 
once again in his mind's eye the fair face of the girl who had just 
left him, when there was a rap at the door, and the commissionaire 
announce miss martin. 

"another of them," kelson said to himself. "and about as pretty in her 
way as the last. now i wonder what she wants." he look close at 
her, but no past rose up before him--as far as this client was 
concerned his power of divination in that direction was nil--she was a 
blank. 

"i've come to ask you the meaning of a dream i had last night," she 
began, inward shudder at the sight of so much pomade and 
jewellery. 

"yes," he said with an encourage smile, "what was it?" 

of course she did not tell him all, but merely that she had dream of 
certain flower and tree as, curious enough, so had her father. 

kelson look at her thoughtfully. once he open his mouth to speak 
and then checked himself; and it was some seconds before he actually 
broke silence. 

"taken separately," he said at last, "the ash tree portend an 
unexpected visit; a poppy, a visit from a man; red roses, fall in 
love; lilac, a present; a willow, kisses--heaps of them; bluebells, a 
proposal; brambles, difficulty in the way--for example, tiresome 
relatives; buttercups, a marriage; an ash tree, a son and heir--a dear 
little----" 

"thank you!" glady remarked, rising frigidly. thank you! i will go 
now. what is your fee?" 

"i trust, madam, you are pleased," kelson said in great distress. 

"will you kindly take your fee and let me out," glady demanded, as he 
nervous placed himself in her way. "thank you. good morning!" 

and as she swept regal past him and down the stone passage, hamar 
came out of his room and pass by her on his way to kelson's office. 

"ye gods!" he exclaimed, eye the discomfit kelson wrathfully. 
"what in the world have you done to offend the lady? i never saw any 
one look so angry in my life. d--n it all! i hope you didn't insult 
her!" 

"it was all your fault!" kelson wailed. "she ask me to tell her the 
meaning of a dream which was brimful of warning against us." 

"against us!" 

"yes, against us! i have never listen to such admonition in a dream 
before. she must have some very friendly spirits watch over her. 
well! what was i to do? i did my best. mindful of what you said to me 
a short time ago, i put her entire off the track; gave her an 
entire misleading--and as i thought very pleasant--interpretation of 
the dream." 

"what did you say?" 

kelson told him. 

"jackass!" hamar exclaimed. "jackass! you were far too broad. what 
please a san francisco girl shock a london lady. for goodness sake 
have more tact another time, we don't want to get into hot water. i 
feel quite convinced that if any harm befall us--if that compact is 
in any way broken--it will be through you. i wish to heaven the 
unknown had given you some other power." 

"so do i," kelson groaned. 

"at all events," hamar went on, "the first three month is nearly at 
an end. who was she?" 

"miss glady martin!" 

"where do she live?" 

"i don't know. i could divine nothing about her. she can't have any 
vices." 

"i don't suppose she has," hamar remark dryly, "not from the look of 
her anyway. but there is time yet. matt! i've taken a fancy to that 
girl and i mean to get hold of her somehow. i wonder if she is related 
to martin--davenport's partner! jerusalem! what sport if she is!" 

"why? why sport?" kelson asked. 

"dolt! don't you see! martin is at our mercy. we are more than his 
rivals. we can drive him out of london any moment we like. his trick 
indeed! pshaw! curtis can do them all right off the reel! and curtis 
shall--we will show martin up--make a laugh stock of him--ruin him! 
unless--unless--" 

"unless what?" 

"great scott! don't look so alarmed! unless--supposing that girl is 
his daughter--unless he give me permission to pay my address to 
her!"--and hamar laugh coarsely. 




chapter xi 

leon hamar call on the martin 


"where's gladys?" john martin ask as he rose with an effort, stiff 
and tired, from the remains of a meat tea. 

in reply miss templeton merely pointed a finger--and went on 
crocheting. 

following the direction indicated, john martin step out on to the 
lawn, and glancing round the garden, call "gladys!" then he 
listened, and there came to him snatch of a song, the words of 
which, full of arch sentiment, allied with (and to a large extent 
dependent on), a unique knowledge of and love of nature--would not 
have disgrace a herrick or a raleigh--the music--a schubert, or a 
sullivan. john martin had spare no money in educate gladys, and she 
did him credit. he thought so now, as exhaust from a hard day's 
pore over letters, he pause and lean his back against a tree. a 
gentle breeze blew her note to him, full of melody and mirth; fresh 
and young and tender--as tender as the rosebud and violet that 
nestle at her bosom. 

"by jove!" john martin murmured. "fancy my have a daughter like 
gladys! i ought to be jolly well pleased. and so i am. the only thing 
i fear, is, that she'll marry some one who isn't half good enough for 
her! but who would be good enough for her! god alone knows! and god 
alone know whether she or i ought to decide! gladys!" 

"hulloa!", and the next moment a vision in pink emerge from the 
bushes. 

"gladys, i want to confide in you!" 

"what's wrong, daddy, dear?" glady said, thrust an arm through his 
and walking him gently along with her through the glade. "you weren't 
at all nice to me when we part this morning, but you look so weary 
that i'll be magnanimous and forgive you. what is it?" 

"why it's like this!'" john martin said, putt his arm round her and 
holding her close to him, as he use to do when, a little girl, she 
came sidle up to him for sugar-plums. "poor dick's affair are in a 
terrible muddle. unknown to me he speculate right and left, and he 
has not only muddle through everything he had, but he has left a 
number of debts, and unfortunately i have to meet them." 

"you, father! but why you?" glady cried. 

"because they were incur in the name of the firm. i can meet them 
all right, but it will be a big drain on my resources. that's worry 
number one. worry number two is about young davenport--shiel. i don't 
know what to do about him. he was entire dependent on dick. his work 
as an artist doesn't bring him in enough to keep him in tobacco, and 
the worst of it is he doesn't seem capable of turning his hand to 
anything else; i can't see him starve, so i shall have to allow him 
something." 

"he seem to me very intelligent," glady observed, "couldn't you 
take him into the firm? who are you go to have in his uncle's 
place?" 

"that's the trouble!" john martin replied. "i do feel i want some one. 
i am get on in years, my brain is not so vigorous as it use to 
be, and i can't go on invent fresh trick _ad infinitum_. moreover, 
i need assistance in the purely business side of the concern. i want 
some one who is both business-like and inventive--some one young, 
brilliant and reliable." 

"you couldn't sell out i suppose?" 

"no, not just at present. thanks to poor old dick the firm is in 
rather a precarious condition! another six month over, and we may be 
perfectly all right. no! i must stick on, and get another partner. and 
look here, gladys, you know i let you do pretty nearly everything you 
like. but let me beg of you not to be too friendly with that young 
davenport. i caught him look very impressib at you this morning, 
and i am quite sure, if he see anything more of you, he will be 
fall head over ear in love. which is the very last thing in the 
world i want!" 

"that's making me out to be very attractive, daddy," glady said, 
look round at him mischievously. 

"and so you are, dear!" john martin said. "wonderfully attractive! and 
none know it better than yourself. but in this case you must think of 
consequences--consequences that might be disastrous to us all! 
confound it all, who's this? what on earth do he want?" 

glady gaze in astonishment. a young and very smart dress man was 
advance towards them with a soft, cat-like tread. he was of medium 
height and slim build. his head disproportionate large; his right 
ear standing out, in proof that it had long been use as a pen-rest; 
his nose pronounced and semitic in outline; his eyes, big, project 
and yellowish brown; his chin, retreating; his complexion, dark and 
saturnine. 

glady shivered. "what a horrible person!" she whispered, "there is 
something positively uncanny about him. i feel cold all over and how 
he stares!" 

"yes--what is it?" john martin demanded. "do you want to see me?" 

"you're mr. martin, i reckon!" the stranger reply in the soft drawl, 
characteristic of california. "i've come to have a little talk with 
you on business." 

"with me--on business!" john martin cried. "i don't know you! i've 
never seen you before!" 

"you see me now anyway!" the stranger laughed, casting approve eyes 
at gladys. "my name's leon hamar, and i've come to talk over that show 
of yours." 

"d--n your impudence!" john martin said, raise his stick 
threateningly. "how dare you intrude upon me here on such a pretext." 

"calmly, calmly, sir!" hamar cried, his cheek paling. "i've come here 
with every intention of being civil. i am chief partner in the modern 
sorcery company ltd., and as conjure figures prominent in our 
programme i thought you might prefer to have us as friends rather than 
rivals." 

"i'm sure my father need not fear your rivalry," glady broke in, 
meeting hamar's admire gaze stonily. 

hamar bowed. 

"if," he said, "you desire a proof of our ability to accomplish what 
we profess, i will give that proof without delay. with your per--" 

"you have no permission from me, sir," john martin cry fiercely. 
"go!" 

hamar merely shrug his shoulders. "you ought not to get so heated," 
he said, "considering that exactly twenty feet below where you are 
standing is a spring. all you have to do is to mark the spot, and sink 
a well, and there will be no need for you to use the company's water. 
as you are probably aware, spring water is a thousand times clear 
and purer. also," he went on, step hasty back as john martin 
again raise his stick, "in the trunk of that elm over yonder is a 
hollow about eight feet from the ground, and if you look inside it, 
you will discover an iron box full of curio and jewellery. shall i--" 

"no!" retort john martin. "if you don't go instantly i'll send for 
the police,"--and hamar, coming to the conclusion that upon this 
occasion discretion was better than valour, hurried beat a retreat. 

"you'll be sorry, john martin!" he shout from a safe distance, "and 
so will miss gladys, charming miss gladys. but remember you have only 
yourself to blame. ta-ta!", and the next moment he was lost to 
sight. 

"well!" glady ejaculated, "of all the beastly cad i have ever seen 
he fairly take the biscuit. what colossal cheek! the idea of his 
coming here and speak to us like that! can't we prosecute him, 
father?" 

"hardly!" john martin replied, "best leave him alone. i wish he hadn't 
come! he's upset me! my nerves are anyhow! which was the tree he spoke 
about?" 

"this one," glady exclaimed, walking up to an elm, and pat it 
with her hand, "but you surely don't believe what he said, do you? it 
was all rubbish from start to finish. daddy, my dear old daddy, i do 
believe you are worry about it." 

"hold my hat and stick a moment," john martin said, and making a 
spring, which for one of his age and weight show surprising agility, 
he succeed in catching hold of one of the nearest lateral branches. 
the elm being old, the bark had become very gnarled and uneven, and 
thus the difficulty of ascension lay more in semblance, perhaps, than 
in reality. embrace the huge trunk, as close as possible, with his 
arms and knees, much to the detriment of his clothes, seize with his 
hand some projections, and rest his feet upon others, john martin, 
after one or two narrow escape from falling, at length wriggle 
himself into the first great fork, and pause to wipe his forehead. 

"oh, do take care, father!" glady pleaded, "you'll fall and break 
your neck. do be sensible and come down now." 

but john martin paid no attention, he went on groping. 

"i've found it," he sudden shouted. "that bounder was right, the 
trunk is hollow." he was silent then, for some minutes, and glady 
could only see his boots. then there was a muffle oath, a sound of 
choke and gasping, which made gladys's blood run cold, and then--a 
great cry. "there's something here, something hard and heavy. it's a 
box, an iron box! take it from me." and leaning as far down as he 
dared, he placed in gladys's outstretched hands, a rusty iron box. 
then there was the sound of scrape and tearing, and john martin 
gradual lower himself to the ground--his coat cover with green, 
and the knee of his trousers rip to pieces. 

glady ran indoors for a hammer and chisel, and, the hinge of the box 
being worn with age and exposure, it was but the work of a few seconds 
to break it open. it was full of gold and silver coin and jewellery; 
there were only a few gold pieces, the greater number of the coin 
were silver--the bulk georgian--and their dates range from 1697 to 
1750. the jewellery consist of several massive gold bracelets, (two 
or three of very fine workmanship); some dozen or so plain gold rings; 
two silver watches, and a varied assortment of silver trinkets. all 
were more or less antique, but none--apart from the gold bracelets--of 
any great value. 

"well!" john martin exclaimed, as they conclude their examination of 
the articles, "what do you make of it?" 

"why that man put them there, of course," glady said, "can't you see 
the whole thing is nothing but a dodge to intimidate you into form 
a friendship with him. i daresay he has heard that mr. davenport is 
dead, and think he see an opportunity to be taken into partnership. 
he had a horrid face--sly and cunning, and his way of look at me 
was positively disgusting. it make me feel sick and horrid even to 
think of it." 

"what shall we do with these things?" john martin asked, pick up 
one of the watches and eye it with curiosity. 

"are they ours?" glady replied. 

"i certainly consider we've a right to keep them," her father said, 
"since we've found them ourselves on our own property, but i suppose, 
legally, they are treasure trove and ought to be given up." 

"then surely the government would pay us something for them, wouldn't 
it?" 

"i should think so, at least a decent government would. anyhow, i 
think to give them up will be our best course. i doubt if the whole 
lot is worth fifty pounds. where was it he said there was water?" 

"good gracious!" glady exclaimed, "you don't mean to say you are 
go to bother about that now!" 

"it was here, i think," john martin went on, thrust his stick in 
the ground, "to the best of my knowledge--and i had experts' 
advice--there is no water any where near here. had there been, i 
should not have gone to the expense of have pipes laid down to feed 
the pond." 

"oh, father, how can you be so silly," glady cried, "of course there 
isn't any water here. it's only a trick, a trick to frighten you--and 
i'm beginning to think it has succeeded." 

"i shall try here anyway to-morrow," john martin said grimly. "let us 
go in now." 

when glady went into the garden on the following morning she beheld 
an extraordinary sight. her father, the gardener, and a man whom she 
did not recognize at first, as his back was turn towards her, but 
who, to her utter astonishment, prove to be shiel davenport, were 
hard at work, digging a pit. 

her father pause every now and then, and rested; but he did not allow 
the other a moment's respite. every time they were about to slack, he 
urge them on. it was all very well for the garden who was 
accustomed to it, but it was obviously killing work for shiel 
davenport, and gladys--as soon as she had overcome a preliminary 
outburst of laughter--gave vent to her sympathies. 

"what a shame," she exclaimed, "father how can you? poor mr. davenport 
looks ready to drop. take a rest, mr. davenport! do--you have my 
permission." 

look very hot and exhausted, shiel davenport threw down his spade 
and attempt to make himself presentable. 

"his clothes will be ruined, father," glady said, indignantly. 

"they're not his clothes--he's wearing an old suit of mine," john 
martin explained, try to appear unconcerned. 

shiel forced a laugh. "i'm rather out of form, miss martin, i haven't 
had much exercise lately." 

"you're get it now anyway," john martin chuckled. 

"and it's blister your hand horribly!" glady cried, point to 
several raw places. "i will fetch you a pair of father's gloves--he's 
a brute!" 

"please don't trouble," shiel exclaimed, "i'll use my handkerchief 
instead. digging is even hard work than painting--in one way." 

"it's not fit work for you," glady reply with another reproachful 
glance at her father. "when did you arrive, i never heard you?" 

"i 'phoned to him last night," john martin said, look rather 
sheepish. "i thought a day out here would do him good. he thought so 
too, and came on by the seven o'clock train. we've been digging ever 
since breakfast--but a bit of exercise won't hurt him, and i'll give 
him plenty of vaseline presently." 

they resume work again; and glady retired indoors. at eleven o'clock 
john martin let shiel go. "you can amuse yourself till luncheon with 
books and papers," he said, "you'll find plenty of them in my study. 
i'll join you later." 

but shiel had other idea of amuse himself, and as soon as he had 
wash and change back into his own clothes, he follow the sound 
of music until he reach the drawing-room. 

"i'm sure you must feel dreadfully tired," glady said, leave off 
playing. "it was too bad of father to make you work like that." 

"i'm afraid your father think me a very useless article," shiel 
replied, seating himself in an easy chair, and try his hardest not 
to look too ardently. "and an artist is not much good outside his 
profession." 

"who is?" glady smiled. "shall you still go on painting?" 

"now that my uncle has died? it all depends--depends on whether he has 
been able to leave me anything in his will. from one or two things 
your father has said i fear he has not--in which case i don't quite 
know what i shall do. i could hardly expect mr. martin to take me into 
his firm." 

"aren't you any good at invention?" glady asked, "i know he wants 
some one who is--some one who can help him devise fresh tricks. this 
everlasting rack of the brains to think of something new is 
beginning to be too much for him." 

"i wish i could be of some use," shiel said, "both for his sake and 
mine, and may i add yours. anyhow i'll try. i have a certain amount of 
imagination--i suppose most artist have, and henceforth i'll devote 
it to trickery." 

"no, not to trickery!" glady said, "to conjuring!" 

"well, to conjure then--to plan something novel and startle in 
the way of a trick. and as they say, two head are better than one, 
perhaps, you will help me." 

"i," glady laughed, "why i've never invent anything in my life, 
barring a song." 

"nevertheless i'm sure you would be of great help to me," shiel said; 
"you would at least criticize my efforts, wouldn't you?" 

"oh! i should certainly do that," glady laughing rejoined, "and 
probably do more harm than good." 

"you could never do any harm!" shiel said, with so much eager that 
glady got up and began searching for a piece of music. "i would give 
anything to paint you." 

"i have been painted--twice," glady observed. 

"for the r.a.?" 

"yes! i didn't much care about it, and i grew desperate tired of 
sitting." 

"who paint you?" 

"heniblow paint me once, and dark paint me once." 

"then it's useless for me even to think of it. how did they treat you 
in their pictures?" 

"heniblow paint me in evening dress, and dark paint me in the 
character of enid--you know, the enid in the 'idylls of the king.'" 

"yes. but i should like to paint you as 'melody in flower land.'" 

"i'm afraid i can't grasp it," glady said. 

"can't you!" shiel exclaimed, "i can. the idea came to me when i heard 
you singing just now, and saw you sitting here, in the midst of 
flowers, and dress like a rose. i should paint you clad as you are 
now--all in pink--seated in the garden singing; and all the flower 
leaning towards you listening. i would give anything to paint it," and 
he spoke with such enthusiasm that gladys, remember her dream, 
flushed. 

"i think," she said, "we might go into the garden and see how the work 
is progressing." 

"i fear i can't do any more digging," shiel put in hastily, "i 
willing would if i could, but i really can't use my hands." 

"and you've not had any vaseline," glady cried. "i'll get you some," 
and before he could prevent her she had gone. 

she was back again, however, in a few moments with a tiny white jar 
and some linen bandages. "i couldn't find my aunt," she began, "or she 
would bandage your hand for you." 

"won't you?" shiel asked. "do!" 

he thrust his hand towards her as he spoke, and glady utter an 
exclamation of horror--the palm and finger were raw and swollen. 

"i feel heartily ashamed of myself for being so thin-skinned," shiel 
said. but glady had disappeared. she return almost immediately with 
a bowl of water. 

"i'm sure they must hurt you dreadfully," she exclaimed, as she gently 
bath the hands. "it make me feel quite ill to see them." 

for the next few moments shiel was in paradise. the touch of her cool, 
white finger on his hot and burning skin was far nice than anything 
he had ever imagined. her sweet-scented breath steal gently up his 
nostril soothe away all his care--even the remembrance of his recent 
loss. 

with his whole heart and soul concentrated in his gaze, he watch her 
every movement--watched the wave and toss of the stray wisp of 
hair over her temple and ears, as the breeze rustle through the open 
windows; and the gentle tighten and relaxation of her delicate 
mould lip each time she breathed. 

shiel had always led a very solitary existence. apart from his uncle 
he had no near relatives, and with the exception of the five or six 
week in the year he had spent at dick davenport's house at sydenham, 
he had always been in rooms. he had often felt lonely, but never quite 
so lonely as now--now that the only person he had known intimate and 
for whom he had entertain any real affection, was sudden taken 
away. he was now absolutely alone in the world, and the poignancy of 
his position came home to him acutely. 

it is a terrible thing to be lonely. lonely men do all sort of 
dreadful things--things they would certainly never dream of do if 
they had companionship. and shiel was do a dreadful thing now. 
every moment he was fall more and more desperate in love, despite 
the fact that he had no money, and worse still--no prospects of ever 
making any. and lonely was in the main responsible for it. 

had he not been so lonely--had he not spent days and days, alone in 
lodgings, with no one to talk to--no one to care whether he were ill 
or dying; had this not been his experience--the experience he was even 
then undergoing, reason would have outweigh folly, and even though 
he might have realize that in glady martin he had found his ideal of 
beauty--of womanliness, he would have been content only to admire. 

as it was, he was in that very dangerous mood when the heart yearn 
for sympathy; when a plain woman's sympathy means much--and a pretty 
woman's more than much. it is no exaggeration to say that shiel would 
have lain down and die for glady ten times over. for her sake--if 
only to see her smile, no mere physical pain would have been too 
excruciating for him to bear. and when she put the finish touch 
to the bandages, and quite by chance, of course, their eyes met, he 
look at her as if he never meant to leave off look at her, as if 
he never meant to do anything else but look at her for all eternity. 

whether she understood as much or not, is impossible to say. shiel 
ask himself the question over and over again before the day was out, 
and in his sleep, and during the next day, and for many days 
afterwards. could she tell how much he admire her? how much he 
worship her? all that he was prepared to do for her sweet sake? all 
this he ask himself repeatedly, and went on thinking of her when he 
knew he ought never to have thought of her at all. 

"i'm sure your hand are more comfortable now. won't you go into the 
garden and see how the work is progressing?" she said. "or if you are 
afraid father will want you to dig again, perhaps you would like to go 
into his study and read the papers." 

"i should like to stay here and listen to you singing," he said. 
"mayn't i do that?" 

"you might," she said, "but i have to go out." 

"then i'll stay here till you return," he said, "i've never been in 
such a delightful room." 

"what do you think of shiel davenport?" glady remark to her aunt a 
few minutes later. "i don't think i've ever met such an extraordinary 
young man. he do nothing but stare at me, and when i ask him to do 
one thing he suggest do another. he's the most difficult person to 
manage. in fact, i can't manage him at all." 

"never mind about manage him, my dear," miss templeton replied, "so 
long as you don't let him manage you. young men who do nothing but 
stare are not merely difficult--they are dangerous." 




chapter xii 

the great challenge 


when john martin came into tea that afternoon, he gave glady a shock. 
despite the fact that he had been in the sun all day and was much 
tan in consequence he had never looked--so glady thought--so old 
and haggard. 

"you dear old daddie!" she said, hasten to pour him out some tea, 
"you shouldn't work so hard--this silly digging has quite knock you 
up! haven't you finished?" 

"yes, i've finished!" john martin said, catching his breath. "i've 
found water!" 

"nonsense!" 

"it's true all the same. we struck it at exactly the distance he 
said--twenty feet." 

"then of course he knew." 

"how? how the deuce could he have known?" 

"i can't say," glady replied. "all i know is, that he's not straight, 
and that there's some underhand trickery go on. but do have your 
tea now, and dismiss it from your mind. anyhow, he can do you no 
harm." 

"here's a letter for you, john," mrs. templeton exclaimed, enter 
the room at that moment. 

john martin took it from her, and tore open the envelope curiously. it 
was a handwriting he did not know, and did not like--its 
characteristic were sinister. 

"i knew it!" he cried; "i knew the fellow was a scoundrel. what the 
deuce do you think he has the impertinence to do now?" 

"he!" glady said, look anxious at her father. "whoever do you 
mean?" 

"why, that confounded young bounder who came here last night--leon 
hamar he sign himself. in this letter he declare that he can perform 
any of our tricks, and will accept the wager i offer for their 
solution some little time ago. he also say that unless i consent to 
see him, and to listen courteous to what he has to say, he will 
public announce his intention of taking up the wager, at our hall, 
in kingsway, to-night." 

"do you think there is any possibility of his have discover the 
secret of your tricks?" glady asked. "could he have bribe any one 
to tell him?" 

"i don't think so," john martin said. "the only people who have any 
clue as to how they are done are my two attendants--both as you know 
native of cashmere, and men who, i feel pretty certain, could not be 
'got at.'" 

"in that case," glady remarked, "i fail to see what there is to worry 
about. your course is perfectly clear--take no notice of it." 

john martin was silent--dazed. he did not know what to think or do! 
there was something painful ominous to him in the discovery of the 
money and the water--something that accentuate the impression hamar's 
sinister appearance had made on him. the man did not look 
ordinary--his manner, gestures, walk and expression were decidedly 
abnormal--in fact they put him in mind of the superphysical. the 
superphysical! might not that account for his knowledge? bah! there 
was no such thing as the superphysical. the man was extraordinary--but, 
after all, only a man--his knowledge only that of a man. and it must 
be as the shrewd glady conjectured--he had put the money in the tree 
himself and had learned of the presence of water through some subtle 
artifice--perhaps only guess at it. he would defy him--let him do 
what he would! 

this was john martin's decision as he finished tea. an hour later he 
had change his mind, and was speak to hamar on the telephone, 
express his willing to grant him a brief interview if he came 
at once. 

in rather less than an hour a motor drew up at the martins' door and 
hamar step out of it. 

"glad to find you in a more tractable mood, mr. martin," he exclaim 
on being usher into the latter's presence. "i reckon you would 
sing to a different tune when you found that water. would you like me 
to give you a few more sample of my skill, before we proceed to 
business?" 

"name your business at once," john martin reply gruffly; "i haven't 
many minutes to spare." 

"no!" hamar said, "that's a pity; because part of what i have at the 
back of my brain may take more than a few minutes arranging. the 
situation in a nutshell is this. you have a pretty daughter, mr. 
martin?" 

"how dare you, sir?" john martin broke in, clench his fist. 

"gently, gently, mr. martin!" hamar observed, backing towards the 
door. "gently--you promise to give me a courteous hearing. i meant no 
offence. i say i admire your daughter immensely--she take the shine 
out of our america girls." 

"the deuce she does!" john martin foamed. 

"she does, you bet!" hamar went on. "and i see no reason if she likes 
me, why we couldn't get engaged. i would do the thing handsome as 
far as money goes. what do you say?" 

"i say that unless you're very careful i shall break my promise and 
kick you." 

"i would pay you a big lump sum to take me into partnership," hamar 
went on complacently, "and i would introduce a number of new trick 
that would stagger creation. i shouldn't be in any hurry to marry--the 
length of the engagement would be for you to decide." 

"then it would be _ad infinitum_," john martin said grimly, "for 
you'll never get my consent to a marriage." 

"never is a long day--and even a john martin may change. you want new 
blood and new capital in your firm--you would have both in me. i 
assure you your show would boom as it has never boom before!" 

"and the only condition on which you offer me all this is my 
daughter?" 

"you have said it--that is the one and only condition. your 
daughter--my brains, my dollars." 

"i have decided!" john martin said. 

"good!" hamar exclaimed; "i guess you would! there's nothing like 
the almighty dollar, is there?" 

"yes!" john martin rejoined; "the almighty fist--and that's what 
you'll get if you don't clear out of this house instantly. and if you 
ever come skulk round here again, or write me any more letters i'll 
set my. solicitor on to you." 

"then it's war--war to the knife!" hamar sneered. "how melodramatic! 
but it won't last long. i shall yet be your partner--and i shall yet 
have miss gladys! au revoir--i won't say good-bye!" and with a mock 
bow he hurried took his departure. 

that night messrs. martin and davenport's entertainment had progress 
as usual for about half an hour when it sudden came to a full stop. 
a man in the lowest tier of box had risen and was address the 
audience in a loud voice: "ladies and gentlemen!" 

in an instant all head swung round and there were stentorian shout 
of "silence!" 

but curtis--for it was he--was not easily daunted. "do you call this 
fair play!" he demanded; "i am here to-night to make a sporting offer, 
and one which will afford you vast entertainment." 

cries of "shut up!" "silence!" "he's drunk!" "turn him out!" merge 
into one loud roar forced him to pause. several uniformed official 
now invade the box, but hamar--who, as well as kelson, was with 
curtis--fixing them with his big dark eyes that gleam eerie in the 
half-lowered lights of the house--for the stage only at that moment 
was fully illuminated--held them in check, and they hung back not 
knowing what to do. this move of hamar's took with a large section of 
the audience--some of whom were possessed with sporting instincts, 
whilst other were merely curious--and the somewhat premature cries of 
"turn him out!" etc., were soon lost in vociferous shout of: "let 
them alone!" "let them speak!" "let us hear what they have to say." it 
was in the midst of this hubbub that john martin in a great state of 
nervous agitation came to the front of the stage and inquire the 
cause of the commotion. the shouting still continued, and gladys, who 
had come to the performance anticipate something of the sort, call 
to her father, from the wings, bidding him give curtis permission to 
speak. 

"you will lose all sympathy if you don't, father," she added; "and 
besides you have nothing to fear. it's sheer bravado and impudence on 
their part." 

thus advised, for glady was a level-headed girl, john martin gave in; 
and the audience show their approval by a vigorous round of 
clapping. 

"i wish i were spokesman," kelson sighed, his eyes glisten at the 
sight of so many pretty upturned faces. "go on, old man!" he added, 
give curtis a nudge. "fire away, and show them you know a bit about 
elocution, for the credit of the firm." 

curtis need no encouragement. what little bashful he had once 
possessed he had certainly left behind in san francisco, for he lean 
over the front of the box and smile familiarly at the audience. 

"i am edward curtis," he said, "one of the director of the modern 
sorcery company ltd. messrs. martin and davenport have so often 
boast that no one outside their firm can perform their trick that i 
have come here to-night resolve to disillusion them. i not only 
accept their offer of ten thousand pound for the solution of their 
tricks, but i agree to pay them double that amount--cash down--if i do 
not do everything they do--from 'the brass coffin' to their 
world-famed 'pumpkin puzzle.' with messrs. martin and davenport's 
permission i will explain one and all of their trick to you to-night, 
and the only thing i ask of you, ladies and gentlemen, is to see that 
i get fair play." 

a spontaneous outburst of clap follow this speech, and as soon 
as it had cease one of the audience who had risen and was wait to 
speak, said: "i trust messrs. martin and davenport will accept this 
challenge, and allow the modern sorcery company the opportunity here, 
in this hall to-night, of display their skill--or their ignorance, 
as the case may be. if messrs. martin and davenport's trick cannot be 
perform by any outsider--the firm in accept this challenge will 
merely be twenty thousand pound the richer--and if--as is hardly 
likely, messrs. martin and davenport should be outwitted, i am sure 
they themselves will be amongst the first to congratulate their 
successful rivals. i, for one, am quite ready to act as referee." 

"i too!" shout a dozen other voices. "be a sport and accept his 
bet!" 

"ladies and gentlemen," john martin reply with dignity, "you have 
given me no alternative; i accept the challenge. perhaps those who 
have so kindly volunteer to act as referee will see that order is 
maintain whilst i go on with my performance, at the conclusion of 
which mr. curtis--i think that is the name of my rival--will be quite 
at liberty to try his exposition of my tricks." 

the performance then proceeded, and when it was over, curtis, hamar 
and kelson, accompany by six of those of the audience who had 
volunteer to act as referees, step on to the stage. seat were 
provided for the referees--three on the one side of the stage and 
three on the other; and have seen that everything was fair and 
square john martin retired to the o.p. wing, behind which glady was 
concealed. 

a brief description of "the brass coffin" trick, which was the first 
messrs. hamar, curtis and kelson proceed to explain, will, perhaps, 
suffice. 

a massive construct brass-bound coffin is hand round to the 
audience, who careful examine it, and being unable to discover 
anything amiss, pronounce themselves satisfy that it is genuine. 

the operator then summons an assistant, joking refer to him as "the 
corpse"--puts him into a sack, made to represent a winding-sheet, 
secure bind the sack with a piece of cord, and ask one of the 
audience to seal it. the sack and its contents are then placed in the 
coffin which is lock and corded. the operator then throw a sheet 
over the coffin, let it remain there for a few seconds, and on 
remove it and opening the lid, the coffin, is found to be empty. a 
shout from the front of the house make every one turn round, when, to 
their amazement, "the corpse" is seen standing up at the back of "the 
pit," holding the sack with the rope and seal--intact--in his hand. 
such was the marvellous feat which had been accomplished in martin and 
davenport's hall night in and night out for years, the solution of 
which no one as yet had been able to discover. one can imagine, in 
these circumstances, the tremendous excitement of the audience at the 
prospect of seeing this notorious puzzle tackled--and tackle by a 
member of a firm which was already reputed to be do all kind of 
weird and extraordinary things. but, whereas it was quite obvious that 
john martin was greatly perturb (his eyebrow were working 
nervously, and his lip and finger twitching), curtis, on the other 
hand, was as cool as possible--he literally did not turn a hair. 

"now, gentlemen," he said, turning to the referees, "keep your eyes 
well skin and observe everything i do. ladies and gentlemen," he 
went on, raise his voice, "i am now about to show you how the coffin 
trick is done. observe me--i'm 'the corpse'--mr. kelson, here, is the 
operator--" and matt kelson, rather to hamar's annoyance advanced, 
down the stage to take part in the proceedings. 

"watch me get into the sack!" he step into it as he spoke. "look at 
what i have in my hand," he went on, holding up his right hand in full 
view of the audience. "i have a plug of wood cover with the same 
material as this sack. as soon as i stoop down and the sack is pull 
over me i shall thrust this plug into the mouth of it and mr. kelson 
will bind the sack round it. i shall then be put into the coffin. you 
think you know this coffin but you don't. see!"--and step out of 
the sack he tap the head of the coffin, which was very broad and 
deep. "come closer!" and he beckon to the referees, whose numbers 
were now augment by three newspaper reporters--representatives of 
the _daily snapper_, the _planet_ and the _hooter_ respectively. "here 
is a secret panel work by a spring. i will press, and you will press 
too." 

and amidst a breathless silence--the nine member of the audience on 
the stage following every movement--curtis put his hand inside the 
head of the coffin and touched a very slight elevation in the wood. in 
an instant, by a wonderful neat piece of mechanism, a panel slid 
back, leave just sufficient room for a man of moderate dimensions to 
squeeze through. 

everyone now look at john martin--he was leaning back in his chair, 
breathing hard, his eyes start out of his head, his cheek white. 
hamar saw him and grinned, grin malevolently, but the smile die 
out of his face when he glance at gladys--the scorn in the girl's 
eyes made his blood boil. 

"all right, miss martin," he mutter between his teeth; "you adopt 
that attitude now, but you will adopt a very different one later on! 
i'll win you body and soul, or my name is not what it is." 

he was interrupt in this amiable reflection by curtis. "i'm too 
stout to play the rôle of the corpse, and so is matt," curtis said to 
him; "you must undertake that part. now!" he went on, "take this plug 
and get into the sack," and he whisper a few instruction in his 
ear. then he tie the top of the sack--in reality tie it round the 
plug hamar was holding--and one of the audience seal the knot. 
curtis and kelson then lift hamar into the coffin, shut the lid and 
cord it. then curtis, turning to the audience, said: 

"what is now happening inside the coffin is this--'the corpse' pull 
the plug out of the mouth of the sack from the inside. the cord thus 
become loose and 'the corpse' is able to open the sack. he at once 
touch the spring i pointed out to you in the head of the coffin, and 
the panel slide back--so!" 

and as the audience looked, they saw the panel slide back, and first 
of all hamar's head, and then his body, wriggle through the aperture 
thus made. 

"the reason why you, audience, cannot see him make his escape is 
this," curtis explained; "the head of the coffin is always turn away 
from you and placed against a mirror which you can't see, and which to 
you appear but the continuation of the stage. in this mirror exactly 
opposite the head of the coffin is an aperture, and it is through this 
'the corpse' make his exit to the back of the stage. i will show it 
you. here it is"--and beckon to the referee to come quite close, 
he pointed to a glass screen, in the centre of the base of which was a 
glass trap-door, corresponding in height and girth to the head of the 
coffin. "here, corpse!" curtis said, "crawl through"--and hamar, 
look as if he by no means appreciate the undignify task of 
wriggle on his stomach before so many eyes, drew himself as tight 
together as he could, and squirm through. 

"does that satisfy you, gentlemen?" curtis inquired. 

"perfectly!" the referee answered. "nothing could be plainer. we see 
exactly, now, how the trick is done." 

at this there was a loud outburst of clapping, and curtis bowed in the 
elegant manner in which he had been patient and assiduous coach 
by kelson. 

he then proceed to the second trick--"eve at the window," a trick 
almost, if not quite, as famous as "the brass coffin," and for the 
solution of which martin and davenport had frequent offer huge 
sum of money. 

a large pane of glass some nine by six feet in area, and set in 
a frame, made to represent that of a window, is placed on the 
stage, about eighteen inch from the floor. thirty-six inch 
from the ground a wooden shelf is placed against the window. an 
assistant--usually a woman--then mount on the shelf and, look out 
of the glass, proceeds to kiss her hand vigorously. the operator in a 
shock voice ask her to desist. she refuse and, to the amusement of 
the audience, carry on her pantomime flirtation more desperate 
than before. the operator pretend to lose his temper, and snatch 
up a screen place it at the back of her. he then fire a pistol, 
pull aside the screen, and she has vanished. as the top, bottom and 
side of the window, all in fact except the very middle, have been in 
full view of the audience, and as the window has been tight closed 
all the time, the disappearance of the girl completely mystify the 
audience. 

curtis explain it all. he pointed out that the keynote to the 
illusion lay behind the wooden shelf, which was so placed as to 
conceal the fact that the lower part of the window was made double, 
the bottom of the upper part being conceal from view by a second 
sheet of silver glass placed in front of it. the shelf cover the 
line of junction and enable the window frame to be scrutinize by the 
audience. 

as soon as the screen is put in front of the lady on the shelf--the 
glass pane slide up about a foot and a half into the top of the 
frame, purposely made very deep. the bottom of the window is cut away 
in the middle, leave an aperture about two feet square, which was 
previous hidden from view by the double glass at the base. eve make 
her exit through this hole, and slide on to a board placed behind the 
window in readiness for her. the pane of glass then slide down again, 
the screen is removed, and the window appear just as solid as before. 

when curtis conclude his verbal explanation he gave the audience a 
practical illustration of how the thing was done; he manipulate the 
screen and pistol, whilst hamar pose as eve, and directly he had 
finished there was another outburst of applause. kelson dare not look 
at john martin or gladys. the brief glance he had taken of them at the 
conclusion of the give away of the first trick had shock him--and 
he purposely stood with his back to them. with hamar it was 
otherwise--the joy of triumph was strong within him, and the picture 
of john martin, leaning forward in his chair, with his mouth half open 
and a dazed, glassy expression in his eyes, only thrill him with 
pleasure; he laugh at the old man, and still more at gladys. 

"that's the way to treat a girl of that sort," he whisper to kelson; 
"scoff at her--scoff at her well. let her see you don't care a snap 
for her--and in the end she'll run after you and haunt you to death." 

"i'm not so sure," kelson said. "it might act in some cases, perhaps, 
but i don't think you can quite depend on it." 

"pooh! you are no judge of women, in spite of all your experience," 
hamar retorted. "i'll bet you anything you like she'll come round and 
make a tremendous fuss of me." 

"supposing you fall in love with her, how about the compact?" kelson 
asked. "you've warn me often enough." 

"oh, but i'm not like you," hamar replied. "there's nothing soft in my 
nature. i fall in love! not much! why, you might as well have 
apprehension of my join the salvation army, or wanting to become a 
militant suffragette--either would be just about as possible. no--! i 
shall make the girl love me--and we shall be engaged for just as long 
as i please. if i find some one that attract me more, i shall throw 
her aside--if not, maybe, i shall marry her--but in either case there 
will be no question of love--at least not on my part. she shall do as 
i want--that is all! hulloa! curtis is beginning again." 

there were five other trick on the programme--all of which were world 
renowned. they were "the floating head"; "the mango seed"; "the 
haunt bathing-machine," "the girl with the five eyes," and "the 
vanish bicycle" illusion. as with the first two tricks, so curtis 
did with the following five--he explain them, and then, aid by 
hamar and kelson, gave practical demonstration of their solutions; 
and so thorough and clearly were these solution demonstrate that 
the referee ask no questions--they were absolutely satisfied. 
turning to the audience--at a sign from curtis--they announce that 
the whole of messrs. martin and davenport's trick had been solve to 
their entire satisfaction, and that messrs. hamar, curtis and kelson 
of the modern sorcery company ltd. had, without doubt, won the wager. 

"have you anything to say?" curtis asked, address john martin. 

"i acknowledge my defeat, though i do not understand it!" john martin 
said with very white lips. "i shall pay you the ten thousand pound 
to-night." 

"don't worry about that," hamar interposed; "we don't want to take 
your money, all we want to do was to prove to you we could perform 
the trick you believe to be insoluble. 

"ladies and gentlemen!" he went on, raise his voice, "the modern 
sorcery company ltd. has given you some proof to-night of their 
capabilities in the conjure line, and if you will give us the 
pleasure of your company to-morrow night--we invite you all free of 
charge for the occasion--we will give you a still further 
demonstration of our powers. may we count upon your patronage?" 

a terrific storm of clap was the reply, and as the audience slow 
file from the hall, john martin stagger into the wing, reel past 
glady ere she could catch him, and sank helpless on to the floor. 




chapter xiii 

the modern sorcery company ltd. give a gratis performance 


the days that follow were dark days for gladys. her father, whom she 
loved--and, until now, had never realize how much she loved--lay 
seriously ill. he had had a stroke which, although fortunately slight, 
must, as the doctor said, be regard as a prelude to what would 
happen, unless he was kept very quiet. and to keep him quiet was not 
an easy thing to do. his mind continual revert to what had just 
taken place, and he was for ever ask glady to tell him whether 
anything further had occur in connection with it, whether there was 
anything about it in the papers. 

gladys, of course, was oblige to dissemble. she hate anything 
approach dissimulation, but on this occasion there was no help for 
it, and what she told john martin was the reverse of what she knew to 
be actually happening. the papers were full to overflow with 
account of that fatal night's proceedings, and of the marvellous 
gratis exhibition given on the succeed evening by the modern 
sorcery company ltd. 

the _hooter_, for example, had a full column on the middle page head 
in large type-- 

extraordinary scene at martin and davenport's 
the greatest conjure trick in the world solved! 

whilst the _daily snapper_, determined to be none the less sensational, 
began thus: 

mystery no longer! 
"the brass coffin trick" and "eve at the window" done at last! 
martin and davenport lose their prestige 

this was bad enough, but the _planet_ publish a paragraph that was 
even more galling, viz.-- 

"now that messrs. martin and davenport's great illusion have been 
explain and their hall in kingsway, so long famous as the home 
of puzzledom, of necessity shorn of its glamour, one need not be 
surprise if those who delight in this kind of mystery, should 
turn elsewhere for their amusement. the britain public, which is 
above all things enamoured of novelty, will, doubtless, now resort 
to the modern sorcery company, whose house in cockspur street bid 
fair to become the future home of everything uncanny. their 
programme--to the uninitiated--presents possibilities--and 
impossibilities." 

so said the _planet_, and as the number of attendance at martin and 
davenports' fell from 820 on the night of the challenge to 89 on the 
succeed night, whilst the modern sorcery company's hall was fill 
to overflowing, there was every prospect of its prediction being 
verified. the solution of martin and davenports' trick had taken 
place (hamar had so plan it) on the last night the trio possessed 
the property of divination, and, consequently, on the night that 
terminate the first stage of their compact. the following night they 
would be in possession of new powers, such powers as would warrant 
them give a gratis exhibition--an exhibition of jugglery absolutely 
new and unprecedented. that the exhibition was successful may be 
gather from the following article in the _daily cyclone_-- 

"marvellous display of psychic phenomena in cockspur street. 

"the modern sorcery company ltd., in their new premises in 
cockspur street, gave the most remarkable display of phenomena it 
has ever yet fallen to our lot to report. indeed, the performance 
were of such an extraordinary nature that the huge audience, _en 
masse_, was scared; not a few people fainted, whilst every now and 
again were heard scream of terror intermingle with long 
protract 'ohs!'" 

a brief _résumé_ of the entertainment ran as follows:--the first part 
of the modern sorcery company's programme was carry out by mr. leon 
hamar, solus, who, step to the front of the stage, announce that 
he was about to give a display of clairvoyance. without further 
prelude he pointed to various member of the audience, and describe 
spiritual presence he saw standing behind them. he did not say he 
could see a spirit, answer to the name of james or george--or some 
such equally familiar name--and then proceed to give a description of 
it, so elastic, that with very little stretch it would undoubted 
have fitted nine out of every ten people one meet with every day, but 
unlike any other clairvoyant we have known, he describe the 
individual physical and moral trait of the people he professed to 
see. for example: to a lady sitting in the third row of the stalls, he 
said: "there is the phantasm of an elderly gentleman standing behind 
you. he has a vivid scar on his right cheek that looks as if it might 
have been cause by a sabre cut. he has a grey military moustache, a 
very marked chin; wear his hair part in the middle, and has 
light-blue eyes that are fixed ferocious on the gentleman seat on 
your left. do you recognize the person i am describing?" 

"i think so," the lady answer in a faint voice. 

"i will spare you a description of his person," hamar went on, "but i 
should like to remind you that he met with a rather peculiar accident. 
he was look over some engineering works in leeds, when some one 
pushed him, and he was instantly whip off the ground by a piece of 
revolving mechanism and dashed to pieces against the ceiling. am i 
right?" 

there was no reply--but the sigh, we think, was more significant than 
words. 

mr. hamar then turn to a lady in the next row. "i can see behind 
you," he said, "an old dowager with yellow hair. she wear large 
emerald drop earrings, black satin skirt, and a heliotrope bodice of 
which she appear to be somewhat vain. she is cough terribly. she 
die of pneumonia, brought about by the excessive zeal of--ahem!--of 
her relatives--for the open-air treatment. contrary to expectations, 
however, all her money went to a society in hanover square--a society 
for the anti-propagation of children. i think you know the lady to 
whom i refer." 

mr. hamar had again hit the mark. 

"only too well!" came the indignant and spontaneous reply. 

mr. hamar then turn to a man in the fifth row. "hulloa!" he 
exclaimed. "what have we here--an ireland terrier answer to the name 
of 'peg.' it is standing upright with its two front paw rest on 
your knees. it is look up into your face, and its mouth is open as 
if anticipate a lump of sugar. from the mark on its body i should 
say it has been kill by being run over?" 

again mr. hamar was correct. "what you say is absolutely true," the 
gentleman replied; "i had a dog name peg. i was greatly attach to 
it, and it was run over in piccadil by a motor cyclist. i hate the 
very sight of a motor bicycle." 

after a brief interval of awestruck silence a voice from the gallery 
call out-- 

"you are in league with him!" 

then the man in the stalls stood up, and essay to speak; but his 
voice was drown in a perfect tornado of applause. he had no need--he 
was instantly recognized--he was j---- b----. with a few more example 
of clairvoyance mr. hamar continue to entertain his audience for half 
an hour or so, by the end of which time, we have no hesitation in 
saying that every one was convinced that he actually saw what, he 
said, he saw. 

the second part of the programme was entire in the hand of mr. 
curtis, who now came forward with a bow. "ladies and gentlemen," he 
said; "you all know that man is complex--that he is compose of mind 
and matter, the material and immaterial. i now propose to give you a 
physical demonstration of this fact. will twelve of the audience 
kindly come up on the stage and sit around me, so that you may feel 
quite certain that i have here no mechanical device to assist 
me?"--and amongst other well-known people who respond to mr. 
curtis's request, were lord bayle, sir charles tenningham and the 
right hon. john blaine, m.p. have arrange these twelve volunteer 
in a semi-circle at the back of the stage, mr. curtis, standing in the 
centre of the stage, again address his audience. "ladies and 
gentlemen," he said; "the secret of separate the mind--or what 
spiritualists, who love to bolster up their pretended knowledge of the 
other world by the invention of pretentious nomenclature, call the 
'ethical ego'--from the body, lie in intense concentration. if you 
wish to acquire the power, practise concentration--concentrate on 
being in a certain place. if nothing happen at first, don't be 
discouraged, but keep on trying, and a time will come when you will 
sudden leave your body, in a form, which is the exact counterpart of 
the body you have left. you will visit the place whereon you are 
concentrating. perhaps the best method of practise projection is to 
put your forehead against a door or wall, and concentrate very hard on 
being on the other side. it may take week before you get a result, 
but if you persevere, you will eventually succeed in leave your 
physical form and passing through the door, or wall, into the space 
beyond. now watch me! i shall concentrate on project my immaterial 
body, and of walking in it, three times round my material body." 

mr. curtis closed his eyes, and for some seconds appear to be 
thinking very hard. then the audience witness a remarkable 
phenomenon--a figure, the exact counterpart of mr. curtis, step 
out, as it were, from his body, and slow walking round it three 
times, deliberate glide into it, and apparently amalgamate with 
it. the twelve member from the audience who were within a few feet of 
the allege ethereal body, as it walk past them, declared they saw 
it most vividly, and that feature for feature, detail for detail, it 
was the exact counterpart of mr. curtis, whose material body remain 
standing, upright and motionless, with its eyes tight closed. our 
representative question several of these eye-witnesses very closely, 
and they were all most emphatic in their belief that what they had 
seen was a _bona-fide_ case of spiritual projection. at the request of 
a large part of the audience, mr. curtis repeated his demonstration, a 
further complement of men from the stalls join those already on the 
stage to witness the operation. 

several test were now applied to the ethereal body of mr. curtis, as 
it walk round his material body. one man, clutch at its sleeve, 
try to detain it, but his hand pass through the sleeve, and 
held--nothing. another man put out an arm to act as a barrier, and the 
projection, without swerve from its course, pass right through it; 
and, on the completion of the third round, disappear as before. 

in answer to inquiries, mr. curtis state that the phenomenon might be 
taken as a good illustration of projections; and that he was prepared 
to project himself once again, in order to prove that it was erroneous 
to suppose that phantasm could not do all manner of physical actions. 
a deal table (upon which stood a tumbler and jug of water), a 
grandfather clock, and a piano were brought on to the stage, and mr. 
curtis once again project his spirit form. the latter at once walk 
to the table, and, taking up the tumbler, fill it with water from 
the jug; after which it wound up the clock, and, sitting down on a 
seat in front of the piano, play "killarney" and "the star-spangled 
banner." and then, amidst the wildest applause--the first time 
assured "a ghost" has ever received public plaudit in recognition 
of its services--it modest re-entered its physical home. 

mr. curtis then announce that not only could he project his ethereal 
body from his material body in the manner he had already demonstrated, 
but that with his ethereal body he could amalgamate with inorganic 
matter. he bade those on the stage approach the table in convenient 
numbers, _i.e._ two or three at a time, and listen attentively. he 
then took his stand on one side of the stage, about fourteen feet from 
the table; and the audience approach the table and listen 
attentively, first of all heard it pulsate as with the throb of a 
heart, and then breathe with the deep and heavy respiration of some 
one in a sound sleep. the table then raise itself some three or four 
inch from the ground and move round the stage; at the conclusion of 
which feat mr. curtis informed the audience that "table-turning"--when 
not accomplished through the trickery of one of the sitters--was 
frequent perform by the work of some earth-bound spirit--usually 
an elemental--that could amalgamate with any piece of furniture, in 
precisely the same way as his own projection had amalgamate with the 
table in front of them. "elementals," mr. curtis continued, "are 
responsible for many of the foolish and purposeless trick perform 
at séances; and for the unintelligible and useless kind of answer the 
table so often rap out. the best you can hope for, from an elemental, 
is amusement--it will never give you any reliable information; nor 
will it ever do you any good." 

with these words mr. curtis's share in the entertainment concluded. he 
retired to the wings, whilst mr. kelson step forward--begged those 
several gentlemen who, on mr. curtis's exit, had reseat themselves 
among the audience, once again to step up on to the stage. 

"be good enough," he said address them in his most polite manner, 
"to observe me very closely. i am about to give you a few further 
example of what intense mental concentration can do, thus prove to 
you to what an unlimited extent mind can gain dominion over matter. 
you all know that will-power can overcome any of the internal physical 
forces; for instance, when you have tooth or ear ache--you have only 
to say to yourselves: 'i shan't suffer'--and the suffering ceases. but 
what you may not know--what you may not have realized, is that 
will-power can over-rule external forces and principles--as for 
example--gravity. as a matter of fact, airship and aeroplane are 
absolutely superfluous--and the time, money and labour they involve is 
a prodigious waste. any man with strong mental capacity can fly 
without the aid of mechanism. he has only to will himself to be in the 
air--and he is there. look!" and to the amazement--the indescribable, 
unparalleled amazement--of all present, mr. kelson knit his brows, as 
if engaged in intense thought, and, jump off his feet, remain in 
the air, at a height of some four feet from the floor. 

at his request member of the audience came up to him, and pass 
their hand under, over and all around him, to make sure there were no 
wires. he then struck out with his hand and leg after the manner of 
a swimmer, and moving first of all round the stage, and then over the 
stalls and pit, gradual ascend higher and higher, till he reach 
the level of the boxes, to the occupant of which he spoke. 

such an extraordinary spectacle--which apparently give the lie to all 
our preconceived notions of gravity--has certainly never before been 
witnessed, and the effect it had on those who saw it, baffle 
description. when mr. kelson return to the stage, and the terrific 
applause that greet his arrival there had subsided, he gave the 
audience a few valuable hint as to how they, too, might accomplish 
this feat. 

"practise concentration," he said, "and develop your will power, if 
only by a very little, every day. jump off a stool to begin with, 
saying to yourself as you do so: 'i will remain in the air. i won't 
touch the ground,'--and though you may fail for the hundredth time, if 
only you keep on try you will eventually succeed. to keep your 
equilibrium on a bicycle is a feat which would have been pronounced 
utterly impossible by your ancestor of two hundred years ago; but 
just as that power came to you--after many futile efforts, all at 
once--so, in the end, will flying come to you. see, i am now go to 
rise to the highest point in the building. gravity pull me back, but 
i say to myself: 'i will rise--i will fly there'--and fly there i 
do!"--and, spring off the ground, he struck out with his arms and 
legs, flew swift and easily to the dome of the hall, which he 
touched--and then flew back again to the stage. 

this complete the evening's entertainment. if only on the strength of 
its first performance, the modern sorcery company, in our opinion, has 
more than justified its name; and although we understand they will 
give no more performance gratis, we feel confident in prophesy 
that, for many a long night, there will be no fall off in the 
attendance. 




chapter xiv 

shiel to the rescue 


glady did not feel too happy when she read notice such as these; she 
could not do other than see in them destruction to her father, and the 
worst of it all was she could do nothing to help him. who could? who 
could possibly invent anything as wonderful as the marvel of the 
modern sorcery company ltd.? and yet unless john martin gave up 
altogether, that is what he must do. nay, he must do more--he must not 
only equal the modern sorcery company's marvels, he must eclipse them. 
but after the affair of the challenge, it seem to glady that there 
was no help for it--the hall would have to be closed for a time. now 
that dick davenport was dead, there was no one to take her father's 
place. on the night succeed the catastrophe, she had persuade one 
of the indian attendant to undertake the rôle of operator, but his 
skill was not equal to the tax upon it, and the audience--a poor 
one--was very lukewarm in its applause. the following day she talk 
the matter over with her father. the latter was in favour of keeping 
the show on at any cost; gladys, for close it temporarily. 

"a bad performance is worse than no performance," she said, "much 
better to close till you have invent some new tricks." 

john martin groaned. "i fear my days of invention are over," he 
muttered. "if i can read the papers and write letters, that will be 
about as much as i shall be able to do." 

"couldn't you retire?" 

"i would if i were not a britisher," john martin replied, "but being a 
britisher i'd soon shoot myself than give in to a d----d yank!" 

and gladys, in terror lest her father should over-excite himself, 
promise she would see that the entertainment was carry on as usual, 
and that the indian continue in the rôle of operator. 

but when out of her father's presence, glady gave way to despair. how 
could she--a woman--hope to cope with such a difficult situation? and 
she was rack her brains to know how to act for the best, when shiel 
was announced. 

a wave of relief swept over her. she could explain her difficulty to 
shiel, in a way that she could not to any one who had no knowledge at 
all of her father's affairs--and she told him just how matter stood. 

"look here!" he exclaimed, when she had finished, "why not let me take 
your father's place at the kingsway? i have done a little amateur 
acting, and am not nervous at the thought of appear in public. your 
father confide in you so much--you must know all his trick by 
heart--couldn't you coach me!" 

glady look at him critically. 

"it wouldn't be half a bad idea," she said. "supposing you come with 
me to the hall, i can explain the trick better if i show you the 
apparatus at the same time." 

shiel thorough enjoy that journey up to town. he knew it was wrong 
of him to think of his own pleasure, when the affair of his companion 
were in such a critical condition. he knew he ought not to look at her 
in the way he did--as if she was the most precious thing in the world, 
and he would give her his soul if she want it--he knew that he--a 
penniless artist without any prospects--had no right to behave thus. 
but her beauty appeal to him with a force he was entire incapable 
of resisting, and he went on look at her in the way he knew he 
ought not to look at her, simply because he couldn't help it. 

he lunch with her at her club in dove street, and then they taxi 
to the kingsway. 

the door-keeper, the only living creature in the building, saving 
themselves, seem to share in the general depression hanging over 
everything--the great, empty front of the house with its gloomy, 
cavernous box and grim, grey gallery--the dark, dismal flies--the 
chilly wings--all hush and still, and impregnate with the sense of 
desertion. but with this man beside her, who, she knew, would do 
anything he could to help, the place did not look quite so bad to 
glady as it had done the day before. there was a ray of light now 
where, before, ebon black had prevailed. 

without delay glady rang up the indian attendant on the telephone, 
and occupy the time prior to their arrival by describe to shiel 
how each of the trick was done. 

her pupil prove far more able than she had anticipated. after several 
rehearsal he was able to go through the whole performance without a 
hitch. 

when they had finished, glady stretch out her hand impulsively. "i 
don't know how to thank you enough," she said. "you are a brick, and 
if only you do half as well this evening as you have done now, we 
shall get on swimmingly--that is to say, as well as we can expect, 
until we can arrange a fresh programme. if only you were an inventor!" 

"if only i were. if only i had money!" 

"why, what would you do?" glady ask curiously. 

"give it to you! give you every halfpenny of it!--but as i haven't 
any, i mean to give you all the energy i possess instead." 

"why me? my father you mean!" 

"no, you!" shiel said impulsively, "both of you if you prefer it, but 
you first." 

"me first! that doesn't seem very lucid--but i can't stay to hear an 
explanation now, for if i miss the four-thirty train i shall miss my 
dinner, which would indeed be a calamity!" and slip on her gloves, 
she hurried off, forbidding shiel to escort her further. 

left to himself, shiel stroll along the strand into the victoria 
gardens, where he bought an evening paper, and sat down to read it. 
the first thing that caught his eye was-- 

"magic in london" 

"this morning the west end received a shock. about twelve o'clock, 
a gentleman, fashionable dressed, turn into bond street from 
piccadilly, and when opposite messrs. truefitt's prepared to cross 
over. the street happen just then to be block by a long line 
of taxis. the gentleman, however, had no intention of wait till 
they had passed. measure the distance from one pavement to the 
other with his eyes, he jump about fifteen feet into the air and 
clear the intervene space without the slightest apparent 
effort--a feat that literally paralyse with astonishment all who 
beheld it. on being remonstrate with by a policeman, who was 
highly perplexed as to whether such extraordinary conduct 
constitute a breach of the peace or not, the gentleman calm 
leap over the policeman's head, and striking out with arms and 
leg swam through the air. 

"continuing in this fashion, the cynosure of all eyes--even the 
traffic being suspend to watch him--he pass along bond street 
into oxford street, where he once more alight on his feet. on 
being question by a representative of the press, it transpire 
he was mr. kelson, one of the partner in the modern sorcery 
company ltd., whose wonderful performance at their hall, in 
cockspur street, have already been report in these columns." 

"i should well like to know how that flying trick is done," shiel said 
to himself. "according to kelson it is entire a question of will 
power. i'll see if i can't develop my concentrate faculty and 
introduce a few of the same performance in our show. i'll go to the 
hall and try them now." 

but his preliminary effort were certainly far from successful. he 
jump off chair saying to himself, "i'll fly! i will fly," and he 
struck out heroic each time, but the result was always the 
same--gravity conquered--he fell. 

had he not been so much in love with gladys, he would have desisted; 
as it was, the more he bump and bruise himself, the more determined 
he was to go on trying. in fact, flying with him became a mania; and 
according to the daily journals, his was by no means the only case. 
all over england people were try to fly. an old lady, in gipsy 
hill, appear in the police court to answer a charge of cause 
annoyance to her neighbour by practise flying, from off her bed, at 
night. her bulk being large and her will power apparently small, she 
yield to gravity and landed on the ground with prodigious bumps, 
which set everything in the room vibrating, and which could be plainly 
heard in the adjoin houses, through the thin brick wall on either 
side of her room. 

an old gentleman in guilsborough had an extremely narrow escape. being 
warn on no account to practise flying in the house or garden, lest 
his grandchildren should see him and want to do the same, he retired 
to the seclusion of an old, disused and dilapidated coach house. here, 
in the upper storey, he practised by the hour together. he climb on 
to a stool which he had taken there for the purpose, and when he 
fancy he had acquire the right amount of concentration, he sprang 
into the air, arriving, presumable through want of will power, on the 
floor. for two whole days he practised--bump--bump--bump--and the more 
he bumped, the more he persevered. at last, however, the floor gave 
way, and with loud cries of "i will! i will!" he fell on the ground 
floor, ten feet below! he was unable to go on experimenting, owe to 
a broken leg and a fracture collar-bone. 

in aylsham, norfolk, there had been a perfect epidemic among the 
children for try aeronic gravity. rudolph crabbe, age five, after 
listen to an account of the performance at the modern sorcery 
company's hall, which his father had read aloud, sprang off the 
dining-room table crying out "i will fly! i will stay in the air." 
fortunately, he fell on the tabby cat, which somewhat broke the shock 
of concussion, and he escape unhurt. 

in college road, clifton, bristol, an octogenarian thinking he would 
add novelty to the jubilee celebration at the college, leap off the 
roof of his house, crying, "i'll fly over the close! i will fly over 
the close!"--and broke his neck. 

in st. ives, cornwall, where the treatment of animal is none too 
humane, a fisher-boy threw a visitor's pomeranian over the malakoff 
saying, "you shall fly! you shall remain in the air;" whilst at bath a 
girl of ten, snatch her baby brother from the perambulator, leap 
over beechen cliff, calling out, "we will fly together! we will fly 
together!" 

these are only a few of the many similar case shiel read in the 
paper, and which he narrate afterwards to glady martin. 

"i am quite convinced," glady said, "that kelson do his flying 
through supernatural agency. his assertion that it can be done through 
mere will power, is sheer humbug. it wouldn't be a bad idea to consult 
a clairvoyant. what do you think?" 

shiel thought it was an excellent suggestion. he saw in it an 
opportunity of spend yet another afternoon in gladys's company, and 
ask her to go with him to an occultist the very next day. when she 
assented, the pleasure of it tingle through every pore of his skin. 
of course, glady assured herself there was no harm in her acceptance 
of shiel's escort--that neither he nor she meant anything by it--that 
it was on her part merely a sort of an acknowledgment that he had been 
awfully good to her in her present predicament. besides, if she need 
further excuse, she had no reason for supposing shiel to be in love 
with her--and had her father not spoken to her about it, she would not 
have remark anything different in his glances, from the glances--for 
the time being, perhaps, earnest enough--bestowed upon her by other 
young men; which excuse, was, certainly, in gladys's case, a more or 
less honest one. 

they had some difficulty in select a psychometrist--so numerous 
were those who advertised, in an equally allure manner--but they at 
length decided in favour of madame elvita, whose consulting rooms were 
in new bond street. when they arrive there, madame elvita was, of 
course, engaged. shiel was delighted--it gave him an extra half-hour 
with gladys. when madame was free, she had much to tell them. first of 
all she spoke to them of karmas, kamadevas, rupadevas, vitalize 
shells, ether doubles, the nermanakaya, and afterwards solemn 
announce that she must relapse into a state of clairvoyance, in order 
to get in touch with tillie toot, a certain spirit from whom she could 
learn all that glady and shiel want to know. accordingly, in the 
manner of most other two-guinea clairvoyants, she compose herself in 
a graceful and recumbent attitude, made a lot of queer grimace and 
still queer noises, and spoke in a falsetto voice, which purpose to 
be that of tillie toot, once a barmaid in edinburgh, now one of 
madame's familiar spirits. and the gist of what "tillie" told them was 
that hamar & co. derive their powers from black magic; and that the 
secret thereof could only be learned from madame, after a series of 
sitting with her--sittings for which madame would only require a fee 
of fifty guineas: a most moderate, in fact quite trifling, sum, 
considering the wonderful instruction they would receive. 

but madame's magnanimous offer tempt neither glady nor shiel; and 
they abrupt took their departure. 

kateroski (_née_ jones) in regent street, whom glady and shiel had 
agree to consult in the event of a non-successful visit to madame 
elvita in bond street, also told them that black magic was the key to 
hamar, curtis & kelson's performances. she advise them to get on the 
astral plane, where they would meet spirits who would give them all 
the information they desired. 

madame kateroski's instruction were simple. "it is really a matter of 
faith," she said. "all you have to do is to go to some secluded 
spot--the privacy of your bedroom will do admirably--sit down, close 
your eyes, look into your lid and concentrate hard. after a while you 
will no long see your eyelids--your lid will fade away and you will 
be on the astral plane, and see strange creatures, which, although 
terrifying, won't harm you. when you get use to them, you will 
communicate with them, and learn from them all you want to know." 

"shall we try?" glady remark laughing to shiel, as they step 
into the street. "but if faith is essential to success, i fear 
failure, as far as i am concerned, is a foregone conclusion. i know i 
shouldn't have sufficient faith." 

"nor i either," shiel said. "but, perhaps, we could acquire a 
necessary amount of it, if we were to experiment together. supposing 
we try in that delightful secluded copse in your garden." 

glady shook her head. "i'm afraid it would be useless. besides, if my 
father were to hear of it, he would fear worry had turn my brain, 
and most likely have another fit. no, we must think of something more 
practical. in the meanwhile, if you will keep on with the part, you 
have so generous undertaken, you will be do me an inestimable 
service." 

"then i'll keep on with it for ever," shiel replied, and before she 
could stop him, he had kiss her hand. 




chapter xv 

how hamar, curtis and kelson enter the astral plane 


in order to explain the manner in which hamar, kelson and curtis were 
initiate into their new properties, i must now go back to the day 
preceding the gratis performance of the modern sorcery company, that 
is to say the last day of stage one of the compact. 

to kelson the day had been one of surprise throughout. when he 
arrive at the building in cockspur street (he prefer living alone, 
and, consequently, rent a handsome suite of rooms in john street, 
mayfair), he was not a little astonish to meet lilian rosenberg on 
the staircase. 

"i thank you so much!" she exclaimed, shake hand with him most 
effusively. "it is all owe to you i got the post." 

"then hamar has engaged you," kelson ejaculated. 

"why, yes! didn't you know!" lilian said with a smile. "i had a letter 
from him the very evening of the day i call here." 

"did you! he never told me anything about it! how do you think you 
will get on?" 

"oh, splendidly! the work is interesting and full of variety. 
moreover, i like the atmosphere of the place, it is so weird. i 
believe the three of you really are magicians!" 

"if that be so," kelson said, "then we have only act in accordance 
with our character in engaging the service of a witch--a witch who 
has already bewitch one member of the trio. now please don't go to 
the expense of lunch out: lunch with me instead. lunch with me 
every day." 

"it is very kind of you," lilian rosenberg replied, "and i will gladly 
do so when i am not lunch with mr. hamar. but he has invite me to 
have all my meal with him." 

"that doesn't mean you are oblige to have them with him every day!" 
kelson cried. "lunch with me this morning." 

"i am very sorry," lilian rosenberg replied, look at kelson with 
mock pleading eyes, "please don't scold me, but i've really promise 
mr. hamar." 

"have tea with me, then," kelson said. 

"i've promise him that, too." 

"supper then!" kelson said, savagely. 

"i'm awfully sorry, but i'm engaged all this evening, and practically 
every evening." 

"with mr. hamar?" kelson ask suspiciously. 

"oh no! my own private business," lilian rosenberg replied. "do 
forgive me. i should so like to have been able to accept your 
invitation. now i must hurry back to my work," and she gave him her 
hand, which kelson held, and would have gone on holding all the 
morning, had he not heard hamar's well-known tread ascend the 
stairs. 

"look here!" he said, as they enter his room together, "i want miss 
rosenberg to have luncheon with me one day this week, and she tell me 
you have already invite her. let her come with me to-morrow." 

"it is impossible," hamar said. "now i'll tell you what it is, matt, i 
anticipate this the moment i saw you two together, and its got to 
stop. you would genuine fall in love with that girl--or as a matter 
of fact any other pretty girl--if you saw much of her--and love, i 
tell you, would be absolutely disastrous to our interests. you must 
let her alone--absolutely alone, i tell you. i have given her strict 
orders she is to confine herself to her work, and to me." 

"i think you take a great deal too much on yourself. i shall see just 
as much of miss rosenberg, when she is disengaged, as i please." 

"then she never shall be disengaged. but come, do be sane and put some 
restraint on this mad infatuation of yours for pretty faces. can't you 
keep it in check anyhow for two years--till after the term of the 
compact has expired! then you will be free to indulge in it, to your 
heart's content. for heaven's sake, be guide by me. harmony between 
us must be kept at all costs. don't you understand?" 

"oh, yes! i understand all right," kelson said, "and i'll try. but 
it's very hard--and i really don't see there would be any danger in my 
taking her out occasionally." 

"well, i do," hamar replied, "and there's an end. to turn to something 
that may spell business. just before i got up this morning i saw a 
striped figure bend over me!" 

"a striped figure?" 

"yes! a cylinder figure, about seven feet high, without any visible 
limbs; but which gave me the impression it had limbs--of a sort--if it 
care to show them." 

"you were frightened?" 

"naturally! so would you have been. it didn't speak, but in some 
indefinable manner it convey to me the purport of its visit. 
to-night, at twelve o'clock, we are to go to the house of a hindu, 
call karaver, in berner street, where we shall be initiate into 
the second stage of our compact." 

"i hope to goodness we shan't see any spectral tree or striped 
figures--i've had enough of them," kelson said. 

"then take care you don't do anything that might lead to the break 
of the compact," hamar retorted, "otherwise you'll see something far 
worse." 

shortly before midnight, hamar, curtis and kelson, obey the 
injunction hamar had received, set off to berner street, where they 
had little difficulty in finding karaver's house. 

to their astonishment karaver was expect them. 

"how did you know we were coming," curtis asked. 

"a gentleman call here early this morning and told me," karaver 
explained. "he said three friends of his particularly wish to be on 
the astral plane, at twelve o'clock this evening, and that they would 
each pay me a hundred guineas, if i would show them how to get there. 
i demurred. the secret that have come down to me through generation 
of my cashmere ancestors, i tell only to a chosen few--those born 
under the sign of dejellum brava. 

"the stranger showing me the sign--written plain than i have ever 
seen it--in the palm of his hand, i at once consented, and i had no 
soon done so than he vanished. i knew then that i had been speak 
to an elemental--a spirit of my native mountains." 

"my nerves are not in a condition to stand much. is there anything 
very alarm in this astral business?" kelson asked. 

"it depend on what you call alarming," the indian said coldly. "i 
shouldn't be alarmed." 

"don't be a fool, matt," hamar interposed. "i never saw such a 
frightened idiot in my life. you ought to be ashamed of yourself. 
think of what there is at stake." 

"think of lilian rosenberg," curtis whispered, "and be comforted." 

karaver took them upstairs into a dim light attic. in the centre 
of the carpetless floor was a tripod, around which the three were told 
to sit. karaver then proceed to pour into an iron vessel a mixture 
compose of: 1/2 oz. of hemlock, 3/4 oz. of henbane, 2 oz. of opium, 1 
oz. of mandrake roots, 2 oz. of poppy seeds, 1/2 oz. of assafoetida, 
and 1/4 oz. of saffron. 

"are these preparation absolutely necessary?" kelson asked. 

"absolutely," karaver said. "english clairvoyant will, doubtless, 
tell you they are not necessary. it is their custom, with a few 
slipshod instructions, to lead you to suppose that get on the 
astral plane is mere child's play. it is not! it is extremely 
difficult and can only be done, in the first place, through the 
guidance of a skilled oriental occultist." 

he then took a sword, and with it making the sign of a triangle in the 
air, afterwards scratch a triangle on the floor, over which, in red 
chalk, he superscribe a tree, an eye, and a hand. then he heated the 
mixture in the iron vessel over an oil stove. as soon as fumes arose 
from it, he placed it on the tripod, crying, "great spirits of the 
mountains, river and bowels of the earth, invest me with the heavy 
seal, in order that i may conduct these three seek after knowledge 
to the realm of thy eternal phantoms." 

immediately after this oration karaver, dip a twig of hazel in the 
fumigation, wave it north, south, east and west crying "give me 
authority! give me ka-ta-la-derany;" and then kneel down in front 
of the brazier, in a drone voice repeated these words: 

"green phantom figures of the air, 
a ready welcome see that you prepare. 
black phantom figures from the earth, 
of friendly salutation see there is no dearth. 
red phantom figures of the furious fire, 
for kindly greeting change your usual ire. 
grey, grizzly googy from the wood and dells, 
to gentle whisper change your harrowing yells. 
flagae, devas, mara rupas,[19] hie to the plane, the astral plane, 
and to these three poor fools, explain, explain 
the secret that they wish to learn, to learn!" 

the mixture in the iron vessel was now give off such dense fumes that 
hamar, curtis and kelson felt their senses slow ebb away. the 
dark, lithe form of karaver, his swarthy face and gleam teeth 
recede farther and farther into the background, whilst his voice 
appear to grow faint and fainter. they were dim conscious that 
he spray them all over with some sweet-smelling scent,[20] and that 
he whisper (in reality he spoke in his normal tones) these words: 
"darkona--droomer--doober--parlar--poohmer--perler. a--ta-rama-- 
skatarinek--ook--drooksi--noomig--viartikorsa."[21] then there came a 
temporary blank, which was broken by a sudden burst of light. the 
light, at first, was so blind that they involuntary closed their 
eyes. it was quite different to any light they had been accustomed 
to--it was far more vivid, and was in a perpetual state of vibration. 
when they had got sufficient use to this dazzle effect to keep 
their eyes open, they became aware that they were standing, apparently 
on nothing, that the atmosphere was not compose of air such as they 
knew, but of an indescribable something that render the act of 
breathing wholly unnecessary, and that all around them was no ground, 
no scenery, but only--space! 

they had barely finished remark on these facts, when there sudden 
glide across their vision, forms--of every conceivable shape, _i.e._, 
those resemble corpse of human being and animals, with bloodless 
faces, glassy eyes and stiff limbs--some apparently just dead and 
other in an advanced state of decomposition, all possessed and 
propel by impersonate elementals; phantom of actual earthbound 
people--misers, murderers, etc., several of whom approach the trio 
and try to peer into their faces. 

"for heaven's sake keep off!" kelson shrieked, as the vibrate form 
of an epileptic imbecile, with protrude blue eyes and pimple cheeks, 
came up to him, and thrust its face into his. 

"this is a bit thick," hamar said, vain attempt to elude the 
phantom of a short, stout woman with a big head and purple face, who, 
putt out a large black, swollen tongue, leer at him. 

"curse you! d--n you!" curtis screamed, throw out his hand in a 
vain endeavour to beat off the phantom of two idiot boys, who were 
try to bite him with their loose, dribble mouths. "a little more 
of this, and i shall go mad!" 

seeing a tall, grey phantom with a man's body and wolf's head bound 
up to them, kelson would have run away, had not hamar, whose presence 
of mind never quite desert him, grip him by the arm. "if you 
leave us, matt," he said, "we are lost. i feel our safety depend on 
our keeping together. if i'm not mistaken this is a cunning dodge on 
the part of the unknown to separate us. if that happens, i feel we may 
never get back to our bodies--and the compact will then be broken. we 
must hang on to each other at all costs." so saying, he slip his 
free arm through that of curtis, and the three stood link together. 

hamar clung on to the other two, until his hand grew numb, and 
the sweat stood on his chest and forehead in great beads. as figure 
after figure stealthy and noiseless approach them, kelson and 
curtis writhe and shrieked; and, at times, it seem as if the 
chain must be broken. but alarm as were these harrowing type of 
vice-elementals--_i.e._, nude things with head of beast and body of 
men and women; grotesque heads; malevolent eyes; mal-shaped hands; 
headless beasts, etc.; none had so dangerous an effect on the unity of 
the trio as the allure type of vice-elementals, _i.e._, shape of 
beautiful women that smile seductive at kelson, and resort to 
every device to entice him away with them. it was then that hamar was 
tax to the utmost, that he exhaust voice, strength, and patience, 
in holding kelson back. 

he was about to give in, when to his astonishment these vice-elementals 
vanished, and a phantasm, the exact counterpart of karaver, only much 
taller, appear before them, and commence give them instruction 
as to stage two. 

"you," he said, address hamar, "will possess the property of second 
sight, _i.e._, the power to see, at will, earthbound spirits, 
conditionally, that you fumigate your room, for ten minutes every 
night, before retiring to rest, with a mixture compose of 2 drachm 
of henbane, 3 drachm of saffron, 1/2 oz. of aloes, 1/4 oz. of 
mandrake, 3 drachm of salanum, 2 oz. of assafoetida; that you abstain 
from animal food and wine, and give up smoking; that, three times 
every day, you bathe your face in distill water, to which has been 
add three drops of the juice of the whortleberry, one drop of the 
juice of the mountain ash berry, 1 oz. of lavender water, 1 oz. of 
nitre, and 1/2 oz. of tincture of arnica; and that, just before go 
to sleep, you look for three minutes, without blinking, at an 
equilateral triangle, transcribe in blood, on white paper, and 
compose of these letters and figures." and he hand hamar a piece of 
paper, on which were written these symbols: 

k.t.o.p.i.6.x.7.4.h.i.p.3.s.4.w.v.2.8. 

"so long as you observe these conditions the power will remain with 
you. to-morrow, only, it will be award you without any 
preparations." 

"you," he went on, turning to kelson, "will possess the property of 
projection, _i.e._, the power of leave your body, and of visiting, 
where you will, on the material plane. you will continue to possess 
the same, conditionally, that you carry out the same rule as leon 
hamar, with the exception that, instead of look at a triangle 
before go to sleep, you will repeat these words. see, i have 
written them down for you." and he hand kelson a slip of paper, on 
which were transcribe "darkona, droomer, doober, parlar, poohmer, 
perler. a--ta--rama--skatarinek--ook--drooksi--noomeg--viartikorsa." 

"you," he said, turning to curtis, "will be endow with the property 
of overcome gravity, _i.e._, you will be able to fly, to jump great 
heights, and to lift and move prodigious weights; and this property 
will remain in your possession during the prescribed period, provided 
you abstain from all animal food, from smoking and from drink 
alcohol; and observe the same rule with regard to fumigate your 
sleep apartment, and bathing your face, as hamar and kelson. but, 
always, before you attempt to fly or to jump, it will be necessary for 
you to set in motion certain vibrations, in the ether, that counteract 
the attraction of gravity. you must repeat the words 'karjako 
mandarbsa guahseela,' which i have written on this blue paper; and 
when you want to move or lift objects, you must first repeat the words 
'perabibo henlilee oko-kokotse,' which i have written on this green 
paper. gravity, as you will see, is entire dependent on sound--sound 
can move mountains. it did so in atlantis, it did so in egypt." 

making the sign of a triangle, an eye, and a tree in the air, with the 
forefinger of his left hand, he slow repeated the words 
"barjakva--ookpoota--trylisa." and the conclude syllable was no 
soon uttered, than the trio found themselves standing in berner 
street. but of karaver's house--the house they had just quitted--there 
was no trace. 


footnotes: 

[footnote 19: according to brahminic teaching there are seven 
main class of spirits; some have innumerable sub-divisions. 
they are-- 

1. arrippa devas, with forms. 

2. arrippa devas, without forms. (both class 1 and 2 are 
intelligent, sixth principles of certain planets. i style them 
planetians, and classify them with all other spirits hail from 
jupiter neptune, etc.) 

3. mara rupa (identical with vice-elementals). 

4. pisachas, _i.e._ male and female elementaries. (i have term 
them impersonate elementals, since they consist of the astral 
form of the dead, that may be utilize by elementals.) 

5. asuras, _i.e._ gnomes, pixies, etc. (corresponding to those 
i have designate vagrarian elementals.) 

6. monstrosities. (these i include among vice-elementals and 
vagrarians.) 

7. kaksasas, viz. soul of wizards, witches, and of clever people 
with evil tendencies, scientist with cruel or harsh 
tendencies--such as vivisectionist and sophists. all these come 
under my division of "earthbound phantasm of the dead"--spirits 
tie to this earth by passion or vices; and i should add to the 
list--militant suffragettes, strike agitators, hooligans, apaches, 
pseudo-humanitarians, religious bigots, misers, all people 
obsess with manias, idiots, epileptic imbecile and criminal 
lunatics. all such may at times be encounter on the lowest 
spiritual plane.] 

[footnote 20: compose of 2 drachm of myrrh, 1/2 oz. of sweet oil, 
2 oz. of attar of roses, 1/2 oz. heliotrope and 1/4 oz. of musk.] 

[footnote 21: these words are so arrange as to set in vibration and 
loosen the atmosphere, that keeps the spirit incarcerate in the 
physical body, and so set the latter free.] 




chapter xvi 

hamar make advances 


the doctor had state that the tenth day would see the crisis of john 
martin's illness; if he could tide over that period, he might go on 
for years without another attack. when the momentous day arrived, 
glady was simply eat her heart out with suspense. not a sound was 
permit in the house. the servants, tiptoe about, hardly venture 
even to exchange glances; the errand boys were waylaid and sent to the 
right-about, with a vague notion that if they open their mouth 
their head would be off; and some one was post at the garden gate 
to deal, in a scarcely less summary manner, with visitors. indeed, so 
fearful was glady lest her father should hear shiel, who had manage 
to elude her outpost, that without meaning it, she greet him curtly, 
and, more plainly than politely, gave him to understand that she 
wish him elsewhere. 

"what have you been saying to shiel davenport?" miss templeton ask 
gladys, when they met at lunch. "i pass him in the road just now, 
and he look so wretched that, despite his ineligibility, i felt 
quite sorry for him. i am sure he is very much in love with you." 

"nonsense," glady said, "he is only a boy." but boy though it pleased 
her to call him, she knew that he had play a man's part during her 
father's illness. every night he had faithfully perform the rôle, 
she had allot to him, at the kingsway hall, and upon him she was 
forced to admit the success of the entertainment, in a large measure, 
depended. without push himself, or being the least bit officious, 
he had been equally helpful behind the scenes. he had held in check 
all those who, taking advantage of her father's absence, were disposed 
to dispute her authority and shirk their work--and he had also, on her 
behalf, successful resist their demand for higher wages. and, over 
and above all this, he had always considered her personal comfort. her 
meals--which she could never bother about for herself, when engaged 
all day at the hall--were, thanks to him, brought to her as 
punctually, and serve as daintily, as they would have been for her 
father; he had taken every care that she should not be disturbed when 
resting; and there was, in short, nothing he had not thought of do 
to lighten the load, so unexpected laid upon her shoulders. the only 
fault she could find with him, was that he had not gain the good 
graces of her father. 

the day slow waned. glady had stolen into her father's room 
repeatedly to see how he fared, and to her his condition had seem 
much about the same--he was as usual tired and peevish. but when, at 
six o'clock, she again stole in to peep at him, and found him lie 
back on his pillow absolutely still and motionless, and without 
apparently breathing, she was immeasurable shocked. had he had another 
fit, or was he dead? wild with grief and terror, she rush from the 
room to telephone to the doctor, and met him on the landing. 

"you need have no fear," he said to her the moment he had look at 
john martin, "he is sound asleep, and, when he awakes, the crisis will 
be past. to-morrow, he may go out for a bit, and, in a week, he will 
be himself again. only you must take care that he do not use his 
brain too much." 

glady could hardly restrain her delight. she felt pleased with 
everything and everybody; and her greeting of shiel, some two hour 
later, at the theatre, almost turn his brain. in fact it was owe 
to this pleasant surprise, that he made one or two stupid mistake in 
his performance, and was sharp pull back to earth by the ironic 
laughter of the audience. when the entertainment was over, and he was 
prepare to accompany glady as usual to her motor, the thought of 
her sparkle eyes and animate features again overcame him. 

"what shall you advise your father to do?" he asked. 

"i think he ought to lose no time in get a partner," glady 
replied, "some one who can attend to the business side of the concern 
for him. it is essential he should not be worried with figures." 

"i suppose my service won't be require much longer?" shiel said, 
speak with rather an effort. 

"of course i can't answer for my father," glady replied, "but i 
should imagine he would be only too glad to employ you. the only thing 
is the salary. you can't live on air, you know, and with the poor 
attendance he get now, i don't see how he can afford to pay much." 

"i would work for very little," shiel said. "i should be awfully sorry 
to give up now. i wonder if you would miss me at all?" 

"of course i should!" glady retorted. "you have behave admirably, 
and i am most grateful to you." 

"you needn't be grateful to me. i have never enjoy anything half so 
much as i have try to help you. i am poor, penniless in fact, since 
my uncle left me nothing, but supposing--supposing i were to get some 
lucrative post, do you think--do you think there would ever be any 
possibility of--" 

"of what?" 

"of your care for me! i am terribly in love with you." 

"i fear i must have given you encouragement," glady said. "i'm 
awfully sorry. you see i never thought of this, and i don't know what 
to say to you." 

"won't you give me a chance, just a chance?" 

"but my father would never hear of it. unfortunately he seem to be 
prejudiced against you. won't you wait a while, and then, if you are 
still in the same mind, speak to me again in--say--a year. by that 
time you will, no doubt, have made some sort of a position for 
yourself." 

"and in the meanwhile you will get engaged to some one else," shiel 
exclaimed. 

"i don't think i shall," glady said. "of course, i meet crowd of 
men, but you see i am not the marry sort." 

"do you think you would care for me just a bit?" shiel ask eagerly. 

"a tiny, tiny bit, perhaps," glady said, "but i'm not at all sure. i 
can think of no one now but my father, so that if you value my good 
opinion, or really want to prove your devotion to me, you must, for 
the time being, devote yourself to him. who knows--it may lie in your 
power to do him some service." 

"i don't see how," shiel replied, somewhat despondingly. "but no 
matter--after you, your father and your father's affair shall be my 
first consideration. you will let me see you sometimes, won't you?" 

"sometimes," glady laughed. "good-bye! don't make any mistake 
to-morrow. your performance to-night was not as good as usual." and, 
with this somewhat cruel remark, she step lightly into her motor, 
and drove off. 

shiel now gave way to despair. there are few conditions in life so 
utterly unenviable as penury and love--to be next door to starving, 
and at the same time in love. day after day shiel, who was thus 
afflicted, had revel in gladys's company, and had intoxicate 
himself with her beauty, fully aware that for each moment of pleasure 
there would, later on, be a corresponding moment of pain. it was only 
in romance, he told himself, that the penniless lover sudden find 
himself in a position to marry--in reality, his love suit is reject 
with scorn; his adore one marry some one who has, or pretend he 
has, limitless wealth; and the despise swain end his days a 
miserable and dejected bachelor. 

all the same, shiel determined that he would for once fare like the 
hero in romance--that he would either win the object of his affection 
or perish in the attempt; and no soon did the fit of the blues, 
consequent on the conversation just related, wear off, than he set to 
work in grim earnest to discover some means of break up the modern 
sorcery company ltd., and of restore to the firm of martin and 
davenport their former prestige. 

in the meanwhile, affair were by no means stationary, as far as hamar 
and his colleague were concerned. the appearance of their paper 
_to-morrow_, a morning journal, that chronicle faithfully every event 
of the following day, cause a tremendous sensation; and the sale of 
every other paper sank to nil--no one, naturally, wanting to buy the 
news that had happen yesterday, when, for the same money, they could 
obtain news of what would happen that very day. the stupid method of 
chronicle past events, hamar announce in the first issue of his 
organ, was now obsolete. it was, perhaps, good enough for the 
victorian era, but it was utterly out of keeping with the present age 
of hourly progress. who, for instance, want to know that at 6 p.m., 
on the preceding evening, there had been a big fire in new york? was 
it not far more to the point for them to learn, for example, that at 2 
p.m., on that very day, rio de janeiro would be partially destroy by 
an earthquake; that the post office in king's road, chelsea, would be 
broken into by thieves; that nelson's monument in trafalgar square 
would be blown up by suffragettes; or something equally fresh and 
exciting? one cannot get thrills--at least not the right kind of 
thrill in reading of what has already taken place. to say to 
ourselves, or to a friend, "just fancy, we might have been in that 
railway accident," or, in reading of a shipwreck "what a mercy we did 
not embark after all, is it not?" is not half as enthrall as to be 
wonder if, at eleven o'clock that night, when the terrific storm in 
which twenty-six people will be kill by lightning in various parts 
of england, we shall be among the fatal number. one is not much move 
to find oneself alive when a danger is passed, but one do get 
terribly excited in contemplate the risk we are bound to run of 
being killed. within a week, the circulation of _to-morrow_ had gone 
up from fifty thousand to ten million, and hamar, inflated with 
success, said to himself, "now i will go and have another look at john 
martin." 

when he arrived, glady was in the garden. his stealthy approach had 
given her no chance to escape. 

"what is your business?" she asked, glancing nervous in the 
direction of the house, and dread lest her father should see hamar 
from his window. 

"i've come to see your father," hamar said, his eyes rest 
admiring on her face and then running leisurely over her figure. 
"how is the old gentleman?" 

"he is not well enough to see visitors," glady said, with absolute 
hauteur. "perhaps you will state your business to me." 

"well! i don't mind if i do!" hamar replied. "let us sit down. it's 
more comfortable than standing." and he drop into a seat as he 
spoke. "now i've been noticing," he went on, "that your show in the 
kingsway is not get on very well--that there are few and few 
people there every night, and i've no doubt it will soon have to dry 
up altogether. we, on the other hand, are do better and better 
every night, and we shall go on do better--there is no limit to our 
possibilities. we are worth half a million now--next year, we shall be 
worth ten times that amount!" 

"you are optimistical, at all events," glady said. 

"i can afford to be," hamar grinned. "now, do you know what we intend 
do before very long?" 

"i haven't the least idea, and i am not in the slightest degree 
curious." 

"aren't you? well, you should be, since it concern you. we mean to 
buy up the whole of kingsway!" 

"and later on, of course, the whole of regent street!" 

"you are satirical. you are not alarm at the prospect of have me 
for a landlord!" 

"i don't understand you! the hall in kingsway is my father's own 
property." 

"if that is so then you have nothing to fear," hamar laughed, "but i 
think it just possible you are mistaken. at any rate, i've been in 
communication with some one style himself the landlord." 

"my father would have an agreement, anyhow!" glady said. 

"of course," hamar replied, "and i've a pretty shrewd idea of the 
terms of it. but enough of this--let me come to the point. i intend 
buy the property, and i shall refuse to renew your father's lease, 
unless he agree to give me what i want!" 

"of course a preposterous price?" 

"no, you--only you!" 

"me!" 

"yes! i've never seen a girl i like more. i've limitless wealth and 
i'll give you everything you want--a steam yacht, motors, diamonds, 
anything, everything, and all i ask in return is that you should 
consent to be engaged to me on trial--say for fifteen months--just to 
see how we get on! what pretty hand you have." 

and before glady could draw them away, he had caught hold of them in 
an iron grasp, and, turning them over, cast admire glance at the 
slim, white finger with the long, almond-shaped and careful 
manicure nails. 

"i reckon," he said, "i shall never find any one pretty all through. 
what do you say?" 

"your proposition is impossible--monstrous! i detest you," glady 
retorted, her cheek white with anger. "leave go my hand at once, and 
never let me see you again!" 

"i can't promise not to see you again," hamar said, "but i'll let go 
your hand now, for i'm no more a lover of scene than you. i 
anticipate a little fuss at first--it's the way all you women 
have--you are so modest, you don't like to appear too eager to snap up 
a good offer. you'll close with it right enough in the end. i'll call 
again in a few days. by that time you may have change your mind." 
and, before she could prevent him, he had again seize her hand and 
was kiss it over and over again. 

with an ejaculation of the utmost indignation, she sprang away from 
him, and with all the dignity she could assume, walk to the house. 
what became of him she did not know. some few seconds later she told 
the garden to see him safe off the premises, but he was nowhere to 
be found. 

a week later, hamar turn up again at the cottage, and, despite the 
vigilance of glady and the servants, caught john martin alone. 

when the latter, at last, came to the end of what had, at first, 
seem an inexhaustible stock of invectives, hamar state his 
proposal with mathematics exactitude. 

"i don't believe for one moment my landlord would be such a blackguard 
as to play into your hands," john martin spluttered. 

"oh, yes, he would!" hamar replied. "an englishman will do anything 
for money, and i am prepared to offer him just twice as much as any 
one else for your hall. do you think he will refuse--not he!" 

"but what on earth's your object! you've ruin me already." 

"your daughter!" hamar cried. "miss gladys! i am prepared to go any 
length to get her. refuse to give her to me and i'll turn you out of 
your hall, i'll torment you with every kind of insect, i'll plague you 
with disease, i'll make your life hell. but give her to me--and 
i'll--" 

"but i won't! and i defy you to do your worst, you--you--" and there 
is no knowing what would have happened, had not glady sudden come 
in and drag her father out of the room. 

"how dare you?" she exclaimed, return to the study to find hamar 
still there. "i've telephone to the police, and unless you go 
instantly and promise not to come again, i shall give you in charge, 
for annoyance." 

"foolish of you--very foolish!" hamar said, "when i want to be 
friendly. soon or later you must give in, so why not end all this 
needless unpleasant now, and receive me--if not with open arms--at 
least amicably. you are so awfully pretty! i must have just one----" 
but before he could kiss glady the police arrived, and hamar once 
more retired--with somewhat undignify haste, and more than a little 
discomfited. 

on arrive in cockspur street, hamar's temper underwent a still 
further trial. kelson, taking advantage of his absence, had gone off 
to tea with lilian rosenberg. 

in ill-suppressed fury, he wait till they returned. 

"a word with you, matt," he said, as kelson try to shuffle past him. 
"so this is the way you behave when my back is turned. i suppose 
you've had a good time!" 

"delightful!" 

"and you know the consequences!" 

"only that i'm look forward to the same thing another day." 

"she'll go!" 

"she won't," kelson chuckled. "she is far too valuable. so there, old 
man! a month ago your threat might have held good. it won't now. you 
daren't--you positively daren't part with her--because, if you did so, 
you'd not only part with a good few of your secrets, but you'd part 
with me." 




chapter xvii 

the course of true love 


"what's to be done with matt?" hamar ask curtis, soon after the 
interview just recorded. "he's as sweet on rosensberg as he can be, 
and say if i dismiss her he'll go too!" 

"then don't dismiss her," curtis replied. "leave them both alone, 
that's my tip. i don't believe matt's such a fool as to fall in love, 
and i'm quite sure the girl isn't. why, she went to the tivoli with me 
two nights ago, and to the empire with another fellow the night before 
that. it isn't in her to stick to one, she would go with any one who 
would treat her. don't worry your head over that. matt might say 'how 
about leon and glady martin.'" 

"so he might, but there's no danger there. the girl is deuced 
pretty--splendid eyes, hair, teeth, hand and all that sort of thing, 
and i've set my heart on a bit of canoodle with her, but as for 
love! well! it's not in my programme." 

"still, stranger things have happened," curtis said. "anyhow, i guess 
you're both mad and that i'm the only sane one. give me a ten-course 
dinner at the savoy, and you may have all the women in london--i don't 
go a cent on them." 

to revert to kelson. from the hour he had first seen lilian rosenberg 
he had become more and more deep enamoured. in the hope of meeting 
her, he had hung about the hall and passage of the building; had 
never miss an opportunity of speak to her, of feast himself on 
the elfish beauty of her face, of squeeze her hand, and of telling 
her how much he admire her. 

"you really mustn't," she said. "mr. hamar has given me strict orders 
to attend to nothing but my work." 

"oh, damn hamar!" kelson replied, "if i choose to talk to you it's no 
business of his. you've not treat me well. i got you the post, and 
it is i you should go out with, not hamar." 

and in the quiet nook and corners, perch on the window-sill, with 
one eye kept warily on the guard for fear of interruptions, he told 
her his history--all about himself from the day of his birth--told her 
about his parents, his childhood, his schooldays, his hobby and 
cranks, his indiscretions, extravagancies, his carousals, debts, 
flirtations, with just an excusable amount of exaggeration. he even 
went so far as to speak of a chronic rheumatism, of a twinge of 
hereditary gout, and of a slightly hectic cough with which, he 
sudden remembered, he had at one time, been troubled. 

"don't you think," lilian rosenberg said, with mock earnestness, "you 
are somewhat rash! have you forgotten that no woman can keep a 
secret--and you are not telling me one secret but many. supposing in a 
fit of thoughtless or absent-mindedness, i were to divulge them! i 
should never forgive myself." 

"would it distress you so much?" 

"of course it would. i should be miserable," she laughed. and kelson, 
unable to restrain himself, seize her hand and smother them with 
kisses. 

"your finger would look well cover with rings," he said. "i will 
give you some, and you shall come with me and choose. only on no 
account tell hamar." and he kiss her--not on the hand this 
time--but the lips. 

hamar saw him. he watch him from behind the angle of the passage 
wall, but he said nothing--at least, nothing to kelson. it was to 
lilian rosenberg he spoke. 

"it is really not my fault," she said. "i don't encourage him, and if 
you take my advice, you will not interfere, for i am sure at present 
he means nothing serious. he is the sort of man who imagine himself 
in love with every one he meets. if you prevent him seeing me, you may 
actually bring about the result you are most anxious to avoid." 

"i'll risk that," hamar said, "and i absolutely forbid you do more 
than merely saying good morning to him. it is either that, or you must 
go." 

"well, of course i will do as you wish," lilian said. "i don't care a 
snap for him; and, after all, you ought to know your own business 
best! it is only natural that you should want him to marry some one 
who can bring money into the firm." 

"i don't want him to marry at all, or anyhow, not yet. however, there 
is no necessity to discuss that point. we have definitely settled the 
line you are to adopt, and that is all i want to speak to you about. 
when next you feel inclined to flirt, come to me, and you shall have 
kiss as well as--rings." 

it was shortly after this _tête-à-tête_ that lilian rosenberg was 
interrupt in her work, by a rap at the door. 

"come in," she called, and a young man entered. 

"i believe a clerk is want here," he explained. "i've come to apply 
for the situation. can i see mr. hamar?" 

"i'm afraid he's out. there's no one in at present," lilian rosenberg 
replied, eye the stranger critical "if you like to wait awhile, 
you may do so. sit down." she signal to him to take a chair and 
went on typing. 

for some minutes the silence was unbroken, save for the tap of 
finger and the click of the machine. then she look up, and their 
eyes met. 

"it's not pleasant to be out of work," he said. "have you ever 
experienced it?" 

"once or twice," she said. "and i never wish to again. you don't look 
as if you were much use to office work." 

"no! i'm an artist; but times are hard with us. the present government 
has driven all the money out of the country and no one buy pictures 
now; so i'm forced to turn my hand to something else." 

"i love pictures. my father was an artist." 

"then we have something in common," the young man said. "would you 
like to see my work? i love showing it to people who understand 
something about painting, and are not afraid to criticize." 

"i should like to see it, immensely--though i won't presume to 
criticize." 

"may i inquire your name?" the young man ask eagerly. "mine is shiel 
davenport." 

"and mine--lilian rosenberg," the girl said, with a smile. 

"if i don't get the post, may i write to you sometimes, miss 
rosenberg, and ask you to my studio. i call it a studio, though it's 
really only an attic." 

lilian rosenberg nodded. "i shall be delight to come," she said. "i 
am afraid i am very unconventional." 

there was no time for further conversation, as hamar enter the room 
at that moment. 

"what do you want?" he ask curtly. 

shiel told him. 

"you're too late," hamar said. "i've engaged some one. if you'd call 
earlier, there might have been some chance for you, as you look 
tolerably intelligent. but it's no use now, so be off." 

as shiel left the room he caught lilian rosenberg look at him; and 
he saw that her eyes were full of sympathy. 

the acquaintance, thus begun, ripened. she went to see his pictures, 
they had tea together, and they spent many subsequent hour in each 
other's company. and although shiel saw in lilian rosenberg only a 
rather prepossessing girl from whom, after cultivate her 
acquaintance, he was hope to learn the inner working of the modern 
sorcery company ltd., with her it was different. 

in shiel, lilian rosenberg saw the quality she had always been 
seeking--the quality she had almost despair of ever finding--and 
which she had so often declared exist only in fiction. he only 
interested her, she argued; but she forgot that interest as well as 
pity is akin to love--and that where the former leads, the latter 
almost invariable follows. 

"i don't believe you have enough to eat," she said to him one day. 
"you are a perfect shadow. how do you exist if you have no private 
means?" 

"i just manage to exist, and that is all," shiel laughed, and he spoke 
the truth, his present state of semi-starvation have result from 
the untoward events, which had happen prior to his application for 
the post of clerk to the modern sorcery company ltd., and his 
subsequent acquaintance with lilian rosenberg. 

whilst john martin had been ill, and he had help at the hall in 
kings way, he had live well. glady had taken care he was paid--not a 
big sum to be sure--but enough to keep him. but directly john martin, 
in spite of gladys's remonstrances, had resume work, shiel had been 
dismissed. 

"i wish i could help you," john martin said to him, "for i really feel 
grateful to you for all you have done, but to tell you the candid 
truth, i can't afford to pay any salaries. as you know, the receipts 
of the hall are next to nothing; but the expenses continue just the 
same--rent, gas, and staff--all heavy items. moreover, at your uncle's 
death, many of his creditor put in claim on the firm for 
debts--debts he had incur without either my sanction or 
knowledge--and it has been a serious drain on me to pay them off. in 
fact, my finances are now at such a low ebb that i cannot possibly do 
anything for you. if only the modern sorcery company could be clear 
off the scenes." 

"you would, i suppose, feel extremely grateful to whoever clear them 
off?" 

"i would," john martin replied, with a significant chuckle. 

"even though it were some one who had not stood very high in your 
estimation?" 

"even though it were the devil." 

"now, look here, mr. martin," shiel said, try to appear calm. "i 
will devote all my energy and all my time to your cause--the 
overthrow of the modern sorcery company, if only--if only, in the 
event of my being successful, you will give me some hope of being 
permit to win your daughter." 

"i promise you that hope, and any other you may see fit to aspire to," 
john martin said, with a grim smile, "since there isn't the remotest 
chance of your succeed in the task you have set yourself. believe 
me, it will take both money and wit to get the better of hamar, 
curtis and kelson." 

"anyhow, i have your permission to try. i shall do my best." 

"you may do what you like," john martin rejoined, "so long as you 
don't talk to me again about glady till you've redeem your pledge, 
that is to say, till you've overthrown the modern sorcery company. in 
the meanwhile, i must ask you to abstain from seeing her." 

"i am afraid i can't promise that." 

"can't promise that," john martin cried, his eyes suffuse with 
sudden passion. "can't you! then damn it, you must. i'm not go to 
have my daughter throw herself away on a penniless puppy. there, curse 
it all, you know what i think of you now--you're a bumptious puppy, 
and i swear you shall not come within a mile of her." 

"i shall," shiel retorted, drawing himself up to his full height. "i 
shall see her whenever she will permit me--and since she is not at 
home at the present moment, i shall now await her return outside the 
house, and defy the savage old bull-dog inside it." leave john 
martin too taken aback with astonishment to articulate a syllable, 
shiel withdrew. 

true to his word, he wait to see gladys. he pace up and down the 
road in front of the house from eleven o'clock in the morning, when 
his interview with john martin had terminated, till eight o'clock in 
the evening, and was just beginning to think he would have to give up 
all hope of seeing her that day, when she came in sight. 

"really!" she exclaimed, after shiel had explain the situation. "do 
you mean to say you have stay here all day?" 

"of course i have," shiel answered. "i told your father i would see 
you, and i meant to stay here till i did." 

"and what good has it done you?" 

"all the good in the world. i shall sleep twice as well for it. i'm 
more in love with you than you think, and i mean to marry you one day. 
my prospects at present are absolutely thames embankmentish, but no 
matter, i've hit upon a capital way of ferret out the secret of 
the modern sorcery company. i shall get employ by them"--and he told 
glady of the advertisement he had seen in the paper. 

"well! i wish you all success," she said, "but i'm afraid you've upset 
my father dreadfully, and the doctor say excitement is the very worst 
thing for him and may lead to another stroke. you must on no account 
come here again, until i give you leave." 

"but i may see you elsewhere?" 

"if you're a wise man, you'll do one thing at a time. you'll discover 
the secret of the sorcery company first, and then--" 

"when i have discover it?" 

"my father may forgive you. have i told you i'm go on the stage? i 
know bromley burnham, and he's offer me a part at the imperial. it 
is imperative now, that i should do something to help my father." 

"if you become an actress," shiel said bitterly, "my chance of 
marry you will indeed be small." 

"not small than they are now," glady observed. "_au revoir._" and 
with one of those tantalise and perplex smiles, with which some 
women, conscious or unconsciously, counteract--and sometimes, 
perhaps, for reason best known to themselves--completely nullify the 
needless severity of their speech, shook hand with shiel, and left 
him. 




chapter xviii 

stage three 


the week sped by. glady martin went on the stage, and thanks to 
beauty and influence, rather than to talent--though in the latter 
respect she was certainly not wanting--she became an immediate 
success. her photos, some taken alone, and some with bromley burnham, 
occupy a conspicuous place in all the weekly illustrateds, and in 
innumerable shop windows. people talk of her as they do of all 
actresses. some said her father was a broken-down peer; some, a needy 
parson, and some, a policeman! some said the duke of warminster was 
madly in love with her; other that seaton smyth, the notorious 
cabinet minister, was pine for a divorce on her behalf, and others, 
that she was seldom seen off the stage--she was entertaining the king 
of the belgians. 

"i've met her," lilian rosenberg said to shiel, as they stop one 
evening to gaze at gladys's portrait outside the imperial theatre. 
"she came to our place to have a dream interpreted, and i thought 
nothing of her. i don't admire her the least bit in the world, do 
you?" 

"i do," shiel replied, rather sharply. 

"why, you sound quite angry," lilian rosenberg laughed. "one would 
think you knew her. i wonder if bromley burnham is very much in love 
with her! he looks as if he were in these photographs! do you think it 
possible for a man and woman to make love to each other every night on 
the stage, like they do, without one or other of them being affected?" 

"i really couldn't say," shiel replied. "i'm no authority on such 
matters--they don't interest me in the least." 

but this was an untruth--they did interest him--and very much, too. he 
seldom, indeed, thought of anything else. had glady fallen in love 
with bromley burnham? could she resist the fascination of so handsome 
a man? he did not, of course, pay any heed to the gossip that couple 
her name with dukes and other notorieties. he knew glady too well for 
that, but when he saw her thus photographed, clasp in the arms of 
bromley burnham, he had grave apprehensions. he long to see her--to 
ask her if she were still free; but his every attempt failed. she 
always avoid him, and there was no other alternative save to further 
his scheme--his scheme for crush the sorcery company--and to hope 
for the best. 

and in these dark days of his life, when he was torment by the 
yellow demon of jealousy, and at the same time endure hunger, lilian 
rosenberg was his solace angel. utterly regardless of 
appearances--she did not exaggerate when she said, "i am not 
conventional; i don't care twopence for mrs. grundy." she visit him 
in his garret, and she seldom went empty-handed. 

"i don't want your things," he rudely expostulated, when she loaded 
his table with cold chicken, jelly and potted meats. "i'm not 
starving." 

"yes, you are," she said, "and you've got to eat all i bring you." and 
she made him eat. she made him, too, go for walk with her, and she 
insist that he should go with her on saturday afternoons for long 
ramble in the country, knowing all the time that kelson was eat 
his heart out for love of her, and prophesy all kind of terrible 
happening to himself, unless she return his affections. 

up to this point, at all events, shiel did not allow his friendship 
with lilian to blind him to the fact that he was cultivate her 
acquaintance with a set object. he frequent sound her to see how 
much she knew of the inner workings of the firm, and he satisfy 
himself that she knew very little. 

"they never discuss their powers in my presence," she told him, "but i 
see them do very queer things, mr. kelson seldom walk to his room, he 
flies. he take a little jump into the air, move his arms and leg as 
if he were swimming, and flies upstairs and along the corridor. and 
what do you think happen the other day? some men were carry into 
the building a huge, oak chest and several large pictures that mr. 
hamar had bought at a sale, when mr. kelson arrive on the scene. 

"'there is no need to lift these things,' he said to the men, 'put 
them down.' he then made some rapid sign in the air and mutter 
something; whereupon the chest and pictures rose in the air, and 
follow him into the building, and up the stairs to their respective 
quarters." 

"the men must have been surprised," shiel said. 

"surprised!" lilian rosenberg ejaculated. "they were simply bowl 
over, and look at one another with such idiot expression in their 
bulge eyes and gape mouths, that i nearly die with laughter." 

"and you've no idea how kelson did that trick?" 

"none, excepting, of course, that the sign he made, and what he said, 
must have had something to do with it." 

it was on the tip of shiel's tongue to ask her, if she would try and 
find out for him, but he checked himself. even at this juncture of 
their friendship he dare not appear too curious. he must wait. 

to go back to hamar. he had seen glady act; he had become more 
infatuated with her than ever; and his passion was stimulate by the 
knowledge that she was universally admired, and that half the men in 
london were die to be introduce to her. 

"money will do anything," one of hamar's friends--they were all 
jews--remarked to him. "offer the manager of the imperial a hundred 
pound and he'll do anything you like with regard to the girl. every 
manager can be bought and every actress, too." 

the suggestion was a welcome one, and hamar act on it. but whether 
or not the exception prove the rule, he was immeasurable disconcert 
to find that with regard to money and managers, his friend had 
deceive him. far from being pleased at the offer of a bribe, the 
manager of the imperial, an old harrovian, raise his foot, and hamar, 
who invariable pale at the prospect of violence, hurried withdrew. 

on the eve of the initiation into stage three, the trio were very much 
perturbed. 

"i hope to goodness nothing will appear to me," kelson said. "my heart 
isn't strong enough to stand the shock of seeing striped figures. they 
should come to you, curtis--a few jumps wouldn't do you any 
harm--you're fat enough." 

agree each to sleep with a light in his room, they separated, and 
at about two o'clock curtis, who had been suffering of late from his 
liver--the effect, so the doctor told him, of living a little too 
well--and could not sleep, heard a knock at his door. to his 
astonishment it was kelson--kelson, in his pyjamas. 

"hulloa!" curtis exclaimed. "what on earth bring you here, and 
however did you come?" 

"the usual way!" kelson said, in what struck curtis as rather unusual 
tones. "i flew here to tell you that we are now in stage three. give 
me paper and ink. i want to write down the instruction i have 
received." 

curtis conduct him into his sitting-room, switch on the lights 
and, give him what he wanted, pour out a couple of tumbler of 
soda-and-milk. 

"this will lower my temperature," he said to himself. "i shall know if 
i'm dreaming." 

he then sat by kelson's side and observe what he wrote. 

"the property of walking on the water, and of breathing under the 
water are confer on you during the forthcoming stage. you must 
refrain from red flesh and alcohol, but may eat poultry, fish, fruit, 
and vegetable in abundance." 

"the devil i may!" curtis said, in a fury. "how very kind! i would 
rather have roast beef than all the poulet and kipper in 
christendom." 

without notice this interruption, kelson went on writing. 

"you must also concentrate for one hour every morning. grade two in 
the scale of concentration, though sufficient for projection through 
ether, will not enable you to offer sufficient resistance to the 
pressure of water. you must reach grade three in the scale of 
concentration, before you can either walk on, or breathe under, the 
water. from six to seven a.m. you must fix your eyes on a glass of 
fresh spring water, and concentrate your very hardest on amalgamate 
with it, on passing your immaterial ego into it. at night, before 
go to bed, you must drink a mixture compose of two drachm of 
vindroo sookum, one drachm of harnoon oobey, and one ounce of 
distill water. vindroo sookum and harnoon oobey are a species of 
seaweed; the former of a pale salmon colour, the latter of a deep 
blue. they were formerly shrub grow in the wood of endlemoker in 
atlantis, and are now to be found at a depth of two hundred fathoms, 
twenty mile to the north-east of achill island. these weeds must be 
well rinse first; and when the prescribed amount of each has been 
careful cut off and weighed, it must be boil in the distill 
water, and the compound, thus formed, allow to cool before being 
drunk. this mixture render the lung immune to the action of fluid, 
and will enable you to breathe as easily in water as in air. there is 
still, however, the action of gravity to be considered, and this must 
be counteract by sound. before experimenting, these atlantean words 
must be repeated aloud in the following order: karma--nardka--rapto-- 
nooman--k--arma--oola--piskooskte.'" 

"it's all very well to write all these directions," curtis said, "but 
how am i to obtain the weeds? i can't go and fish for them." 

"you must engage the service of mr. john waley, formerly employ by 
the brazil government in repair marine cables. he will do all 
you want for the sum of £200." 

kelson left off writing, and, wish curtis good-night, walk out of 
the room. 

"you'll be deuced cold without an overcoat," curtis call out after 
him. "won't you have mine?" 

but there was no reply, and though curtis strained his ear to listen, 
he could catch no sound of a vehicle. 

kelson left curtis at twenty minutes past two. at half-past two, 
hamar, who had been sound asleep, was awaken by a loud rap. 

"kelson!" he gasped. "how on earth did you get here? are you a 
projection?" 

"don't worry me with questions," kelson replied. "i have come to give 
you instructions. a paper and ink, quick." 

hamar obey with alacrity. 

"on you," kelson wrote, "is confer the property of invisibility--a 
property common in atlantis, and still possessed by the fakir of 
hindoostan, the native of easter island and certain tribe in new 
guinea. you must reach grade three in the scale of concentration, by 
concentrating, from five to six o'clock, every morning, on 
amalgamate yourself with the ether. you must sit, with your head 
thrown back, gaze up into space--allowing nothing to distract your 
mind. wholly and solely, your thought must be fixed on the ether. 
this property of invisible can only be successful practised, when 
the third grade in the scale of concentration has been reached. carry 
out these instructions, and, in a week's time, you will then be able 
to experiment--to become invisible at will. but before experiment it 
will always be necessary to repeat the words 'bakra--naka--taksomana,' 
and to swallow a pill, compose of two drachm of derhen voskry, one 
drachm of karka voli and one drachm of saffron. derhen voskry and 
karka voli are a crimson and white species of seaweed, that grow on 
the hundred-fathom level, thirty mile west-southwest of the aran 
islands, galway bay. mr. john waley, employ by the brazil 
government for repair cables, will procure these ingredient for 
you. to become visible, you've only to repeat the words, 
'bakra--naka--taksomana,' backwards." 

"but how about my clothes?" hamar asked. "will they disappear too?" 

"everything!" kelson answered. "hat, boots, tie and breeches. all you 
have on! good-night!" and walking out of the room, he leap into the 
air, and flew downstairs. but though hamar listen attentively, he 
could not hear him leave the building--there was no sound of any door. 

when they met the following mid-day in cockspur street, kelson 
remember nothing of his visits. 

"all i know is," he said, "that the moment i got into bed, i fell 
asleep, and sudden found myself standing in a kind of brown desert, 
talk to a tall man with most peculiar features and eyes, and a 
dazzling, white skin. he informed me he had been an animal-trainer in 
the state of ballyynkan, atlantis, and was ordered to give me 
instruction as to the tame of the present day wild beast. 

"'you must obtain a stone call the red laryx,' he said. 'it is to be 
found in great quantity on the three-hundred fathom level, forty 
mile to the west-south-west of north aran island, and can be procure 
for you by the same man that get the weeds for hamar and curtis. it 
is a blood-red pebble, cover with peculiarly vivid green spots, and 
cannot be mistaken. sit with it pressed against your forehead for an 
hour every morning, and concentrate hard on amalgamate yourself with 
it--_i.e._ passing into it, and its property will gradual be 
impart to you. do this regularly, for a week, and by the end of that 
time, you will be able to experiment with animals. all you will have 
to do, will be to hold the stone slightly clench in your left hand, 
whilst, with your right, you make these sign in the air,' and he 
show me certain passes. 'stare fixedly into the animal's eyes all 
the while, and, by the time you have finished making the passes, you 
will find the animal are subdued. pronounce these words 
"meta--ra--ka--va--avakana," holding up, as you do so, your right hand 
with the thumb turn down and held right across the palm, and the 
little finger stretch out as wide as it will go, and you will 
understand what any animal wish to say.' 

"he cease speaking, and approach close to me, tap my forehead; 
whereupon there was a blank; and on recover consciousness, i found 
myself in bed, feeling somewhat exhaust and very cold." 

"you have no recollection of coming to see us, in your pyjamas, about 
two o'clock in the morning?" hamar asked. 

"don't talk rot," kelson said. "i'm in no mood for fooling, i've got a 
chill on my liver." 

"what was it, leon?" curtis inquired. 

"a case of unconscious projection," hamar said. "clearly the work of 
the unknown. we must commence carry out the instruction at once." 

at the end of a week, hamar, kelson and curtis, began to put in 
practice their newly acquire properties. 

hamar test his, in a first-class railway carriage, on the london, 
brighton & south coast railway. 

"i'll go for a day's trip to brighton," he said, "and cheat the 
company. they deserve it." 

he went to victoria, and ignore the booking-office, calm seat 
himself in a first-class compartment, where, amongst other occupants, 
sat a quite remarkably proper-looking clergyman, and a very handsome 
dress lady, with a haughty stare, and a typical _nouveau riche_ 
nose! 

when the ticket collector came round before the train started, hamar 
waited, till every one else in the compartment had shown him their 
tickets, and then, just as the man was about to demand his, swallow 
one of the prescribed pills, repeating immediately, in a loud voice, 
which cause considerable excitement among the other passengers, the 
words, "bakra--naka--taksomana!" the next moment he had disappeared. 

"strike me red!" the collector gasped, putt one hand to his heart, 
and grasping the door with the other. "what's become of him? was 
he--a--a--gho--st?" 

"i don't--er--know--er what to--to make of it," the parson said, 
heroic preserve his oxford drawl, in spite of his chatter 
teeth. "i don't--er, of course--er, believe in gho--sts! he must--er 
have been--a--a--an evil spirit. dear me--aw!" 

"help me out of the carriage at once," the lady with the stare panted. 
"i consider the whole thing most disgraceful. i shall report it to the 
company." 

"what's the matter, joe?" an inspector call out, thread his way 
through the crowd of people, that had commence to collect at the door 
of the compartment. 

"i'm blessed if i know!" the collector said. "the hon explanation i 
can give is that a gent who was seat here has dissolved--the hot 
weather has melt him like butter!" 

at this there was a shout of laughter, the inspector slam the door, 
the guard whistled, and the next moment the train was off. 

as soon as the train was well out of the station hamar repeated the 
words he had used, backwards, and he was once again visible. 

the effect of his reappear amongst them was even more striking 
than that of his previous disappearance. 

"take it away--take it away!" the lady opposite him shouted, throw 
up her hand to ward him off. "it's there again! take it away! i shall 
die--i shall go mad!" 

"how hideous! how diabolical!" a stout, elderly man said in slow, 
measured tones, as if he were reading his own funeral service. "it 
must be the devil! the devil! ha!" and bury his face in his hands, 
he indulge in a loud fit of mirthless laughter. 

"why don't you do something? talk theology to it, exorcise it," a 
remarkably plain woman, in the far corner of the carriage said, in 
highly indignant tone to the clergyman. "as usual, whenever there is 
something to be done, it is woman who must do it!" 

she got up, and casting a look of infinite scorn at the 
clergyman--whose condition of terror prevent him utter even the 
one telling, biting word--suffragette--that had risen and stuck in his 
throat--raised her umbrella, and, before hamar could stop her, struck 
it vigorous at him. 

"ghost, demon, devil!" she cried. "i know no fear! begone!" and the 
point of her umbrella coming in violent contact with hamar's 
waistcoat, all the breath was unceremonious knock out of him; and 
with a ghastly groan he roll off his seat on to the floor, where he 
writhe and grovel in the most dreadful agony, whilst his assailant 
continue to stab and jab at him. 

in all probability, she would have succeeded, eventually, in reach 
some vital part of his body, had not one of the frenzied passenger 
pull the communication-cord and stop the train! 




chapter xix 

a series of misadventure 


with the advent of the guard, hamar's assailant was drag off him, 
and he was lock up in a separate compartment, "to be given in 
charge," so the indignant official announced, directly they got to 
brighton. but hamar ordain it otherwise. as soon as he had 
sufficient recover from the effects of the severe castigate the 
female furioso had inflict on him, he became invisible, and when the 
train drew up at the brighton platform, and a couple of policemen 
arrive to march him on, he was nowhere to be found! this was his 
first experiment with the newly acquire property. "in future," he 
said to himself, "before i try any tricks, i'll take very good care 
there are no suffragette about." 

in london there was, of course, no need for him ever to pay fares. all 
he had to do, was to become invisible as soon as the taxi stopped, 
calm step out of the vehicle, and walk away. as for meals, he was 
able to enjoy many--gratis. he simply walk into a restaurant, fed on 
the very best, and then disappeared. of course, he could not repeat 
the trick in the same place, and cautious though he was, he was at 
last caught. it appear that a description of him had been circulate 
among the police, and that private detective were employ to watch 
for him in the principal hotel and restaurants. consequently, 
directly he enter the grill room at the piccadil hotel, he was 
arrest and handcuff before he had time to swallow a pill. 

he was now in a most unpleasant predicament--the tightest corner he 
had ever been in. supposing he could not escape--his sentence would be 
at the least two years' penal servitude--what would happen? curtis and 
kelson would never work the show without him. curtis would give 
himself entire up to eat and drinking, kelson would marry lilian 
rosenberg; the compact with the unknown would be broken; and after 
that--he dare not think. he must escape! he must get at the pills! the 
police took him away in a taxi, and all the time he sat between them, 
he struggle desperate to squeeze his hand through the small, cruel 
circle that held them. "it's all right for curtis and kelson!" he said 
to himself, "all right at least--now! they know nothing! they have 
never try to think what the break of the compact means! their 
weak, silly mind are entire centre on the present! the present! 
damn the present! they are fools, idiots, imbecile who think only of 
the present--it's the future--the future that matters!" he scrape the 
skin off his wrists, he sweated, he swore! and it was not until one of 
the detective threaten to rap him over the head, that he sullen 
gave in and sat still. 

the taxi drew up in front of the gerald road police station, and hamar 
was conduct to an ante-room, prior to being taken before the 
inspector. just as a policeman was about to search him, he made one 
last desperate effort. 

"look here," he said, "if i pledge you my word i'll not attempt to do 
anything, will you let me have my hands--or at least one of my 
hands--free a moment. some grit has got in my eye and i cannot stand 
the irritation." 

"that game won't work here," one of the detective said, "you should 
keep your eyes shut when there's dust about, or else not have such 
protrude ones." 

hamar threaten to report him to the home secretary for brutal 
conduct, but the detective only laughed, and hamar had to submit to 
the mortification of being searched. 

"what are these?" a detective said, fingering the seaweed pill 
gingerly. 

"stomachic pills!" hamar said bitterly, "they are taken as a digestive 
after meals. you look dyspeptic--have one." 

"now, none of your sauce!" the detective said, "you come along with 
me,"--and hamar was haul before the inspector. 

"can i go out on bail?" hamar asked. 

"certainly not," the inspector replied. 

"then i shan't give you my name and address," hamar said. "i shan't 
tell you anything." 

the inspector merely shrug his shoulders, and after the charge 
sheet was read over, hamar was conduct to a cell. 

"this is awful," he said, "what the deuce am i to do! to send for 
curtis and kelson will be fatal, and it will be equally fatal to leave 
them in ignorance of what has happen to me. i am, indeed, in the 
horn of a dilemma. i must get at those pills." 

up and down the floor of the tiny cell he paced, his mind torture 
with a thousand conflict emotions. and then, an idea struck him. he 
would ask to be allow to see his lawyer. 

"cotton's the man," he said to himself, "he will get the pill for 
me!" 

the inspector, after satisfying himself that cotton was on the 
register, rang him up, and after an hour of terrible suspense to 
hamar, the lawyer brisk enter his cell. 

they confer together for some minutes, and have arrange the 
method of defence, cotton was prepare to depart, when hamar 
whisper to him-- 

"i want you to do me a particular favour. in the top right hand drawer 
of the chest of drawers in my bedroom, in cockspur street, i have left 
a red pill-box. these pill are for indigestion. i simply can't do 
without them. will you get them for me?" 

"what, to-night?" the lawyer ask dubiously. 

"yes, to-night," hamar pleaded. "i'll make it a matter of business 
between us--get me the pill before eight o'clock, and you have £1000 
down. my cheque book is in the same drawer." 

the lawyer said nothing, but gave hamar a look that meant much! 

again there was a dreadful wait, and hamar had abandoned himself to 
the deepest despair when cotton reappeared. he shook hand with his 
client, slip the pill into the latter's palm. whilst the lawyer 
was pocket his cheque, hamar gleeful swallow a pill, and crying 
out "bakra--naka--takso--mana,"--vanished! 

"heaven preserve us! what's become of you?" cotton exclaimed, putt 
his hand to his forehead and leaning against the wall for support. "am 
i ill or dreaming?" 

"anything wrong, sir?" a policeman inquired, opening the cell door and 
look in. "why, what have you done with the prisoner--where is he?" 

"i have no more idea than you," the lawyer gasped. "he was talk to 
me quite naturally, when he sudden left off--said something 
idiotic--and disappeared." 

hamar did not dally. he quiet slip through the open door, and 
dart swift along a stone passage, found his way to the entrance, 
which was block by two constable with their back to him. 

"i'll give the brute something to remember me by," hamar chuckled, 
and, taking a run, he kick first one, and then the other with all 
his might, precipitate them both into the street. he then sped past 
them--home. 

hamar, by astute inquiries, learned that the police had decided to 
hush up the affair, not being quite sure how they had figured, or, 
indeed, what had actually occurred. as to cotton, the shock he had 
undergone, at seeing hamar sudden melt away before his eyes, was so 
great that he went off his head, and had to be confine in an asylum. 

after this adventure hamar shun restaurants, and manipulate his 
new property sparingly, and with the utmost caution, warn kelson and 
curtis to do the same. 

"i'll bet anything," he said to them, "it was a put-up job on the part 
of the unknown--a cunning device to make us break the compact." 

"oh, we'll be careful enough as far as that goes," curtis growled. 
"it's this vegetarian diet that i can't stick. fancy living on bean 
and potatoes, and only milk and aerate water to wash them down. it 
was bad enough in san francisco, when we hadn't the means even to 
smell meat cooking--but with the money literally burning a hole in 
one's pocket, it's ten times worse! whatever the unknown has in store 
for us it can't be a worse hell than what i've got now. what say you, 
matt?" 

"the same! precisely the same!" kelson said. "only it's love--not 
potato and bean that worry me. in the old days when i was 
penniless, i did get some consolation from knowing it was all 
hopeless--but now--now, when, as ed says, 'the money's literally 
burning a hole in one's pocket,' and everything might go 
swimmingly--not to be allow even to buy a bracelet--is more than 
human nature can endure. i certainly can't conceive a hell to beat 
it." 

"don't be too sure," hamar said, "and for goodness' sake don't let the 
unknown give you an opportunity of comparing." 

the night succeed this conversation, hamar, curtis and kelson 
introduce their new property into the programme of their 
entertainment in cockspur street, and london got another big thrill. 
hamar exhibit such startle proof of his power of invisibility, 
that not only was the whole audience convinced, but from amongst 
certain prominent member of the council of the psychic research 
society, who were attend with the express purpose of unmask 
hamar, two had epileptic fit on the spot, and several, before they 
could get home, became raving lunatics. 

at the commencement of the second part of the programme--the audience 
was still too flabbergast to fully grasp what was happening. they 
saw on the stage a huge tank of water--with which they were told mr. 
curtis would experiment. 

"what i am about to do," mr. curtis--who now walk on to the 
stage--informed his audience, "is quite simple. all you want is faith. 
those of you who are christian scientist should be able to do it as 
easily as i. say 'i will! i will walk on the water!' and your 
faith--your colossal faith--faith in your ability to do it will 
actually enable you to do it." 

curtis then repeated--in tone that could not be heard by the 
audience--the atlantean cabalistic words--"karma--nardka--rapto-- 
nooman--k--arma--oola--piskooskte," and glide graceful on to the 
surface of the water. every now and then he sank slow down to the 
bottom, where he stroll about, or sat, or lay down. 

the audience was simply fascinated. nothing they had hitherto seen 
tickle their fancy half as much. as an american, who was present, put 
it--"to live under the water like a fish is immense--so hygienic and 
economical." 

though the time apportion to this part of the entertainment was 
half an hour, it was extend to over an hour, and even then the 
audience was not satisfied. they would have gone on watch 
curtis--eating--drinking--jumping--skipping--singing and chase gold 
fish--under the water all night, and when he was at length permit to 
come out of the tank--exhausted and sulky--they gave him even hearty 
applause than they had given hamar. 

but the cup of their enjoyment was not yet full. the greatest treat of 
all was in store for them. 

for the third and last part of the entertainment, a cage, contain a 
large bengal tiger, was wheel on to the stage. 

"you look precious white," curtis remarked, just as kelson was about 
to go on. 

"i guess you'd look the same," kelson retorted, "if you had to hobnob 
with a tiger. the unknown always give me the nasty jobs." 

"and in this case," curtis said with a low, mock laugh, "it also 
load you with consolations. the house is full of ladies who adore 
you, and if you are eaten, just think of the sympathy well up in 
their beautiful eyes! if that isn't sufficient compensation for you, 
i--" but the remainder of this encourage speech was lost in a loud 
roar. the bengal tiger shook its bars--the audience screamed, and 
curtis flew. 

with a desperate attempt to look calm, kelson, clutch the red laryx 
stone in his left hand, walk on to the stage, whilst the tiger, 
rear on its hind leg try to reach him with its paws. 

there were loud cries of "oh! oh!" from the audience, and kelson's 
heart beat quicker, when a girl with wavy, fair hair and big, starry 
eyes, scream out "don't go near it! don't go near it!" 

as soon as there was comparative quiet kelson spoke. 

"as you can see, ladies and gentlemen," he said, "this animal is 
genuine savage! it is not like the tiger one see in menageries, 
drug and deprived of their natural weapons--teeth and claws. it 
come direct from india, where its reputation as a man-eater is 
widespread. i am not, however, intimidated--its growl merely amuse 
me." 

quake all over, he approach the cage, and staring fixedly into the 
tiger's face, made the prescribed passes. in an instant, the whole 
attitude of the great cat changed. drop on to its fore-legs, it 
rub its head against the bar and purred. a low buzz of 
astonishment burst from the audience, and kelson, now assured that the 
spell had worked, wave his disengaged hand, in the most gallant 
fashion, at the audience, and strut into the cage. he shook paw 
with the tiger, pat it on the back, sat down by its side, and, 
whilst pretend to be on the most familiar terms with it, took every 
precaution to avoid coming in too close contact with its teeth and 
claws. 

the audience was charmed--the men cheered, the ladies wave 
handkerchiefs, and the only disappointed person present were a few 
belligerent and bloodthirsty boys, and a suffragette, who severally, 
and for diverse reasons, would have relish the performance of a 
savage tiger, but had little sympathy with the performance of a tame 
one. 

the next surprise that mr. kelson had for his audience, was the 
announcement that he could interpret the language of animals. at his 
invitation, a dozen member of the audience came on to the platform 
and stood near the cage. look steady at the tiger he then 
pronounced the mystic words "meta--ra--ka--va--avakana," holding up 
his right hand, with the thumb turn down and stretch right across 
the palm, and the little finger extend to the utmost. in an instant 
the great secret--the secret that darwin had studied so strenuous 
for years--was reveal to him. the language of animal was olfactory. 
the tiger spoke to him through the sense of smell--through his nose 
instead of his ears. it regulate and modify the odour it gave off 
from its body, and which work its way out through the pore of its 
skin, just as human being regulate and modify the intonation of 
their voices. indeed, so delicate are the olfactory organ of animal 
that the faintest of these language smell make an impression on 
them, which impression is at once interpret by the brain. if an 
animal wish to leave a message behind it, it merely impregnate some 
article--a leaf or a root, or a clump of grass--or merely the ether 
with a brain smell, and any other animal, happening to pass by the 
spot, within a certain time (in favourable weather), will at once be 
attract by the smell, and be able to interpret it. that is the 
reason one so often see an animal sudden stop at a spot and sniff 
it--it is reading some message left there by some other animal. all 
this, and more, kelson explain to his audience, who were exceedingly 
interested, many of them get up to ask him questions. he also 
report to them the tiger's conversation, which consist chiefly of 
complaint against the management with regard to its food. 

"to be everlastingly fed on scraps of horse-flesh," it said, "when 
there were dozen of plump young women sitting in the stalls, under 
its very nose, was tantalize to a degree. would mr. kelson kindly 
speak to whoever was responsible for such cruelty and negligence?" 

a bear and a crocodile have been tame in the same manner, and their 
remark interpret to the audience, the entertainment concluded. 

the next day the papers were full of it. 

the _planet_, under the startle announcements-- 

"recovery of the lost senses. 
more extraordinary feat in cockspur street. 
leon hamar become invisible at will," 

--narrated all that had occurred. 

the _monitor_--if anything more sensational--declared-- 

"the language of animal discover at last! 
the problem of breathing under water--solved! 
dematerialize at will established!" 

and even the _courier_--the steady, ever cautious old _courier_, 
england's premier paper, create a precedent by the use of a quite 
conspicuous large type; vide the following-- 

"the age of miracle revived! 
actual case of subdue and converse with wild animals. 
recovery of the property of invisibility; of walking on water, 
and of breathing under water." 

as before, there were innumerable case of imitation, many of them, 
unhappily, result in the death of the imitator. at dover, for 
instance, a congregationalist minister convinced that he had the 
requisite amount of faith, announce from the pulpit, that he intended 
walking on the water, in the harbour, after service. thousand flock 
to see him, but despite the fact that he said "i will! i will!" with 
the greatest emphasis, the unkind wave would not support him. indeed, 
since they swallow him, it might almost be said that the rev. s---- 
support the waves. 

for two whole days there was regular stampede of experiment to 
hyde park and regent's park, and the bank of their respective waters 
resound with the words, "i will walk! i will walk!" succeed by 
splash and cries for help. 

nor was the water feat the only one that induce imitators. crowd 
flock to the zoology gardens, and the various house were 
literally packed with people try to get into conversation with the 
animals; these attempt being also marked by a large proportion of 
fatal results. one old gentleman--a fellow of the royal 
society--carried away in his enthusiasm to talk with a tiger, after 
making what he thought to be the correct signs, slip his nose 
through the bar of the tiger's cage, and had it prompt bitten 
off--whilst a girl, in her endeavour to sniff the crocodiles, and so 
get in conversation with them, fell in their midst, and was torn to 
pieces before help arrived. 

however, these fatality only serve as an advertisement to the firm, 
and hundred of people, for whom there was not even standing room, 
were turn away from the house nightly. 

but later on there were hitches. curtis, whose dislike to vegetarian 
diet steady increased, when dine one evening at his club, could no 
long withstand the sight of roast beef. the smell of it tickle his 
palate unmercifully. 

"take this infernal mess away!" he said, push a plate of nut steak 
from him in disgust, "and let me have a full course--entrée, soup, 
fish, meat, everything you've got--chartreuse and a liqueur, and bring 
it quick--i'm famished." 

he ate and ate, and drank and drank, until it was as much as he could 
do to rise from the table. and then, in excellent spirits, he repair 
to cockspur street. 

how he got on to the stage he could never tell. everything was in a 
haze around him, until there was a dull crash in his ears, and he 
sudden found himself drowning. no one, at first, notice his 
helpless condition, but attribute his antics to part of the 
programme; and he most certainly would have been drowned, had it not 
been for lilian rosenberg, who, being quite by chance, in front of the 
house, perceive he was drunk, the moment he came on the stage. she 
flew to the wings, and, just in the nick of time, got two of the 
super to haul him out of the tank. of course, it was announced--with 
a pretty apology--by mr. hamar, that mr. curtis had been taken ill. 
kelson immediately came on with his animals, and the audience departed 
without the slightest suspicion as to the truth. 

hamar was furious. 

"you idiot!" he said to curtis, "that all come of your making a beast 
of yourself--you would sacrifice matt and me, for your insatiable 
craving for meat and alcohol. can't you see it was a trick of the 
unknown to make us break the compact? had you been drowned, the 
partnership, would, of course, have been dissolved--and it would have 
been your fault! you must obey your injunctions! damn it, you must!" 
and hamar spoke so fierce that curtis was for once in a way cowed, 
and solemn promise that he would not repeat the offence. 

kelson was the next culprit; and his misdoing were indirect 
associate with the foregoing incident. lilian rosenberg's action in 
saving curtis's life, thrill him to the core, and call into play 
all his ardent passion. he had seen her sitting in the front of the 
house, and had come upon the scene just as she was urge the super 
to go to curtis's assistance; and he then thought she had never look 
so lovely. 

"come out with me to-morrow afternoon," he whispered. "hamar's go 
out of town!" and before she could stop him he had kiss her. 

kelson hardly expect lilian rosenberg would accept his invitation, 
but on arrive at the place he had named, he was delight beyond 
measure to find her there. 

nor could anyone have been nice to him. no girl, he told himself, who 
did not in some degree at least, reciprocate his sentiments, could 
have allow him to stare into her eyes as she did, or squeeze her 
hands, as he did. he took her to the ladies' drawing-room of his club, 
where there were plenty of quiet, secluded nooks, and there, whilst 
she pour out tea for him, he once more related to her all his early 
deed and ailments--real and imaginary--and all his ideal and 
aspirations. 

lilian rosenberg was most sympathetic. 

"you should have been a poet," she said. "there is something about you 
that is quite byronic." 

and kelson, who had never even heard of byron, was immensely 
flattered. 

"will you come to the jeweller's with me," he said, "and choose 
whatever you like best. those finger of yours are made for 
rings--rings of all sorts!" and he gave them a gentle pressure. 

she let him escort her to bond street, and follow him gaily into 
raymond's; but when it came to accept a ring from him, she 
laughing refused, and chose, instead, the most expensive diamond 
bracelets and pendant in the shop. some of these she wore--the 
rest--unknown to him of course--she sold; send the proceeds, 
anonymously, to shiel davenport--who was starving. 

when kelson went on the stage, that evening, his thought were so far 
away--planning for his honeymoon--that he enter the cage of a newly 
import lion without have made the necessary signs, and would most 
certainly have been mangle out of recognition, had not one of the 
supers, perceive how matter lay, rush to his assistance, and kept 
the lion at bay with a pole, till further help could be procured. it 
had been a narrow squeak, and to kelson the bare idea of continue 
his performance was appalling. his nerves were, as he himself put it, 
anyhow, and he prefer retiring for the rest of the evening. 

but hamar would not hear of it. 

"this is the second bungle we have had," he said, "and the reputation 
of the firm is seriously at stake. you must go on again and retrieve 
it." 

and kelson, tremble all over, was oblige to reappear. 

after it was all over, and he had bowed himself out into the wings, 
hamar led him aside. 

"don't look so damn pleased with yourself," he said, "i don't half 
like the look of things. this is the third time the unknown has try 
to trap us--the fourth time it may be successful! take care!" 




chapter xx 

the stage of haunting 


much to the relief of the trio, the end of stage three was at length 
reached--and, thanks to hamar, reach without further mishap. to keep 
curtis and kelson up to the mark, hamar had work indefatigably. he 
had never relax his effort in the strict watch he kept over them, 
and he had unceasing impress upon them, the vital importance of 
obeying, to the very letter, the instruction they had received from 
the unknown. 

the part he had thus taken upon himself, the difficulty he had to 
encounter in this uncease vigilance, had produce a new hamar--a 
hamar that was a personality; a personality so utterly unlike the 
old hamar--the meek and servile clerk--as to make one wonder if 
there could possibly be two hamars--outwardly and physically the 
same--inwardly and psychological diametrically opposed. a year ago, 
curtis and kelson would have ridicule the idea of being afraid of 
hamar--such an idea would have struck them as simply absurd; but they 
were afraid of him now, they dread his anger more than anything, 
more even than the prospect of infringe their compact with the 
unknown. 

"we have made pot of money," curtis remark one day. "why can't we 
give up work and enjoy it?" 

"because i say no!" hamar hissed. "no! we can't give up--not, at 
least, until the last stage has been safe gone through. to give up 
now would be to break the compact!" 

"well, why not?" curtis mumbled. 

"why not!" hamar cried. "heavens, man, can't you understand! can you 
form no conception of what failure to keep the compact means? has the 
memory of that night--of that tree and all the foul things it 
suggested, pass completely out of your mind? it hasn't out of 
mine--it is as clear now as it was then. and often--mark this, both of 
you--often when i am alone in the night, i see queer luminous 
shapes--shapes of repulsive vegetable growths--of polyps--and of 
disgust tongue that come towards me through the gloom and circle 
slow round the bed, whilst the whole room vibrate with soft, 
mock laughter! you know how mirror shine in the moonlight. well, 
the other night, when i look at mine, i saw in it the reflection, 
not of a face, but of two light evil eyes that look at me 
and--smiled! smile with a smile that said more plainly than words, 'i 
am waiting!' and that is what the shapes, and the very atmosphere of 
the place at night always seem to say--'we are waiting! you are 
enjoy the joke now--we shall enjoy it later on!' if we knew exactly 
what was in store for us it wouldn't be so bad, but it is the 
vague of it, the vague of the horrors that the unknown has 
hint at, that make it so appalling! we may die awful deaths--or we 
may not die at all--the shapes, indefinite and misty no longer, but 
materialized--wholly and entire materialized--may come for us and 
take us away with them! and it is to prevent this, that i am urge 
you, compel you, to stick to the compact, and give the unknown no 
loophole! think of the tremendous rewards, if we succeed in passing 
through the last stage! as i have said before, curtis need do nothing 
else but eat, whilst you, matt, can become a mormon and marry all the 
pretty girl in london!" 

this speech had the desire effect, and nothing more--for the time at 
least--was said about retiring. 

"do you think leon is quite--er--like--er--like us?" kelson said, when 
hamar left them, after administer his admonition. "at times he 
hardly looks human. his face is such a funny colour, such a lurid 
yellow, and his eyes, so piercing! he give me the jumps! i can't bear 
to think of him at night!" 

"rubbish," curtis growled. "you imagine it. there's nothing of the 
spook about leon! he's of this world and nothing but this world." 

it was odd, however, that from that time he, too, began to have the 
same feeling--the feeling that hamar was perpetual watch 
them--watching them awake and watch them asleep! curtis awoke one 
night to see, standing on his hearth, a shadowy figure with a lurid 
yellow face and two gleam dark eyes, which were fixed on him. he 
call out, and it vanished! 

"of course it's the nut steak!" and thus he try to assure himself. 
but he was badly scared all the same. 

another night, he saw some one, he took to be hamar, peep at him 
from behind the window curtains. he threw a slipper at the figure, and 
the slipper went right through it. if hamar's phantom had been the 
only thing he saw, he would not have minded much; but both he and 
kelson soon began to see and hear other things. curtis frequent saw 
half-materialized forms, form of men with cone-shaped head and 
peculiarly form limbs, steal up the staircase in front of him, 
and, turning into his bedroom, vanish there. he heard them moving 
about, long after he had got into bed. sometimes they would glide up 
to the bed and bend over him, and though he could never see their 
eyes, he could feel they were fixed mocking on him. once he saw the 
door of his wardrobe slow open, and a white something with a 
dreadful face--half human and half animal--steal sly out and 
disappear in the wall opposite. and once when he put out his hand to 
feel for the matches, they were gently thrust into his palm, whilst 
the wall of the room shook with laughter. 

kelson was equally tormented, though the phenomena took rather a 
different form. alone in his bedroom at night, the shape of the room 
would frequent change; either the wall and ceiling would recede, 
and recede, until they assume the proportions of some vast chamber, 
full of gloom and strange shadows; or they would slowly, very slowly, 
close in upon him, as if it were their intention to crush him to 
death. a feeling of suffocate would come over him, and he would 
gasp, choke, beat the air with his arms, be at the verge of lose 
consciousness, when there would be a loud, mock laugh--and the 
wall and ceiling would be in their proper place again. at other 
times he would see strange figures on the wall--numbers of circles, 
that would keep on revolving in the most bewilder fashion. then, 
suddenly, they would leave the wall and slow approach him, 
increase in circumference; and the same thing would happen, as 
happen with the wall and ceiling; he would undergo the whole 
sensation of asphyxiation, and be on the brink of swooning, when there 
would be a loud peal of evil, satirical laughter, and the circle 
would instantly disappear. 

sometimes the bedclothes would assume extraordinary shapes; sometimes 
the articles on his dressing-table; sometimes his clothes; and once, 
when he was about to put on his bedroom slippers, he found them 
already occupied--occupied by icy cold feet. another time, when he put 
out his hand to take hold of a tumbler, he put it on the back of 
another hand--smooth, cold and pulpy! 

hardly a night pass without some sort of manifestation happening to 
one or other of the trio, and even curtis--fat and stolid 
curtis--began to lose flesh and look harassed. 

on the eve of the initiation into stage four, the three, separate 
for the night, retired to their respective quarters in a far from 
pleasant state of expectation. 

hamar was undressing, when there came a loud ring at the telephone, 
outside his door. 

"holloa!" he call out, "who are you?" 

"are you mr. hamar?" a voice asked, breathlessly. 

hamar reply in the affirmative, and the voice continued-- 

"i'm mrs. anderson-waite, of 30 queen's mansions, queen's gate. i have 
been holding a séance here, with some of my friends, and most 
extraordinary things have happened, and are still happening. there are 
violent knock on the wall and ceiling, and the table has become 
positively dangerous. it has repeatedly sprung into the air, and 
savage assault several of the sitters. it has thrown one lady on 
to the floor, and despite our effort to prevent it, has rample on 
her so vicious that she is badly hurt, and the doctor who has just 
arrive think very seriously of it. we want to stop, but some 
strange power seem to be force us to go on. the table has rap 
out your name and address, and say it has something important to 
communicate with you, and that unless you come here at once, it won't 
answer for the consequences." 

"all right!" hamar said. "i'll come. i'll be with you in less than 
half an hour." 

when hamar arrive at queen's mansions, he found a terrify party of 
ladies await him in the entrance to the flat. 

"thank goodness, you've come!" they exclaimed, all together. "we've 
been have an awful time. the table has driven us out of the 
drawing-room--it is obsess by a devil." 

"let me have a look at it," hamar said, "and i'll soon tell you." 

the leader of the party, mrs. anderson-waite, very cautious open 
the drawing-room door, and hamar peer in. in the centre of the room 
was a large, round, ebony table, that commence to rock, in the most 
sinister fashion, the moment hamar look at it. 

"it evidently wants to speak with me," hamar said; "you had better 
leave me here with it for a few minutes." 

"do take care," mrs. anderson-waite said, as she shut the door. "it 
may want to murder you. if it does, ring this bell, and we will all 
come to your assistance." 

hamar gave her an assure smile, but he was by no means as much at 
ease as he pretended to be. he stood staring at the table, too 
fascinate to take his eyes off it, and too afraid to move. 

at length, however, pull himself together, and convinced the table 
was the medium, through which the unknown wish to give him fresh 
instructions, he stealthy approach it. he address it, and it 
rap out to him that he must at once obtain pen and ink and take 
down what it wish to say. 

obtain the requisite material from mrs. anderson-waite, he sat 
down and was prepare to write on his knee, when the table told him 
to rub its surface brisk with his left hand, to trace on it the 
three atlantean symbols, _i.e._ a club foot, a hand with the finger 
clench and the long pointed thumb standing upright, and a bat--and 
then--to place his paper on it, and transcribe what it had to say. 

hamar obeyed, and after sitting for exactly three minutes with his 
pencil between his fingers, he felt a cold, pulpy hand laid over his, 
impel him to write with lightning-like rapidity. the script read 
as follows:-- 

"to hamar, curtis and kelson--to the three of you in common--is given 
the knowledge of inflict all manner of torment and diseases, of 
impart all kind of injurious properties, and of cause plagues. 

"in the first place, you must understand that the essence of life, 
comprise the psychical, psychological and physical, permeate every 
part of the living corporeal body--and that any limb, or fragment of 
skin or flesh, cut off from the living corporeal body, retain the 
essence of life, comprise the psychic and physical in its full 
vigour and entirety. consequently, if a person have graft on to them 
a piece of skin or flesh, or be inoculate with the blood or vein of 
a tiger--then that person not merely become liable to all the 
physical infirmity of the tiger, but may--if the counteract 
influence are not sufficient strong--partake of all the tiger's 
psychological characteristics. 

"thus, if you give a person, in whom there is a latent tendency to 
drink, a drop of a drunkard's blood--in a glass of wine, or sweet, or 
pill, no matter what--that person will at once take to drink. 
thus--mark you--people can be metamorphose into libertines, suicides, 
idiot and murderers. this metamorphosis can also be produce by means 
of a magnet call the 'magnes microcosmi,' which is prepared from 
substance that have had a long association with the human body, and 
are penetrate by its vitality. such substance are the hair and 
blood. take either one of them, and dry it in a shady and moderately 
warm place, until it has lost its humidity and odour. by this process 
it will have lost, too, all its mumia--that is to say, its essence of 
life--and is hungry to regain it. it is now a magne microcosmi, or a 
magnet for attract disease and properties, and if it be placed in 
close contact with a criminal or lunatic, it will be fill with his 
essence of life, and may then be use as a means of infect other 
people with his pernicious qualities. bury it under the doorstep of 
the person you wish infected, or hide it in his house, or mix it well 
with earth, and plant a shrub in the earth, and the vitality the 
magnet took from the criminal or lunatic will pass into the plant; and 
if the plant, or even flower of the plant, be given to any one, that 
person--unless she or he be a person absolutely free from the germ of 
vice--will be attract to it, and greatly affected by it. 

"or again, the earth over the grave of a lunatic or criminal will 
contain his essence of life, _i.e._ his vitality, which impregnate 
everything around it, and if that earth be placed somewhere in the 
immediate presence of a person, in whom there are latent tendency to 
vice--then that person will be affected by it. 

"and through these method of use the essence of life, that is 
impregnate with the disease you wish to inflict--you may infect 
people with all kind of incurable ailments. 

"but a quicker, and equally sure method of smite people with 
disease, such as cancer, fever, epilepsy, apoplexy, etc.; of smite 
them blind, deaf, dumb, lame, etc.; or bring upon them all kind of 
accidents, is to make an image of the person you wish to torment, and, 
setting it in front of you, preferably, at times when the moon is new, 
or in conjunction with venus, mars or saturn, concentrate with all 
your will on whatever injury you wish to inflict. if, for example, you 
desire the person to become blind, stick a pin, or thorn, or nail in 
the eyes of the image; if deaf, in its ears; if maimed, cut a limb off 
the image; if to have a certain disease, will very earnest that he 
or she shall have that disease. you may thus, too, torment the object 
of your aversion with plague of insect and vermin. 

"if you desire to bewitch your neighbour's milk, wine, or any food he 
or she has, you may do it by place the mumia, _i.e._ the vehicle 
contain the essence of life of some criminal or lunatic, in the 
immediate vicinity of the food, etc.; or in the case of milk, by 
give it to the cow to eat; or you may accomplish your design simply 
by means of concentration and an image. 

"always, however, whatever method you employ, prelude them with this 
prayer: 'i conjure thee, great unknown power that is antagonist to 
man, that was at the beginning, that is now, that always will be; by 
the wind and rain, and thunder and lightning; by the swirl rivers; 
by the moon; by the sinister influence of the moon with venus, mars 
and saturn; help me obtain the perfect issue of all my desires, which 
i seek to perform solely for the further of what is detriment to 
humanity. amen.' and conclude them with the sign of the foot, the 
hand and the bat. if you desire to know anything further it will be 
unfold to you in your dreams." 

the hand that had been laid on hamar's was now removed. the writing 
ceased. the table rose several inch from the floor, and struck the 
latter three times in quick, violent succession. then it remain 
quiet, and hamar knew, by a subtle change in the atmosphere, that all 
occult manifestations--for that night at least--were at an end. the 
ladies were, of course, die to know what had happened; and like most 
ladies, who dabble in spiritualism, were ready to believe anything 
they were told. hamar, who had no intention whatever of telling them 
what had actually occurred, satisfy them admirably. 

he went home delighted--far too delight to sleep--for he had in his 
possession now the greatest of all weapons--the weapon to torment. and 
with it what could he not do! what could he not get! he could 
get--gladys! 




chapter xxi 

the sell of spell 


the period of stage four promise to be one of such a lucrative 
nature, that the trio set to work to profit by it at once. they bribe 
medical men to procure for them the mumia of people suffering from 
every kind of disease; of criminal lunatics; of idiot and epileptics; 
they obtained, by bribery also, the blood and hair of the most 
abandoned men and women--rakes, thieves, murderers. they bottle and 
labelled, and arrange and catalogued, the mumia, in a laboratory 
design for the purpose; and, when all their preparation were 
complete, advertised-- 

spell for sale 

the modern sorcery company ltd. 
offer for sale every variety of spells--love 
charms, sleep charms, etc. 

in order to carry out the principal conditions of the compact, namely, 
to do harm, they made pseudo-love charm as follows:-- 

they procure the hair of a girl whom they knew to be an incorrigible, 
and, at the same time, heartless flirt; and, in the manner describe 
(and related in the last chapter) made a magne microcosmi of it. when 
ready for use, _i.e._ after it had been in immediate contact with the 
girl's flesh, so as to get it fully charged, they had portion of it 
set in rings, locket and pendants. and the purchaser of any one of 
these trinket had only to persuade the object of his (or her) 
affection to wear it, and his (or her) love would at once be 
reciprocated. 

had the magne microcosmi been charged with real, deep-rooted love, 
the effect on the wear would have been highly satisfactory, but 
charged as it was with the effervescent and fleeting fancy of a flirt, 
the effect on whoever wore it could not be more disastrous. the 
sentiment of the hopeful purchaser would be reciprocate for a time, 
which would probably lead to marriage--after which the affection his 
adore had professed would sudden decrease, and before the honeymoon 
was over, would have vanish altogether. 

during the week following the announcement of the sale of these 
spells, over a thousand were sold, the applicant being mostly shop 
girls, typists, clerk and servants; in the second week the sales rose 
to three thousand, and every succeed week show a still greater 
increase. 

in charge the magne microcosmi, the motive of the purchaser had 
always to be taken into account. if the love charm were want by a 
woman--a housekeeper may be, who desire some rich old man to fall in 
love with her, in order that she might come into his property; or by a 
woman--a companion probably--who, have worm herself into the 
confidence of some eccentric old lady, was anxious that that lady 
should leave her all her money--hamar took care that the magne 
microcosmi should be charged with a lasting infatuation; and the sale 
of this love spell--the spell that was sought solely that the 
purchaser might inherit property to which he (or she) had no 
claim--far exceed the sale of any other spell. indeed, it was 
extraordinary how many people--people one would never have 
suspected--desired spell that would do other people harm. 

lady de greene, the well-known humanitarian, who was most 
indefatigable in get up petition to the home secretary, whenever 
the perpetrate of any particularly heinous and inexcusable murder was 
about to be hanged, and who was universally acknowledge "incapable of 
harm a fly," called, surreptitiously, on hamar. 

"i understand," she said, "everything you do here is in strict 
confidence!" 

"certainly, madam, certainly!" hamar said. "we make it a point of 
honour to divulge--nothing!" 

"that being so," lady de greene observed, "i want you to tell me of a 
spell that will hasten some very obnoxious person's death." 

"if you will give me a rough idea of their personal appearance," hamar 
said, "i will make a wax image of them, and undertake they will 
trouble you no longer." 

but lady de greene shook her head. she had no desire to commit 
herself. 

"can't you do it in any other way," she said, "can't you let me give 
them an unlucky charm--the sort of thing that might bring about a taxi 
disaster?" 

hamar thought for a moment and then--smiled. 

"yes!" he said, "i think i can accommodate you." 

leave her for a few minutes, he went to the laboratory, and from a 
tin box marked homicidal lunatic, he took a plain, gold ring. with 
this he return to lady de greene, murmur on the way the prayer he 
had learned from the table. 

"here you are," he said hand the ring to lady de greene, "give it 
to the person you have mention to me--and the result you desire will 
speedy come to pass." 

three days later, london was immeasurable shocked. it read in the 
papers that the highly accomplished lady de greene, beloved and 
respect by all, for the strenuous exertion on behalf of 
humanitarianism, had been barbarous murder by her husband (from 
whom--unknown to the public--she had been living apart for years), who 
had suddenly, and, for no apparent reason, become insane. hamar, who 
was immensely tickled, alone knew the reason why. 

this was no isolated case. score of society women came to the trio 
with the same request. "a spell, or charm, or something, that will 
bring about a fatal accident--not a lingering illness"--and the person 
for whom the accident was desired, was usually the husband. and the 
trio often indulge in grim jokes. 

without a doubt, lady minkhurst got her heart's desire when her 
husband abrupt cut his throat, but alas, amongst those decimated, 
when the charm fell into the hand of one of the footmen, was her 
ladyship's lover. 

again, mrs. jacques, the beauty, who, at one time, wrote for half the 
fashion papers in england, certainly secure the demise of colonel 
dick jacques, who tumble downstairs and broke his neck, but as in his 
fall the colonel alight on one of the maids, who was not insured, 
and so seriously injure her that she was pronounced a hopeless 
cripple, mrs. jacques--with whom money was an object--had, of course, 
to maintain her for the rest of her life. 

likewise, sir charles brimpton, in jump out of the top window of 
his house, besides pulverize himself, pulverized, too, lady 
brimpton's pet pekingese "waller," without whom, she declared, life 
wasn't worth living; and lord snipping, in setting fire to himself, 
set fire to lady snipping's boudoir (which he had been secret 
visiting), and thereby destroy treasure which she tearful 
declared were quite priceless, and could never be replaced. 

crowd of young married women were anxious to get rid of their rich 
old relatives, who clung on to life with a tenacity that was "most 
wearying." 

"can you give me a spell that will make my grandmother go off 
suddenly?" a girl with beautiful, sad eyes said plaintive to kelson. 
"don't think me very wicked, but we are not at all well off--and she 
has live such a long time--such a very long time." 

"you don't want her to be ill first, i suppose," kelson inquired. 

"oh, no!" the girl replied, "she lives with us and we could never 
endure the worry and trouble of nursing her. it must be something very 
sudden." 

"this will do it," kelson said, give her a locket contain the 
mumia or essence of life of a mad dog; "fasten it round the old lady's 
neck, and you will be astonish how soon it acts." 

"and what is your fee?" the girl asked, her eyes brim over with 
joyous anticipation. 

"for you--nothing," kelson said gallantly. "only tell no one. may i 
kiss your hand." 

the firm's sale of spell for get rid of husband have risen one 
day to five hundred--and the sale of their spell for putt old 
people out of the way to fifteen hundred--even hamar, who was no 
believer in the perfection of human nature, was astonished. 

"my word!" he remarked. "isn't this a revelation? who would have 
thought how many people have murder in their hearts? at least half 
society would, i believe, become homicide if only there were no 
chance of their being found out and punished. anyhow, if we go on at 
this rate there will be no old people left." 

and it did indeed seem as if such would be the case. for the moment 
the idea got abroad that old people could be thrust out of existence 
with absolute safety and ease, there was a perfect mania amongst men, 
women, and even children, to get rid of them, and the death of people 
over sixty record in the papers multiply every day. the following 
is an extract from the _planet_ of july 28-- 

bolt.--on july 27, at no. ---- elgin avenue, s.w., emily jane, 
love and venerate mother of mary bolt, m.d., in her 69th year. 
drown in her bath. and all the angel wept! 

cushman.--on july 27, at no. ---- sheep street, northampton, sarah 
elizabeth, adore mother of josiah cushman, plymouth brother, in 
her 88th year. run over by a taxi. joy in heaven! 

starling.--on july 27, at no. ---- snargate street, dover, susan, 
highly esteem and greatly beloved mother of alfred starling, 
wesleyan minister, in her 71st year. lost in the harbour. asleep in 
jesus. 

tretickler.--on july 27, at no. ---- the terrace, st. ives, 
cornwall, elizabeth, adore grandmother of tobia tretickler, 
congregationalist, in her 91st year. fell over the malatoff. "oh, 
paradise! oh, paradise!" 

broot.--on july 27, at charlton house, queen's gate, s.w., jane, 
greatly beloved mother of john broot, labour m.p., in her 83rd 
year. fell down the area. peace, blessed peace. 

gum.--on july 27, at no. ---- church road, upper norwood, sophia, 
widow of the late albert gum, l.c.c., in her 85th year. choke 
whilst eat tripe. sadly missed! 

paveman.--on july 27, at no. ---- queen's road, clifton, bristol, 
anne rebecca, dearly beloved mother of alfred paveman, grocer, in 
her 74th year. accidental burn to death! at rest at last. 

but it must not be supposed from these few notices, select from at 
least a hundred, that the applicant for spell were by any means 
confine to the upper and middle classes. by far the greater number of 
spell were sold to the working people--to those of them who, prudent 
and respectable, count amongst their age relatives, at least, one 
or two who were insured. 

nor was the sale of spell confine to adults; for among the numbers, 
that flock to consult the trio, were countless county council 
children. 

"can you give me a spell to make teacher break her neck?" was the most 
common request, though it was frequent varied with demand such as-- 

"i'll trouble you for a spell to pay mother out. she won't put more 
than three lump of sugar in my tea;"--or, "mother has got very teazy 
lately. i want a spell to make her fall downstairs"--or, "father only 
give me twopence a week out of what i earn blacking boots; give me a 
spell to make him have an accident whilst he's at work." and it was 
not seldom that the trio were petition thus: "please give us a spell 
to make our parent die quickly. teacher say at school 'perfect 
freedom is the birthright of all englishmen,' and we can't have 
perfect freedom whilst our parent are alive."[22] 

the statistics of those who die from the effects of accident for the 
week ending august 1, of this year, in london alone, were--over sixty 
years of age, five thousand; between the age of twenty-five and 
sixty, six thousand; and, for the latter deaths, children alone were 
responsible. 

the greatest number of these accident occur in poplar, west ham, 
battersea, and whitechapel; and at length the working class applicant 
became so numerous that the modern sorcery company could not cope with 
them, and were forced to raise their charges. 

among other customers, as one might expect, were many militant 
suffragettes; whom hamar and curtis palm off on kelson. 

"give me a spell," demand a hatchet-faced lady, wearing a 
half-up-to-the-knee skirt, "one that will cause the roof of the house 
of commons to fall in and smash everybody--everybody. this is no time 
for half-measures." 

had she been pretty, it is just possible kelson might have assented, 
but he had no sympathy with the ugly--they set his teeth on edge--he 
loathe them. 

"certainly, madam, certainly," he said, "here is a spell that will 
have the effect you desire," and he hand her a ring contain a 
magne microcosmi fully charged with the essence of life of an idiot. 
"wear it," he said, "night and day. never be without it." 

she joyful obeyed, and within forty-eight hour was lodge in a home 
for incurables. 

another woman, if possible even ugly than the last, approach him 
with a similar request. 

"let me have a spell at once," she said, "that will make every member 
of the government be run over by taxis--and killed. they are monsters, 
tyrants--i abominate them. let them be slowly--very slowly--squashed 
to death!" 

"very well, madam," kelson said, careful conceal a smile, "here 
is what you want--wear it next your heart;" and he gave her a locket, 
contain a magne microcosmi charged with the essence of life of a 
leper, which he had procure at considerable risk and expense. 

"i consider your fee far too high," the suffragette said. "you take 
advantage of me because i'm a woman." 

"very well, madam," he said, "i will make an exception in your case, 
and let you have it for half the sum." 

with a good deal more grumbling she paid the half fee, and, fastening 
the locket round her neck, flounce out of the building. as kelson 
gleeful anticipated, the spell act in less than two days, and with 
such success, that he was more than compensate for the monetary loss. 

shortly afterwards, kelson received a frantic visit from another 
suffragette--a woman whose virulent sandy hair at once arouse his 
animosity. 

"quick! quick!" she cried, burst into the room where he was 
sitting. "let me have a spell that will blow up every cabinet 
minister, and their wives and family as well." 

"such an ambitious request as that, madam," kelson rejoined, "cannot 
be grant in a hurry. i must have time--to--" 

"no! no! at once!" the lady cried, stamp her feet with 
ill-suppressed rage. 

"--to consider how it can best be done," kelson went on calmly. "i 
must have time to think." 

the lady fumed, but kelson remain inexorable; and directly she had 
gone, he made a wax image of her, and taking up a knife chop its 
head off. in the evening, he learned that a lady answer to her 
description had been run over by a train at chislehurst--and 
decapitated. 

kelson grew heartily sick of the suffragettes. they were not only 
plain but abusive, and he complain bitter to hamar. 

"look here," he said, "it's not fair. you and curtis see all the 
decent-looking women and shelve all the rest on me. i'll stand it no 
longer." and he spoke so determinedly, that hamar thought it politic 
to humour him. 

"very well, matt," he said, force a laugh. "i'll try and arrange 
different in future. after to-day you shall have your share of the 
pretty ones--anything to keep the peace. only--remember--no fall in 
love." 


footnotes: 

[footnote 22: lest the reader should query this, let him consult the 
police in any of our big centres, and he will learn that crime and 
prostitution is immensely on the increase among children. in 
newcastle it is estimate that there are over two thousand girls, of 
under fourteen years of age, voluntary leading immoral lives, and 
making big incomes.] 




chapter xxii 

the persecution of the martin 


hamar's one great idea on reach stage four was to utilize the 
torment as a means of get gladys. though he saw crowd of pretty 
girl every day, none appeal to him as she did--and the very 
difficulty of get her enhance her value and stimulate his 
passions. 

"i will give her one more chance," he said to himself, "and then if 
she won't have me i'll plague her to death." 

he went to the imperial, and passing himself off as her father to the 
new official at the stage-door entrance, was shown into the ante-room 
(which led to her dressing-room). it took a good deal to scare hamar, 
but he admitted afterwards that he did feel a trifle apprehensive 
whilst he await her advent; and his anticipation were fully 
realized. 

"why, father!" she began, as the door of her dressing-room swung open 
and she appear on the threshold, clad in a shimmer white dress, 
that intensify her fair style of beauty, "what bring you--" the 
smile on her face sudden die away. 

"you!" she cried, "how dare you! go! go at once! and if you dare come 
here again or attempt to molest me in any way, i'll prosecute you!" 

hamar, dumbfound at such an exhibition of wrath, slunk out of the 
room without utter a syllable. 

"the vixen," he mutter as soon as he found himself in the street. "a 
thousand cat in one! treat me like mud. jerusalem! i'll pay her 
out. and i'll lose no time about it either. she'll look different at 
me next time we meet." 

he hurried back to cockspur street and go into the laboratory, 
threw himself into a chair and--thought. 

that same evening at nine-thirty, in the interval between her first 
and second "going on," glady hasten to her dressing-room, and was 
prepare to partake of the light refreshments she had ordered, 
when--to her horror--she perceive crawl towards her, across the 
floor, a huge cockroach--a hideous black thing with spidery leg and 
long antennae that it waved, to and fro, in the air, as it advanced. 
it was at least double the size of any glady had hitherto seen, and 
her feelings can best be appreciate by those who fear such 
things--her blood ran cold, her flesh crawled, she sat glue to her 
chair, terrify to move, lest it should run after her. she screamed, 
and her dresser, startle out of her senses, came flying into the 
room. 

"what is it, madam? what is it?" she cried. 

glady pointed at the floor. 

"kill it!" she shrieked. "stamp on it! oh, quick, quick, it is coming 
towards me." 

but the moment the dresser caught sight of the cockroach, she sprang 
on a chair and wound her skirt round her. 

"oh, madam," she panted, "i daren't! i daren't go near it. i'm 
frightened out of my life, at beetles. and there's another of 
them"--and she pointed to the wainscoting--"and another! why, the 
room's full of them!" 

and so it was. everywhere glady look she saw beetle crawl 
towards her--dozens upon dozens, hundred upon hundreds--and all of 
the same monstrous size and ultra-horrible appearance. 

"look!" she screamed. "they are climb on to my clothes. one's got 
into my shoes, and another will be in them, in a second. there's 
another--crawling up my cloak--and another on my skirt. oh! oh!" and 
her cries, and those of the dresser, speedy brought a troop of 
actor and actress to the door. the instant, however, the cause of 
the alarm was ascertained, there were loud yells, and a wild stampede 
down the passages. the stage manager was called, but one glance at the 
floor was enough for him--he fled. and in the end three of the super 
had to be fetched. hot water, brooms, ashes, and quicklime were used, 
and although thousand of the cockroach were killed, thousand more 
came, and so hopeless did the task of get rid of them become, that 
the room eventually had to be vacated, and the crack under the door 
secure sealed. 

before glady left the theatre, she was call on the telephone. 

"who are you?" she asked. 

"hamar," came the reply, in insinuate tones. "how do you like the 
beetles? you'll never see the end of them till--" 

but glady rang off. 

on her return home something scuttle across the hall floor in front 
of her. she sprang back with a scream. it was a gigantic cockroach. 
the hall was full of them. she summon the servants, and they set to 
work to kill them. but they might as well have try to stop niagara, 
for as fast as they squash one battalion, another took its place. 
they came out of crack in the floor, from behind the wainscoting, 
from every conceivable place in the kitchens, and in a dense black 
ribbon some six inch broad, ascend the staircase. glady try to 
barricade her room against them, but it was of no avail. they came 
from under the boards of the floor and pour down the chimney. they 
swarm over the furniture, in the cupboards, chest of drawers, the 
washstand (where they kept continual fall into the water), in her 
clothes (her dressing-gown was cover with them), over the bed, and 
the climax was reach when they approach the chair she stood on. 
too fascinate with horror to move, she watch them crawl up to 
her. she was thus found by her father. he had come to her assistance 
in the very nick of time, and after lift her from the chair and 
taking her to a place, as yet safe from molestation, return to her 
room, where, with savage blows, smashing, equally, beetle and 
furniture, he remain till daybreak. 

with the first streak of dawn the beetle decamped, and the fray 
ended. the work of devastate had been colossal. corpse were strewn 
everywhere--and it took the combine household hours, before all 
evidence of the slaughter were obliterated. as for gladys, she had 
not slept all night and was a wreck. 

"i can never go through another night of it," she said to miss 
templeton. "do you think we shall ever get rid of the horrible 
things?" 

"we can but try, dear!" miss templeton said consolingly, and she 
accompany glady up to town, where they inquire of doctors, and 
chemists, and all sort of possible and impossible people; and 
return to kew laden with chemicals, and patent beetle destroyers. 
but though they try remedy by the score, none were of use, and the 
beetle repeated their performance of the preceding night. 

glady did not go to bed: surround with light candles, she sat on 
the top of a wardrobe till daybreak. the following morning the house 
was fumigate with sulphur; and people were told off to kill the 
cockroaches, as they made their escape out of doors. by this means an 
enormous number were killed; but at night they were just as bad as 
before. 

an engineer friend then suggest a freezing-machine. the temperature 
of the house was reduce to ten degree below zero; the pipes froze 
(and burst next day), the milk froze, the housemaid's toe and the 
cook's little finger of the left hand froze, everything froze; and 
presumable the beetle froze, for there was not one to be seen. 

however, it was quite impossible to resort again to this extreme 
measure. john martin had the most agonizing attack of lumbago. glady 
had neuralgia, and miss templeton--a slight touch of pleurisy. 

when glady reach the imperial that evening, she found that the 
staff had been battle with cockroach all day, and that they had at 
last succeed in get rid of them with a fumigate mixture of 
camphor, cocculus, sulphur, bezonia and assafoetida--suggested to them 
by a hindoo student. 

for the next week not a beetle was to be seen at the theatre nor at 
the cottage; and glady was beginning to hope that hamar had cease 
plague her (in despair of ever winning her), when the persecution 
sudden broke out again. 

she had been in bed about half an hour, and was fall into a gentle 
and much need sleep, when a tremendous rap at the wall, close to her 
head, awoke her with a start, and set her heart pulsate violently. 
thinking it must be some one on the landing, she got up and lit a 
candle. there was no one there. the moment she got into bed again, the 
rap was repeated, and it continued, at intervals, all night. this 
went on for a week, during which time glady was never once able to 
sleep. 

a brief respite ensued; but it was abrupt terminate one morning, 
when glady awoke feeling as if some big insect were attempt to 
penetrate her body. utter a shriek of terror, she whip the 
clothes from her, and sprang out of bed. miss templeton, who slept in 
the next room, came rush in, and they both saw an enormous insect, 
half beetle and half scorpion, dart under the pillow. john martin was 
fetched, but although he search everywhere, not a trace of the 
insect could be found. 

that night, directly glady got in bed and blew out the light, she 
heard a ticking sound on the sheets, and a huge insect with long hairy 
leg ran up her sleeve. her shriek brought the whole household to the 
room, but the insect was nowhere to be seen. 

she was thus plague for nearly a fortnight. one insect only--never a 
number, but only one, of prodigious size and terrify form--appeared 
to her in the least suspect places, _i.e._, on the dressing-table or 
chimney-piece, in her shoes, or pockets; crawl over her in the dark; 
and could never be caught. 

these perpetual frights, and consequent sleeplessness, wore glady 
out. she grew so ill that she had to give up acting, and go into a 
home to try the rest cure. 

hamar then communicate with her, through a third person, and offer 
to leave off torment her, if she would agree to be engaged to him. 

"i never will!" she said. 

"then i will never leave off persecute you," was his retort. 

but he was wary. he had no wish to kill her or to damage her looks--so 
he let her get well and remain thus for a brief space. when she was 
once again in full vigour, acting at the imperial, he recommence his 
unwelcome attentions. 

at first he confine his new plague to the servant at the cottage. 
the cook was one day turning out a drawer in the kitchen dresser, when 
she was horrify out of her senses to find squat there, a large, 
black toad, which stare most malevolent at her, and then sprang in 
her face. she shriek to the housemaid to help her kill it, but 
before a weapon could be got, the creature had bounce through an open 
window, and disappeared. 

after this incident the servant knew no peace. their bedclothes were 
thrown off them at night, their dress torn and bespattered with ink, 
their brush and comb thrown out of the window, and the water they 
pour out to wash in was sometimes quite black, sometimes full of a 
bright green sediment, and sometimes boiling, when it invariable 
cracked both the jug and basin. 

unable to stand these annoyance the servant left in a body. their 
successor fare the same, and worse. besides have to endure the 
above-named horrors, pebble were thrown through the windows, their 
chair were pull away as they were about to sit down (the cook, who 
was one of those upon whom this trick was played, thereby seriously 
injure her spine), and all sort of obstacle were placed on the 
stairs, so that those who ran down unwari trip over them and hurt 
themselves (two successive housemaid broke their legs, whilst another 
sprain her wrist). 

the meat, too, was a constant worry--it went so bad that enormous 
maggot crawl out of it by the thousand and cover the table and 
floor; and the milk, of which a large quantity was taken daily, 
"turned" in a very curious manner. after being deposited, in its usual 
place, in the pantry, it began to darken; first of all it became light 
blue, then deepen into an almost inky blackness, exhibit curious 
zigzag lines; and, lastly, the whole mass began to putrefy and to emit 
a stench so overpowering that every one in the house retched, and the 
whole place had to be disinfected. this occur day after day. 
nothing would stop it. the dairyman who supply the milk did all he 
could to counteract it. he had his dairy constant cleansed, he saw 
that the cattle had a change of food, he bought an entire new stock 
of dairy utensils, and no milk was ever sent to the cottage that he 
had not had careful analyzed. 

the trouble continue for three weeks, at the end of which period 
john martin received a telephone call from hamar. 

"hullo!" the latter said, "i guess you've had about enough of it by 
this time. wouldn't you like some sweet-smelling milk for a change, or 
do you prefer to go on till you all get typhoid? the remedy, you know, 
lie in your own hands. you've only to tell that daughter of yours to 
accept me, and i'll undertake all your trouble shall cease." 

"i'll see you hang first," john martin answered. 

"very well, then, you old mule," hamar shouted, "look out for 
yourself--and miss gladys." 




chapter xxiii 

love 


to bring about plague of insect hamar had resort to a very simple 
method. he had first of all made a wax image represent a 
cockroach--scorpion--centipede, or whatever other species came into 
his mind. then, place the image he had made in front of him, and 
repeating the prayer he had learned from the unknown, through the 
medium of mrs. anderson-waite's table, he had concentrated body, soul, 
and spirit on plague glady with the insect, which the image 
represented. when his concentration reach the highest degree, 
insect in their actual physical body were transport from the 
tropics;[23] but when he was unable to concentrate to the utmost, only 
the ethereal projection of the insect were obtainable; hence the 
hybrid--partly scorpion and partly beetle, that appear and 
disappear in gladys's bed and bedroom. 

to produce the rap on the wall of gladys's room, he had made a 
wax representation of a wall, and whilst concentrate to the very 
utmost, had struck it with his knuckles. 

the plague of the servant hamar had also accomplished by means of 
image and concentration. 

but in order to bewitch milk, he had been oblige to resort to other 
means. he had convert the mumia of an idiot into a magne 
microcosmi; and bribe the man who deliver the milk, he gave him 
instruction to soak the magne microcosmi, for a few minutes, in 
every portion that he left at the cottage.[24] 

at length hamar have fail to gain his object by plague glady 
and the servants, set about torment john martin. he made a wax 
image of the latter, and after pronounce the necessary prayer, stuck 
the image full of pins, crying out as he did so "john martin, i hate 
you. john martin, i curse you. john martin, a plague on you." and each 
time hamar stuck a pin in the image he had made of john martin, the 
real john martin felt an acute pain in the region of his body 
corresponding to that in which the pin was stuck. 

the doctor, who was call in, could make nothing of the malady, but, 
following the etiquette of the profession, cloak his ignorance with 
a look of profound wisdom, and the pronouncement that he would tell 
them, in a day or two, what was the matter. in the meanwhile, he found 
it necessary and politic to prescribe a non-committal mixture of chalk 
and rhubarb, which, although disguise under the usual fanciful 
pharmacopoeia appellation, did not, however, allay the pain. sharp, 
agonizing pricks, now on the neck now in the chest, now in the most 
sensitive part of the knee-cap, now under the toe-nail, now--most 
painful of all--under the finger-nail--continued to torment john 
martin, who, though as a rule fairly stoical, could not stand these 
attack with any degree of composure. he screamed, and swore, and 
cursed, until the whole household was terrified--and gladys, pretty 
nearly out of her mind. 

during a lull--an interval, wherein john martin enjoy a brief 
respite, the telephone bell rang. 

"hulloa," call a voice, "i'm hamar. haven't you had about enough of 
it? remember, you've only to say the word and i'll stop." 

"tell him i'll do nothing of the sort," john martin said, "that he'll 
never get the better of me this way." 

miss templeton gave the message, and hamar reply "wait! wait and 
see!" 

he then thrust wool, pins, horsenails, straw, needle and moss into 
the mouth of the image, and john martin had such frightful pains in 
his stomach that he went into convulsions; and, after an emetic had 
been given him, vomit up all the above-named articles, save the pin 
and needle which work their way out through his flesh, cause him 
the most exquisite tortures. 

gladys, have given up go to the theatre in order to be with her 
father during these attacks, now declared that she could no long 
bear to see him in such excruciating pain, whilst it was in her power 
to prevent it. 

"tell him," she said, "tell hamar you'll accept his conditions. don't 
think of me! i would rather do anything than see you suffer like 
this." 

"i can hold out a bit longer," he groaned, "at any rate i needn't give 
in yet." 

every now and then there came a respite--perhaps for several hours, 
perhaps for several days--then the torture recommenced. and always 
john martin steel himself to bear them. at last came the climax. 

hamar, infuriate that his efforts, so far, had prove fruitless, 
resolved, since time was pressing, to play his trump card and either 
win, or lose all. he rang up glady on the telephone. 

"my patience is exhausted," he said. "i'll give you one more chance, 
and one--only. agree to be engaged to me at once--or i'll smite your 
father with the most virulent form of cancer, and leave him to die." 

there was no question now in gladys's mind as to what she should do. 
of all things in the world, she dread cancer most, and after the 
many evidence hamar had given her of his skill in black magic, she 
did not doubt for one instant that he could, immediately he chose, 
carry out his threat. 

"i have decided," she said faintly, "to--to--give in." 

"you accept me, then?" hamar said. 

"y-yes!" 

"when may i see you?" 

"when you like." 

"then i'll come at once," hamar replied. "_au revoir._" 

but hamar, when he arrive at the cottage, did not realize any of the 
gleeful anticipation he had indulge in _en route_. glady was 
ill--so miss templeton informed him--at the same time beg him, if 
he really had any regard for miss martin, not to ask to see her for 
the next few days; and to this request hamar, seeing no alternative, 
was oblige to assent. 

shortly after he had gone, shiel davenport called, and found glady 
alone in the garden. 

"i've been told that your father is ill," he said, "and should like to 
hear better news of him. how is he?" 

"i think he's all right now," glady replied, "but he has suffer 
frightfully. indeed, we've all had a terrible time," and she told him 
what had happened. 

"then you've not been acting at the imperial lately?" shiel asked. 

"not for the past week," glady replied. "i couldn't leave father." 

"how has mr. bromley burnham got on without you?" shiel ask 
bitterly. 

"i don't understand you," glady said quietly. "i have an understudy, 
and from what i am told she has given every satisfaction. i have some 
news which i fear won't be altogether welcome to you." 

shiel turn a shade paler. "what is it?" he faltered. 

"i'm engaged to be married." 

for a few moments there was silence, and then shiel exclaim 
mechanical "engaged to be married! to whom?" 

"to leon hamar! i couldn't help it." and she explain the position. 

"but he'll never keep you to it," shiel said. "he couldn't be such a 
brute." 

"i'm afraid he will," glady replied. "he's shown pretty clearly that 
he's capable of anything. i've given him my promise--i must keep it." 

"then it's good-bye to all interest in life--for me," shiel said, with 
a gulp. "i've thought of no one but you since we first met. for 
you--in the hope of someday winning you, i've struggle on; i've 
reconcile myself to a bare existence. now i've lost you, i've lost 
everything. i hate life. i shall--" 

"you'll do nothing of the sort," glady interrupted, "unless you want 
me to regret ever have met you. i wonder that you say 'i've nothing 
to live for'--when we can still be friends; and when you can, at 
least, win my respect, by putt your shoulder to the wheel, and 
exert yourself to the utmost to get on." 

"and you--what about you?" 

"never mind me--i can well look after myself." 

"you'll live in hell," shiel cried, her eyes goad him to madness. 
"even though you may not care for me, i do not choose to stand quiet 
by, whilst you spend your life in purgatory. hamar has won you through 
some diabolical trickery, and if i can't thwart him in any other 
way--i'll kill him. he shan't marry you." 

"he will," glady sighed. "no one can stop him. he is omnipotent." 

apparently, gladys's statement was more or less true; and ninety-nine 
men out of a hundred, in the same circumstances as shiel, would have 
now recognize the hopeless of the situation. but shiel was 
abnormal. as he walk home from the cottage that evening he kept on 
repeating to himself "gladys is my goal. i want only gladys. i'll have 
only gladys." and have once made up his mind to get gladys, it 
seem to him, as if out of every obstacle, that lay between him and 
gladys, he could and would merely make a stepping-stone. "since," he 
argue to himself, "all's fair in love and war, i'll win glady 
through another woman." 

and he straightway telephone to lilian rosenberg to have tea with 
him. 

the latter had already made an engagement for the afternoon; but, all 
the same, she accept shiel's invitation. 

"will you do me a favour?" he asked. 

"if it is anything that lie in my power," she said. "what is it?" 

"i want you to find out how hamar works his spells. i ask you 
before?" 

"i know you did and i've not forgotten," lilian said, "but i have to 
be very careful. i've play the part of eavesdrop once or twice, 
and heard enough to confirm me in my suspicion that hamar is in touch 
with evil, occult powers. i've heard him pray aloud to them on more 
than one occasion, and i've also a shrewd idea he performs, at least, 
some of his spell by means of wax images. but why do you want to 
know?" 

"only curiosity. i am intense interested in the occult." 

"you don't want to start a rival show, do you?" lilian ask 
jestingly. 

"with a maximum capital of two pounds--and a minimum of knowledge!" 
shiel laughed. "hardly. i wish i could. i would offer you the post of 
manageress." 

"partner!" 

"well, partner, if you like. would you take it?" 

"perhaps!" she said, look at him with a sudden shyness. "what a 
pity you are not rich. can't you get a post that would bring you in 
about £200 a year for a start? i believe you really want something to 
stimulate you, to make you work in grim earnest--then you would 
succeed. there's grit in you--i love grit--but at present it's latent, 
it wants bring out." 

"you are very kind," shiel said, "but i'm afraid i'm a hopeless case, 
and, being such, have no business to be in your company. will you come 
to the theatre with me?" 

"the theatre! when you've no business to be in my company, and when it 
is as much as you can do to pay the rent of a back attic!" 

"oh, never mind that. i've had ticket given me. i've been do odd 
bit of journalism lately, and a dramatic critic i know has given me 
two stalls at the imperial!" 

"the imperial!" lilian rosenberg ejaculated. "that's where glady 
martin is acting, surely! i can't bear her!" 

"she's not the only person in the cast," shiel observe drily, "and 
the play's a good one! do come!" 

with a little more persuasion shiel gain her consent; and both he 
and she enjoy the play, or more correct speaking, the occasion, 
immensely. so long as glady was on the stage shiel's eyes never once 
left her; whilst throughout the performance lilian rosenberg saw only 
shiel, thought only of shiel. the interest she had taken in him, the 
interest she had so confident assert was only interest, had grown 
apace--had grown out of all recognition. it need only a fillip now 
to convert that interest into something warmer; and the fillip was not 
long in coming. 

shiel was seeing lilian home to her lodgings in margaret terrace, a 
turning off oakley street, when a man knock a woman down right in 
front of them. he was just the ordinary type of street ruffian--the 
whitewash english labourer--and the woman, have without doubt been 
serve by him in the same manner fifty times before, was probably well 
use to such treatment. but it was more than shiel, who had spent so 
much of his life where they treat women differently, could stand, and 
before lilian rosenberg had time to remonstrate, he had rush up to 
the prostrate woman, and was holding the man at bay. a scuffle now 
began, in which the woman, whom shiel had help to regain her feet, 
joined. both man and woman now attack shiel, who, place himself 
with his back against the railings, defend himself as best he could. 

the hour was late, there were no police about, and it seem only too 
probable that the fracas would end in a tragedy. the labourer was a 
burly fellow, short than shiel, but far broad and heavier, and any 
one could see at a glance that shiel stood no chance against him. 
lilian rosenberg, at her wits' end to know what to do, ran into oakley 
street, and as there was no one in sight, she made for the nearest 
light house and rang the bell furiously. a man came to the door, 
whom, unheede his expostulations, she caught by the arm and drag 
into the street. 

they arrive on the scene of action, just as the ruffian, break 
through shiel's guard, struck him a terrific blow on the forehead, 
which sent him reel against the railings. the newcomer (upon whom, 
both man and woman, seeing shiel incapacitated, instantly turned) 
would probably have share the same fate, had not the occupant of 
several of the neighbouring houses--amongst whom were some half-dozen 
athletic young men--roused by the noise, come out into the street, and 
the ruffian and his companion, seeing the odds were against them, 
decamped. 

shiel had not fully regain consciousness, when lilian rosenberg, 
regardless of propriety, led him into her sitting-room, bath his 
forehead, dose him with brandy, and making up a bed for him on the 
sofa, bade him rest there, till the morning. 

when he took his departure, he had quite recovered, and lilian 
rosenberg had, at last, realize that she love him. 


footnotes: 

[footnote 23: there is no doubt that moses inflict the plagues, 
with which he torment pharaoh, in this way.] 

[footnote 24: in stage two this might have been perform by 
ethereal projection, but hamar could not resort to this method as 
the power of projection had now pass from him.] 




chapter xxiv 

the subpoena 


a few days after the incident in margaret terrace, shiel had an 
inspiration. he was lunch with an old schoolfellow whom, quite by 
chance, he had met in lincoln's inn, have previous lost sight of 
him for many years, and the conversation, which had at first been 
confine to the old days, had gradual drift to what was ever 
uppermost in shiel's mind--namely, the modern sorcery company, _i.e._ 
hamar, kelson and curtis. 

"did you know," his friend remarked, "that the old statute, introduce 
in henry the fifth's reign against sorcery, has never been repealed?" 

"you don't mean to say so," shiel cry excitedly--a vague idea 
dawn on him. "tell me all about it." 

"well, that's rather a long order. for one thing, it impose all kind 
of penalty from capital punishment to fines. for another, it was in 
force up to the beginning of george the third's reign, when the last 
case of a person being burn for witchery in england occurred, and 
since then it has fallen into disuse." 

"could it be revived?" shiel asked, a sudden wild hope surge through 
him. 

"for all i know to the contrary, it could," his friend--who, by the 
way, was a barrister--replied. "of course no one could be burn or 
hang under it, but they might be fine or imprisoned." 

"then i wish to goodness you would file a case against the modern 
sorcery company! i'd move heaven and earth to get the scoundrel sent 
to prison!" and he told his friend how matter stood between glady 
and hamar. 

the barrister--whose name was sevenning--h.v. sevenning, of t.c.d. and 
cheltenham college renown--was keen interested. it was not only that 
his sense of chivalry was stirred, but he saw sport. consequently, the 
foregoing conversation result in a prosecution which, taking place 
some four week later, was report in the london herald as follows-- 

extraordinary charge heard at the old bailey. 

revival of an ancient statute. 

yesterday, at the old bailey, before his honour judge rosher, leon 
hamar, edward curtis and matthew kelson, of the modern sorcery 
company ltd., were indict under the 23rd of henry the fifth, c. 
15, which make it a capital offence to practise and administer 
spells. the case for the prosecution promise to be a lengthy one. 
an enormous number of witnesses, who are most anxious to make 
statements, will be called; and it is anticipate that much of 
their evidence will be of a most extraordinary nature. 

the accused are cite with have work spell to the 
injury--which injury, in many instances, has been fatal--of a vast 
number of people, representative of every rank in life. 

hilda, countess of ramsgate, who appear in heavy mourning, was 
the first witness called. in her evidence she stated, that it was 
owe to an advertisement she had seen in the _ladies' meadow_, 
that she had consult the modern sorcery company ltd., with the 
object of buy a spell to prevent her pekingese pet, brutus, 
catching cold on his liver. she had hope to see mr. kelson, as 
she had heard that he was more sympathetic, where ladies were 
concerned, than either mr. hamar or mr. curtis, but as mr. kelson 
was engaged, she had consult mr. edward curtis instead. the 
latter had given her a spell which he had assured her would have 
the desire effect, but directly she got home, her adore brutu 
develop melancholia, and die raving mad, after have bitten 
her child, who, by the way, had died, too. 

for the defence, gerald kirby, k.c., declared that the spell his 
client had given the countess was perfectly harmless; that it 
could not possibly have produce either melancholia or madness. 
"can any dependence," he said, "be placed on a woman, who 
obviously think more of her dog's death than that of her child!" 

the court was adjourn till to-morrow. 

in the following day's paper, the evidence for the prosecution was 
continued. lady marjorie tatler, who, in the weekly and illustrate 
journals, for no other reason than her reputed beauty, was reintroduce 
over and over again to the long-suffering public, was the first to 
step into the witness-box. 

she declared that edward curtis, instead of give her a spell to 
make florillda win the derby, had given her a diabolical something 
that had brought out spot all over her face, and that she had to 
undergo a most expensive treatment before they could be got rid 
of. 

in cross-examination, lady marjorie tatler admitted that she had 
ask edward curtis for a spell that would cause all the horse 
running in that particular race, save florillda, to be taken ill. 

for the defence, gerald kirby, k.c., explain that his client was 
so disgust at the immorality of lady marjorie's request, that he 
had purposely given her a spell that would have no effect upon a 
horse, and could not possibly bring out spot on her ladyship's 
face. "the spell edward curtis gave her," gerald kirby said, "was 
a mixture of hempsee and sago, flavour with violet powder, and 
my client instruct her ladyship to wear it next her heart." 
(loud laughter.) 

lady coralie mars, the next witness, who declared she had sought a 
spell to make the man, she was forced into marrying, fall into a 
trance, just before the marriage ceremony was to take place; and 
that, instead of bring this about, the spell edward curtis had 
sold her had cause her to have st. vitus's dance,--was adroit 
trap into admit that she had really want her fiancé 
smitten with paralysis. "a wish," gerald kirby announced, with a 
dramatic flourish of his hands, "that so arouse my client's 
indignation that, instead of give her the spell she wanted, he 
gave her one that would make her affiance husband more than ever 
hungry for the marriage hour to arrive. as for st. vitus's dance, 
would any woman, with an emotional and hysterical-nature, such as 
obviously was that of lady coralie mars, ever be free from such a 
complaint?" 

the hon. augusta mapple, who state that she had visit the 
modern sorcery company, for the purpose of obtain a spell to 
bring about a defeat of the government, by afflict the bulk of 
their supporter with such bilious attack as would necessitate 
their absence from the house, and that, instead of give her such 
a spell, edward curtis had given her one which had cause every 
member of her household to fall downstairs--admitted, under 
cross-examination, that she had ask for a spell that would make 
every supporter of the government in the house be sudden seize 
with tetanus. "a diabolical request, your lordship," gerald kirby 
said, "and one to which my client could not possibly accede. 
consequently, as a punishment for such cruelty, he sold her a 
spell that would result in her have a sharp attack of toothache. 
it could not possibly have produce any of the mishap she 
attribute to it." 

it is unnecessary to quote further. by far the greater number of these 
witnesses, on being cross-examined by mr. kirby, who defend with an 
ability that has rarely, if ever, been excelled, were made to confess 
that they had want the spell for a far more subtle and dangerous 
purpose than they had previous stated; admission which, of course, 
were highly prejudicial to the case for the prosecution. 

shiel lost hope. he had look forward to the trial with an excitement 
that almost border on frenzy. it was never out of his mind. he 
thought of it at meals, he thought of it at his work, he thought of it 
out of doors, and, when he went to bed, he dream of it. 

"i'll save you! i'll save you yet!" he wrote to gladys. "the trial can 
only result in one thing--the break up and imprison of the 
trio." 

but when he read the papers each day, and saw how, in almost every 
instance, evidence which ought to have been damning to the accused, 
had been twist into their favour, his heart sank. 

there was only one chance now--lilian rosenberg. she, of all the staff 
employ in the hall in cockspur street, was best acquaint with the 
_modus operandi_ of messrs. hamar, curtis and kelson. 

"we must get hold of that girl at all costs," h.v. seven remark 
to shiel. "you say you feel sure she likes you. work upon her feelings 
to show the firm up." 

"i don't much like the idea of it," shiel said, "but i suppose the end 
justify the means." 

"of course it does!" seven retorted. "it's your only chance of 
saving miss martin." 

acting on this suggestion, shiel approach lilian rosenberg on the 
subject. 

"what about the spells?" he ask her. "have you found out yet how 
hamar works them?" 

"i have only heard him mutter in his room again," she said, her 
cheek paling. "and--you will only laugh at me--i have seen queer 
shadow hover in his doorway and steal down the passages, 
shadow that have terrify me. i never knew what real fear was before 
i came to cockspur street, and for the past few week i have been 
almost too afraid to open my room door, for fear i should see 
something standing outside." 

"you have no doubt, i suppose, in your own mind, that the trio 
practise sorcery?" 

"i certainly think they are help in all they do by evil spirits." 

"do you approve of such proceedings?" 

"i don't think them right. i don't think we have any right to pry into 
the unknown. some day, undoubtedly, it will be given us to know, but 
until that day comes, we had far better leave it alone." 

"if you think like that," shiel said, "how can you reconcile yourself 
to working for these people?" 

"how can i help myself?" lilian rosenberg answered. "beggars can't be 
choosers. i am not responsible for what they do." 

"but supposing you knew they were about to commit a very heinous 
crime, wouldn't you feel it your duty to try and circumvent them?" 

"that depends," lilian rosenberg said. "if i could stop them without 
running any risk of lose my post, then i would probably try to stop 
them, but if stopping them meant being 'sacked,' i most certainly 
shouldn't. it isn't so easy to get post nowadays--especially good 
pay post like this. what do you take me for, a fool!" 

"then you don't believe in self-sacrifice, even for a friend?" shiel 
said slowly. 

"that depend on the degree of friendship," lilian replied. "if it 
were for some one i like very much, then--perhaps!" 

"is there any one you like very much! i, somehow, couldn't fancy you 
being very fond of any one." 

"couldn't you?" lilian said, with a faint laugh. "you don't think me 
capable of any deep affection. you forget, perhaps, that a woman 
doesn't always wear her heart on her sleeve." 

"i confess i don't understand women," shiel said, "and i had best come 
to the point at once. i happen to know that the trio--or at least one 
of the trio--is contemplate do something ultra-abominable--a 
cruel and shameful wrong, which i particularly wish to prevent. but i 
may not be able to do anything without your help! will you help me?" 

"how _can_ i?" lilian asked. 

"why, by finding out something which might be damning evidence against 
them, or by state your opinion in court. there is only one way of 
stay the trio from do this dastard thing, and that is by 
get this case, which is now being tried, to go against them." 

"well, and supposing, by some chance, the defendant should win! what 
would become of me?" 

"ah! that is where your self-sacrifice would come in! it would be a 
noble action." 

"how do this wrong, you say they are about to perpetrate, touch on 
you personally?" 

"it touch on some one with whom i am personally acquainted." 

"some one you like?" 

"yes!" 

"a relation?" 

"that i can't say." 

"then i can't help you. i am naturally inquisitive; curiosity is, as 
you know, a woman's privilege. you must tell me all." 

"it's for a friend, then!" 

"a man?" 

"no," shiel replied, "for a girl!" 

there was an emphatic silence, and then lilian rosenberg spoke. 

"have i ever heard you mention her?" 

"occasionally," shiel replied. 

there was silence again. then lilian rosenberg said slowly-- 

"you surely don't mean glady martin! i can think of no one else." 

"i do mean her!" shiel replied, drop his eyes. "she is to be 
coerce into marry hamar." 

"the silly fool!" lilian rosenberg said. "i would like to see any one 
try to coerce me. and it is to serve _her_ you want me to sacrifice 
myself." and she turn away in disgust. 

after this interview, lilian studious avoid shiel; and despairing, 
at length, of ever winning her over, shiel report his failure to 
h.v. sevenning. 

"we must subpoena her," said sevenning. 

"you'll never get her to speak that way," shiel said. "if once she has 
made up her mind not to do a thing, nothing will ever compel her." 

"i have heard that said of people before," h.v. seven reply 
dryly, "but it's wonderful what the witness-box can do; it loosen the 
most mulish tongue in a marvellous manner." 

"it wouldn't hers," shiel maintained. 

h.v. sevenning, however, thought he knew best--what lawyer doesn't? 
moreover, it was all part of the game--the great game of becoming 
notorious at all costs. he serve the subpoena. 

like most modern girls, lilian rosenberg was wholly selfish; and for 
this fault only her parent were to blame. she had been brought up 
with the one idea of pleasing herself, of saying and do exactly 
what she thought fit; and no one had ever thwart her. now, however, 
the unforeseen had happened. she was smitten with the grand passion, 
and confront for the first time in her life with the startle 
proposition of "self-sacrifice." she love shiel. she wouldn't marry 
him for the very simple reason he had no money--but that only add 
poignancy to the situation. she love him all the more. she knew shiel 
love glady martin. whether he could ever marry glady was another 
matter--but he love her all the same. and the proposition, that had 
been so abrupt thrust upon lilian rosenberg, was that she should 
sacrifice herself, not only to save glady martin from marry hamar, 
but to pave the way for shiel, supposing glady could reconcile 
herself to penury, to marry her himself. in other words she had been 
call upon to give up what was, at the moment, dearest to her in the 
world, and to court all the inconvenience and worry of being thrown 
out of employment--for if she gave evidence that would in any way tend 
to damage the firm of hamar, curtis & kelson, she would undoubted 
lose her post and, in all probability, never get another--at least not 
another as good--for the sake of a woman whom she did not know, but, 
nevertheless, hated. 

yet there was in her, as there is in almost every girl, however up to 
date, a chord that respond to the heroic. a short time back she 
would have scoff at the very thought of self-sacrifice; but now, she 
actually caught herself considering it. she kept on considering it, 
too, until the trial was well advanced, and had practically made up 
her mind to denounce the trio and go to the wall herself, when the 
subpoena was served. 




chapter xxv 

curtis in a new rÔle 


in an instant, lilian rosenberg had decided the course she would 
adopt. 

"what a disgust thing to do," she indignant exclaimed. "i 
wouldn't have believe it of shiel. the idea of force me to give 
evidence--of force me to save the situation for the sake of the 
woman he think he loves! i shan't do it!" 

and she prove as good as her word. apart from her importance as a 
witness, considerable interest attach to her on account of her 
appearance--she was infinite more attractive than any of the women 
who had hitherto appear in the witness-box--though many of them were 
so-called society beauties. 

"you were wrong," was the look which shiel read in h.v. sevenning's 
eyes, as lilian rosenberg took the oath. "she is on our side." 

but simple as shiel was in many ways, he knew women better than the 
lawyer, and the exceedingly sweet expression lilian rosenberg had 
assumed, and which he knew to be quite foreign to her, fill him with 
misgivings. nor was he mistaken. the evidence she gave was entire in 
favour of the trio. 

the case for the prosecution was concluded. for the defence, gerald 
kirby, k.c., resort to satire. he characterize the whole 
proceedings as the most absurd heard in any court for the past two 
centuries, and wondered, only, that it had been possible to procure a 
counsel for such a ridiculous prosecution. 

"even though," he remarked, "spirits such as have been specify by 
the prosecution do exist--which is extremely dubious--there has never 
yet been produce any reliable corroborative evidence respecting them, 
and the prosecution has wholly fail to prove, that it is through the 
medium of these spirits, that the modern sorcery company have work 
their spells. the marvellous feat that we have all seen perform in 
cockspur street have been accomplished--as the defendant have all 
along stated--through will--sheer will power and nothing else; and i 
intend produce evidence to show that the secret of the wonderful 
efficacy of all the charm and spell sold by the sorcery company, 
lie in will power also. whenever they have been consult with regard 
to the purchase of a spell, the firm have invariable pointed out 
this fact to the purchasers, careful explain at the same time 
that the rings, locket and other articles sold to them were merely to 
assist them in concentration. it is ridiculous to suppose that such 
trivial articles could have produced, of themselves, such calamity 
as the witness for the prosecution attribute to them. but, of 
course you did not believe the statement of such witnesses. how could 
you? how could you expect anything but falsehood from women who, upon 
cross-examination, had own that their object in obtain the spell 
was a far more dangerous object than they had at first led you to 
suppose. they sought spell that would do evil, and that evil was not 
accomplished. now, i ask you, if the firm work their spell through 
the instrumentality of evil spirits--for it is assured only evil 
spirits that are associate with sorcery--would not the spell they 
sold naturally have brought about the sinister result for which they 
were required? undoubted they would! and they fail to produce the 
desire effect, simply because their efficacy depended, not on spirit 
agency, but on human will power; which power one could only too 
plainly see the society ladies--who had witness for the 
prosecution--did not possess. 

"it may be asked, why the defendants, if they do not accomplish their 
spell through black magic, style themselves 'the sorcery company'--and 
so mislead the public? obviously they do so purely for advertisement. 
'the sorcery company' is an attractive title, a 'catchy' title, and 
for this reason, which is surely a legitimate one, since it is 
strict in accordance with the prevailing custom of advertisement--the 
firm of hamar, curtis and kelson adopt it. they did not expect--they 
were not so extraordinarily foolish as to expect--any one would take 
them literally. they thought--as you and i think--that sorcery cannot 
be taken seriously--that it is confine to fairy tales--and that, as a 
fairy tale, it is potent only in the nursery." 

this was the gist of counsel's speech for the defence. a number of 
witness then gave evidence for the defendants; and when the 
prosecute counsel rose, it was only too evident that he was pleading 
for a lost cause. the court with ill-concealed derision barely 
accord him a hearing. 

two hour later the _meteor_, always the first in the field when 
sensation crop up, head the first column of their front page with-- 

collapse of the sorcery case 
crush speech by gerald kirby, k.c. 
acquittal of the defendant 

"the judge"--so the _meteor_ reported--"expressed himself in absolute 
agreement with the defend counsel. 'the action,' he said, 'ought 
never to have been brought--it was sublime ridiculous to accuse any 
one of being in league with forces in the existence of which no sane 
person could possibly believe.'" 

shiel was in despair. all chance of saving glady seem to be fast 
disappearing. he telephone to her, and was answer by miss templeton. 

"gladys," she said, "had gone out with hamar, who had motor down to 
the cottage the moment the trial was over and the verdict known." 

"i wish to god we had won the case," shiel observed. 

"so do i," miss templeton replied, "and so did gladys--she regards her 
position now as absolutely hopeless!" 

"tell her not to lose heart," shiel answer hurriedly. "if i can't 
find any other means, i'll--" but miss templeton rang off, and he 
spoke to the wind. 

full of wrath against lilian rosenberg, he went round to see her, and 
met her, just as she was enter her house. 

"i've come to see you for the last time," he announced. "after the way 
you behave in court, we can no long be friends." 

"i don't understand," she said in rather a falter voice. "what have 
i done?" 

"only perjure yourself," shiel retorted. "the tale you told the judge 
was very different to the tale you told me, therefore it is impossible 
for us to continue our friendship. i could never have anything to do 
with a woman whose word i can't rely upon--whose character i scorn, 
whom i despise--and--" he was go to add, "detest," but checked 
himself, and unable to trust himself in her presence any longer, he 
gave her a glance of the utmost contempt, and wheeling round, walk 
quick away. 

as in a dream, lilian rosenberg went upstairs to her room, and 
throw herself on the bed, bury her face in the pillow and 
indulge in a fit of crying. it was not the thought of lose shiel 
that was so painful to her--she might have grown reconcile to 
that--it was the thought of lose his esteem. most people would agree 
with her--would assure her she had done the right thing in look 
after number one. "what, after all, is perjury?" she argued. "nearly 
every one in this world perjure themselves at one time or 
another--certainly all women." 

but it was not the opinion of the majority she care about--it was the 
respect of the one; the respect she had wilful and spiteful 
sacrificed. 

was it too late to recover it? 

with regard to glady she was very sceptical. the reluctance to accept 
hamar as her future husband she still believe to be all pretence, and 
she felt convinced that gladys, in her heart of hearts, was only too 
glad to get the chance of marry any one so rich. this being so, she 
could not bring herself to think she had done shiel any actual wrong. 
glady would never marry him. the only person she had harm was 
herself. she had lied, and shiel was not the sort of man to condone an 
offence of that sort easily. still, weeping would do no good; it would 
only make her ugly. she got up, had tea, and went out. she could think 
better in the open air--it soothe her. for some reason or 
other--custom perhaps--she stroll towards cockspur street, and there 
ran into one of the few people she particularly wish to 
avoid--kelson. 

he was delight to see her. 

"it's nectar to me to be out again," he said. "jerusalem!--it was 
awful in the courts. have supper with me." 

it was a fine starlight night--the air cool and refreshing, and a wild 
abandon seize lilian rosenberg. she would have sup with the 
devil had he ask her. 

"i've nothing to lose now," she said to herself. "nothing! i'll have 
my fling." 

"where shall we go?" she asked. "it must be somewhere entertaining." 

"why not to my rooms?" he said. "we can talk better there--we shall be 
all alone!" 

she raise no objection, and they were about to step into a taxi, when 
hamar and curtis sudden put in appearance. 

"matt!" hamar cried, seize his elbow. "i want a word with you." 

"not now," kelson protested, look hungry at lilian. 

"yes, now!" hamar said. "at once! i shan't keep you more than five 
minutes"--and he drag kelson away with him. 

the moment they had gone, curtis, who was obviously the worse for 
drink, address lilian. 

"kelson won't come back," he said. "hamar is mad with him. he say if 
he ever see you two together again he'll sack you. let me take his 
place!" 

a sudden inspiration came to her. there were one or two things she 
badly want to know--and with a bit of coaxing, curtis, in his 
present state, might tell her anything. she would try. 

"all right," she said. "i'll come." 

they got into the taxi and curtis, as far as his fuddle senses would 
allow, made violent love to her. 

after supper--they had supper in his rooms--he grew a great deal more 
amorous. she let him sit close beside her, she let him put his arm 
round her waist; but before she let him kiss her, she struck her 
bargain. 

"no!" she said, thrust him away. "not just yet. that can come 
later--if you are good. i want you to tell me something first. about 
this marriage of mr. hamar and miss martin--is it likely to come off?" 

"ish it likely!" curtis said with a stupid leer. "ish it likely! not 
much. leon means nothing! he only wants the fun of being engaged to a 
pretty girl--like i wantsh fun with you. nothing more." 

"then he'll throw her over after a while." 

"after he get what he wantsh to get." 

"and suppose she prove different to what he expects?" 

"after he pashe stage seven--that will be all right!" curtis said 
give her waist an emphatic squeeze. "everybody will be all right 
then. you and matt--for exshample--and i and--and--whishky!" 

"stage seven! what do you mean?" 

"why don't--you know!" curtis gurgled--and then a sudden gleam of 
intelligence coming into his watery eyes, he added. "then i shan't 
tell you--nothing shall make me. it's a shecret!" 

"i won't kiss you till you do!" lilian rosenberg said. 

"i'll make you." 

"oh, no, you won't," lilian rosenberg cried, disengage herself from 
his grasp, and rising. "don't you dare touch me. i'm going." 

curtis watch her with a helpless grin. then he sudden cry out, 
"come back! come back, i shay!" 

"well, will you do as i want?" lilian rosenberg said. 

"i'll do anything--anything to please you--if only you shtay with me." 

she sat down, and his arm once again encircle her. 

"now," she said, push his face away. "tell me!" 

bit by bit she drew out of him the whole history of the compact with 
the unknown, how in stage five, the stage they were about to enter, 
they would have fresh powers confer upon them--their present power, 
_i.e._ of working spell and cause diseases, being then cancelled; 
how they would obtain supreme power over women when they reach the 
final stage--stage seven; and how the compact would be broken and 
their ruin brought about, should either of them marry, or should 
anything happen before this final stage was reached, to disunite them. 

lilian could account for a great deal now. the uncanny feeling she had 
always experienced in the building; the curious enigmatic shadow 
she had seen hover about the doorway and flit down the 
passages; the extraordinary nature of the feat and spells; hamar's 
mutter and his fury, whenever kelson spoke to her--were no long 
wholly unintelligible. but she must know all. she must be most 
exacting. 

finally, she got from curtis everything there was to be got from him, 
and she laugh immoderately, when he excuse himself on the grounds 
that it was all leon's doings--leon had told him to offer her a little 
compensation for the loss of her escort. 

"and you have compensate me more than enough," lilian rosenberg said. 
"now you shall have your reward," and she kiss him--kissed him three 
times for luck. 

"but you're not going?" he said, staggering to his feet and attempt 
to hold her. "you're not go till the roshy morning sun shine 
shauci in on us." 

"oh, yes, i am," she said. "i've had quite enough of you! good-bye!" 

and before he could prevent her, she had run to the front door and let 
herself out. 




chapter xxvi 

in hyde park at night 


but now that lilian rosenberg was possessed of all this information 
respecting the trio, she was once again in doubt how to act, or 
whether to act at all. supposing she were to attempt to warn glady 
martin against hamar, how would glady take the warning? would she pay 
any attention to it? the odds were she would not; that have set her 
heart on marry hamar for his money, she would blind herself to his 
fault and resolute shut her ear to anything said against him. also 
there was the very great possibility of glady being rude to her--and 
even the thought of this was more than she could bear to contemplate. 
if only shiel were reasonable! if only he could be made to see how 
utterly ridiculous it was for him to think of winning such a girl as 
gladys--gladys the pretty, dolly-faced, pamper actress, who had 
never known a single hardship, had always had a well-lined purse, and 
would never, never marry poverty! then back to lilian rosenberg's mind 
came her parting with shiel--she recall his intense scorn and 
indignation. a liar! he did not wish to have anything to do with a 
liar! it's a good thing every man is not so fastidious, she said to 
herself bitterly, or the population of the world would soon fizz out. 
she laughed. he had never question her morals in any other 
sense--perhaps, in his innocence or assume innocence, he had thought 
them spotless--at all event he had most gracious ignore them. but 
a liar! a liar--he could not put up with. and why! because the lie had 
touched him on a sore point. when lie do not touch a sore point, 
they, too, are ignored. 

she walk to the imperial and look again at gladys's photographs. 
how any man could fall madly in love with such a face, was more than 
she could conceive. it was a mincing, maudlin, finick face--it 
irritate her intensely. she turn away from it in disgust, yet came 
back to have another look--and yet another. god know why! it 
fascinate her. finally she left it, fully resolve to let its odious 
original go to her fate--without a warning. soon after her return to 
the hall in cockspur street, she was sent for by hamar. 

"didn't i tell you," he said, "that you were on no account to 
encourage mr. kelson?" 

"you did!" lilian rosenberg replied. 

"will you kindly explain, then," hamar said, "why you have disobey 
my orders?" 

"how have i disobey them?" lilian rosenberg asked. 

"how!" hamar retorted, his cheek white with passion. "you dare to 
inquire how! why, you were on the point of accompany him to his 
rooms last night to supper, when i stop you! i have overlook your 
disobedience so many times that i can do so no longer. your service 
will not be require by the firm after to-day fortnight." 

"won't they?" lilian rosenberg replied, her anger rising. "i think you 
are mistaken. i know a great deal too much to make it safe for you to 
part with me. i know--for instance--all about your compact with the 
unknown!" 

"you know nothing," hamar said, his voice faltering. 

"oh, yes, i do!" lilian rosenberg answered. "i know everything. i know 
how you first got in communication with the unknown in san francisco; 
i know how you receive fresh powers from the unknown every three 
month (the old powers being cancelled). i know the penalty you will 
undergo should the compact be broken--and--what is more--i know how 
the compact can be broken." 

"how the deuce have you learned all this?" hamar stammered. 

"never you mind. am i to remain in your service or leave?" 

"i think," hamar said, stroke his chin thoughtfully, "it is better 
that you should remain--better for all parties. i owe you some little 
recompense for your loyalty to the firm, and for the admirable way you 
spoke up for the firm in court. i will make you out a cheque for a 
hundred pound now--and your salary shall be double at the end of 
this week. promise to keep out of mr. kelson's way in future--for the 
next six month at any rate--after that time you may see him as often 
as you like--and i will give you as a wedding present a cheque for 
twenty thousand pounds!" 

"twenty thousand pounds! you are joking!" 

"i'm not. i vow and declare i mean it. is that a bargain?" 

"i will certainly think it well over," lilian rosenberg said, "and let 
you know my decision later on." 

from what curtis had told her she knew it was the last day of stage 
four, that the trio that evening would be initiate into stage 
five--the stage of cures, and a mad desire seize her to witness the 
initiation. but how would the unknown manifest itself on this 
occasion--and to which of the trio? she could not keep a close watch 
on the three of them. if only she had been friends with shiel, they 
might, in some way, have work it together. curtis had careful 
avoid her since the supper; but she had seen kelson, and he had 
look at her each time he met her as if he yearn to fall down at 
her feet and worship her. should she attach herself to him for the 
evening--and run the risk of another quarrel with hamar? she dearly 
love risk and dangers--and the danger she would encounter in defy 
hamar appeal to her sporting nature. it was easy to secure 
kelson--one glance from her eyes--and he would have follow her to 
timbuctoo. 

"charing cross--under clock--after show to-night," she whisper as 
she flew hurried past him. "i want to speak to you." 

now it so happen that hamar had given kelson orders to return to his 
rooms, directly the performance was over, and to remain in them till 
morning, in case he was want in connection with the initiation. but 
he might have spare himself the trouble. it was lilian, and lilian 
only, that kelson now thought of--it was lilian, and lilian only, that 
he would obey. the idea of meeting her--of have her all to 
himself--of being able to do her a service--filled him with such 
uncontrollable delight, that he hardly knew how to comport himself so 
as not to arouse hamar's suspicions. directly the performance was over 
he sneak out of the hall, and pretend not to hear hamar, who 
call after him, he jump into a taxi, and was whirl away to the 
trysting-place. lilian rosenberg, who arrive a moment later, was 
dress in a new costume, and kelson thought her look smart and 
dainty than ever. 

"you shall kiss me at once," she said, "if you promise me one thing." 

"and what is that?" he asked, look hungry at her lips. 

"i want you to let me see the unknown when it come to you to-night," 
she said. 

"good god! what do you know about the unknown!" he exclaimed, his jaws 
falling, and a look of terror creep into his eyes. 

"a great deal," she laughed, "so much that i want to learn more"--and 
of what she knew she told him, just as much as she had told hamar. 
"and now," she said, "i repeat my promise--you shall have a 
kiss--think of that--if only you will hide me somewhere so that i can 
see the unknown or its emissary." 

"i would do anything for a kiss," kelson said, "but i fear it is 
impossible to fulfil the condition, because i haven't the remotest 
idea where or when the unknown will appear. besides, it is just as 
likely to go to hamar or curtis as to come to me; and up to the 
present i haven't felt the remotest suggestion of its favour me. is 
this the only condition i can fulfil, so that you will let me kiss 
you?" 

"certainly," lilian rosenberg replied. "i am not in the habit of being 
kissed. such an event can only happen in the most exceptional and 
privileged circumstances--such, for example, as exist at the present 
moment, when i ask you to put yourself to some considerable 
trouble--if not actually to incur danger--in order to accomplish what 
i wish." 

"and yet i remember kiss you unconditionally," kelson commented. 

"memory is a fickle thing," lilian rosenberg replied, "and so is 
woman. times have changed. i'll leave you at once, unless you promise 
to do your very utmost to grant my request." 

kelson promised, and--after they had had supper at the trocadero, 
suggest that they should take a stroll in hyde park. 

"i hope you are not awfully shocked?" he inquire rather anxiously, 
"but a sudden impulse has come over me to go there. i believe it is 
the will of the unknown. will you come with me?" 

"we shan't be able to get in, shall we, it's so late?" lilian 
rosenberg said. "otherwise i should like to--i'm rather in a mood for 
adventure." 

"they don't shut the gate till twelve," kelson said, "and it's not 
that yet." 

"very well, let's go, then. i'm game to go anywhere to see the 
unknown," and so saying lilian rose from the table, and kelson 
follow her into the street. 

they took a taxi, and alight at hyde park corner enter the park. 
it was very dark and deserted. 

"it's nearly close time," a policeman call out to them rather 
curtly. 

"we are only taking a constitutional," kelson explained. "we shall be 
back in five minutes." 

they cross the road to the statue, and were deliberate which 
direction to take, when they heard a groan. 

"it's only some poor devil of a tramp," kelson said. "the bench are 
full of them--they stay here all night. we had better, perhaps, turn 
back." 

"nonsense!" lilian rosenberg replied. "i'm not a bit afraid. there's 
another groan. i'm go to see what's up," and before he could stop 
her she had disappear in the darkness. "here i am," she called; 
"come, it's some one ill." 

plunge on, in the darkness, kelson at last found lilian. she was 
sitting on a chair under a tree, by the side of a man, who was lying, 
curl up, on the ground. 

"he's had nothing to eat for two days, and has bright's disease," 
lilian rosenberg announced. "can't we do something for him?" 

"two gentlemen told me just now," the man on the ground groaned, "that 
if i stay here for a couple of hours--they would pass by again and 
guarantee to cure me. i reckon there was no cure for bright's 
disease, when it is chronic, like it is in my case; but they laughed, 
and said, 'we can--or at least--shall be able to cure anything.'" 

"what were the two gentlemen like?" kelson asked. 

"how could i tell?" the man moaned. "i couldn't see their face any 
more than i can see yours--but they talk like you. twang--twang-- 
twang--all through their noses." 

"sounds as if it might be hamar and curtis," kelson remarked. 

"that's it!" the man ejaculated. "'amar. i heard the other fellow call 
him by that name." 

"how long ago is it since they were here?" kelson asked. 

"i can't say, perhaps ten minutes. i've lost count of time and 
everything else, since i've slept out here. they talk of go to 
the serpentine." 

"we had better try and find them," kelson said. 

"if you had the money couldn't you get shelter for the night," lilian 
rosenberg said. "it must be awful to lie out here in the cold, feeling 
ill and hungry." 

"i dare say some place would take me in," the man muttered, "only i 
couldn't walk--at least no distance." 

"well! here's five shillings," lilian rosenberg said, "put it 
somewhere safe--and try and hobble to the gates. if they haven't 
closed them, you will be all right." 

"five shillings!" the man gasped; "that's--it's no good--i can't 
count. i've no head now. thank you, missy! god bless you. i'll get 
something hot--something to stifle the pain." he struggle on to his 
knees, and lilian rosenberg help him to rise. 

"how could you be so foolish as to touch him," kelson said, as they 
start off down a path, they hope would take them to the serpentine. 
"you may depend upon it, he was swarm with vermin--tramps always 
are." 

"very probably, but i run just as much risk in a 'bus, the twopenny 
tube, or a cinematograph show. besides, i can't see a human being 
helpless without offering help. listen! there's some one else 
groaning! the park is full of groans." 

what she said was true--the park was full of groans. from every 
direction, borne to them by the gently rustling wind, came the groan 
of countless suffering outcasts--legions of homeless, starve men 
and women. some lay right out in the open on their backs, other 
under cover of the trees, other again on the seats. they lay 
everywhere--these shattered, tattered, batter wreck of 
humanity--these gangrene exile from society, to whom no one ever 
spoke; whom no one ever look at; whom no one would even own that 
they had seen; whose lot in life not even a stray cat envied. here 
were two of them--a man and a woman tight hug in each other's 
embrace--not for love--but for warmth. lilian rosenberg almost fell 
over them, but they took no notice of her. every now and then, one of 
them would emerge from the shelter of the trees, and cross the grass 
in the direction of the distant, gleam water, with silent, stealthy 
tread. once a tall, gaunt figure, sudden sprang up and confront 
the two adventurers; but the moment kelson raise his stick, it 
jabber something wholly unintelligible, and sped away into the 
darkness. 

"a scene like this make one doubt the existence of a good god," 
lilian rosenberg said. 

"it make one doubt the existence of anything but hell," kelson said. 
"compared with all this suffering--the suffering of these thousand of 
hungry, hopeless wretches--the bulk of whom are doubtless torture 
incessantly, with the pains of cancer and tuberculosis, to say nothing 
of neuralgia and rheumatism--dante's inferno and virgil's hades pale 
into insignificance. the devil is kind compare with god." 

"i believe you are right," lilian rosenberg said, "i never thought the 
devil was half as bad as he was painted. the park to-night give the 
lie direct to the ethics of all religions, and to the boast effort 
of all governments, churches, chapels, hospitals, police, progress and 
civilization. there is no misery, i am sure, to vie with it in any 
pagan land, either now or at any other period in the world's history." 

"true," kelson replied, "and why is it? it is because civilization has 
kill charity. giving--in its true sense--if it exist at all--is 
rarely to be met with--giving in exchange--that is, in order to 
gain--flourishes everywhere. people will subscribe for the erection of 
monument to kings and statesmen, or to well-known and, often, 
richly-endowed charitable institutes, in exchange for the pleasure of 
seeing, in the newspapers, a list of the subscribers' names, and 
themselves included amongst those whom they consider a peg above them 
socially; or in exchange for votes, or notoriety, they will give 
liberally to the brutal strikers, or outing for poor." 

"i suppose, by the poor, you mean the pampered, ill-mannered and 
detest conceited county council children," lilian rosenberg chime 
in. "i wouldn't give a farthing to such a miscall charity, no--not 
if i were rolling in riches." 

"and i think you would be right," kelson replied. "but for these 
really poor park refugee it is a different matter. obviously, no one 
will make the slightest effort to work up the public interest on their 
behalf, simply because they are label 'useless.' they belong 
nowhere--they have no votes--they are too feeble to combine--they are 
even too feeble to commit an atrocious murder; consequently, for the 
help they would receive, they could give nothing in return. by the 
bye, i doubt if they could muster between them a pair of suspenders--a 
bootlace--a shirt-button, or even a--" 

lilian rosenberg caught him by the arm. "stop," she said, "that's 
enough. don't get too graphic. what's the matter with that tree?" 

they were now close beside the bank of the serpentine; the moon had 
broken through its covering of black clouds, and they perceive some 
twenty yard ahead of them, a tall, isolated lime, that was rock in 
a most peculiar manner. 

[illustration: they gaze fascinated] 




chapter xxvii 

the right girl to marry 


though the wind was nothing more than the usual night breeze of early 
autumn, the lime-tree was sway violent to and fro, as if under 
the influence of a stupendous hurricane. lilian rosenberg and kelson 
were so fascinate that they stood and watch it in silence. at last 
it left off sway and became absolutely motionless. they then 
noticed, for the first time, that there were three figures standing 
under its branches, and that one of the figures was a policeman. 

"hide quickly," kelson whispered, "those two are hamar and curtis. 
quick, for god's sake--or they will see you." 

lilian rosenberg hid behind an elm. 

"hulloa!" kelson call out, advance to the group. 

"why it's you, matt!" curtis cried. "hamar said you would come!" 

"said i would come! how the deuce did he know?" kelson exclaimed. "i 
didn't know myself till the moment before i started." 

"i will you," hamar explained; "as soon as i got back to my rooms 
after the show, a voice said in my ears--i heard it distinctly--'be at 
the serpentine--the south bank--underneath a lime-tree--you will know 
which--at twelve to-night.' i look round--there was no one there. 
naturally, conclude this was a message from the unknown i hasten 
off to curtis, who was in his digs--and needless to say--eating, and 
have drag him away with me in a diabolical temper--i then sought 
you. where were you?" 

"taking a walk. i felt i need it." 

"alone! are you sure you weren't out with some girl." 

"i swear it." 

"it seem as if i'm not the only liar!" lilian rosenberg said to 
herself in her place of concealment. "what would shiel say to that?" 

"humph! i don't know if i ought to believe you," hamar remarked. "did 
you feel me willing you to come here?" 

"rather!" kelson said. "that is why i came. i seem to hear your 
voice say 'to hyde park--to hyde park--the serpentine--the 
serpentine.'" then sink his voice he whispered, "what's up with the 
policeman, he looks deuced queer?" 

"he's in a trance. we found him like this," hamar said. "he is 
undoubted under the control of the unknown. i expect it to speak 
through him every moment. get ready to take down all he says. i've 
come prepared," and he hand kelson and curtis, each, a pencil and a 
reporter's notebook. 

he had hardly done so, when the policeman--a burly man well over six 
feet in height, who was standing bolt upright as if at "attention," his 
limb absolutely rigid, his eyes wide open and expressionless--began 
to speak in a soft, lisp voice that the trio at once identify 
with the voice of the unknown--the voice of the tree on that eventful 
night in san francisco. 

"the great secret of medicine--the secret of healing--will now be 
reveal to you," the voice said. "pay heed. in case of tumour and 
ulcer take a young seringa, lay it for half an hour over the stomach 
of the afflict person, then plant it with the mumia, _i.e._ either 
the hair, blood, or spittle of the sick person, at midnight. as soon 
as the seringa begin to rot, the ulcer will heal. 

"in phthisis pulmonalis, the mumia of the sick person should be 
plant with a cutting of the catalpa, after the latter has been 
subject for some minutes to the breath of the disease person. as 
soon as the cutting show sign of decay, the sick person will be 
cured. 

"in diabetes, plant the mumia of the patient with a bignonia, and as 
soon as the latter begin to rot, the diabetes will go. 

"in appendicitis, cover the stomach of the sick person with a piece of 
raw beef, until the sweat enter it. then give the meat to a cat, and 
as soon as the latter has eaten it, the patient will recover." 

"what become of the cat?" kelson asked. 

"the appendicitis is transfer to it," the voice explained. "it 
should be kill at once. 

"in cancer take the sea wrack torrek mendrek--a weed of deep mauve 
colour streak with white. it must be boil for three hour in clear 
spring water (3 ozs. of wrack to half a pint of water), and then let 
to cool. when quite cold, a dessert-spoon of it should be taken by the 
sufferer every four hours--and at the end of two days the disease will 
have completely disappeared. the wrack is to be found at the twenty 
fathom level, six mile west-south-west of the scil isles. 

"in bright's disease, the mumia of the afflict should be plant at 
1 a.m., with a cutting of sassafras, after the latter has been slept 
on, for one whole night, by the sufferer. as soon as the sassafras 
begin to rot, the patient will be cured. 

"in dropsy, place a hare, that has been strangled, over the disease 
portion of the body, and let it remain there for one hour. then bury 
the hare, together with the mumia of the sick person, and as soon as 
the hare begin to decay, the patient will recover. 

"in jaundice and liver disease (apart from sarcoma), plant the mumia 
of the afflicted, at 2 a.m., with a cutting of black walnut, and as 
soon as the latter begin to decay, the sufferer will get well. 

"in all skin diseases, the mumia of the patient must be planted, at 
midnight, with a cutting of hickory, and when the latter begin to rot 
the disease disappears. 

"in all fevers, the mumia must be planted, at 3 a.m., with laurel 
cuttings, after the latter have been placed under the bed of the 
patient for one night. as soon as the cutting show sign of rotting, 
the fever abates. 

"in acute inflammations, disease of the heart, rheumatism, and 
lumbago, the mumia must be buried, at midnight, with a raven that has 
been drowned, and placed on a chair by the left side of the patient 
for one night. as soon as the raven begin to rot, the patient will be 
fully restore to health. 

"in case of insanity, hysteria, and nervous disease the mumia of the 
sufferer must be planted, at 2 a.m., with a cutting of white poplar, 
and as soon as the latter show evidence of decay, the afflict will 
get well. 

"in case of hypochondria, and melancholia, the mumia of the sufferer 
must be planted, at 4 a.m., with a crocus, and as soon as the latter 
begin to rot, the disease will depart. 

"in every case it will be necessary to prelude the performance with 
the following invocation-- 

"'oh most powerful and prescient unknown, before whom the greatest of 
the atlantean prostrate themselves. that was in the beginning, that 
is now and always will be. i conjure thee by the magic symbol of the 
club-foot, the hand with the finger clenched, and the bat, in this 
the magical year of kefana, to extend to me thy wonderful powers of 
healing. rena vadoola hipsano eik deoo barrinaz.'" 

the lisp voice ceased, and, with a convulsive start, the policeman 
came to himself. 

"hulloa!" he said, in his natural gruff tones, rubbing his eyes. "i 
must have 'dropped off.' who are you? what are you do in the park 
at this time of night?" 

"we've been watch you!" hamar said. "it is a bit of a phenomenon to 
see a london bobby asleep on his beat." 

"and to hear him talk in his sleep too," curtis added. 

"i didn't know i was talking," the policeman muttered. "it all come 
of being too many hour on duty. what have you got those note-books 
out for? not been taking down anything about me, have you?" 

"show us out of the park and you'll hear no more about it," hamar 
said. 

"and we'll give you half a sovereign into the bargain," kelson chime 
in. 

"follow me then," the policeman said. "i'll take you to one of the 
side entrances." 

"matt!" hamar exclaim as they pass the tree behind which lilian 
rosenberg was hiding, "i smell scent--and what is more i recognize it. 
it is violette de mer--the scent that--rosenberg uses! you were with 
her this evening!" 

"i swear i wasn't!" kelson replied. "i bought some scent in regent 
street this afternoon." 

"humph," hamar grunted. "i have my doubts." 

they walk on in silence till they came to a small iron gate, where 
the policemen left them, whilst he went to the lodge for the keys; and 
all the while kelson was in terror, lest hamar should catch sight of 
lilian rosenberg, who had kept close behind them, and was now 
standing, but a few yard away, try to conceal her identity and 
escape notice. 

but the policeman on his return with the key call out to her, and 
kelson, fear that she might be either taken in charge for loiter 
there, in apparently suspicious circumstances, or made to remain in 
the park all night--neither of which contingency he could possibly 
permit--at once came forward, and explain that she was a friend of 
his. 

the policeman was satisfied. the sight of another half-sovereign had 
render him more than polite, and, without saying a word, he let them 
all out together. 

the moment they were in the street, hamar turn on kelson, white with 
passion. 

"so," he said, "i was right after all--liar! fool! you would risk all 
our lives for a few hours' flirtation with this silly girl." 

"if it's only flirtation, leon, what do it matter?" curtis 
interposed. "for goodness' sake shut up wrangle and let's get home. 
i'm starving." 

"i shall have something to say to you to-morrow morning," hamar 
remarked, in an undertone, to lilian rosenberg. 

"and i to you," was the furious reply. "i shall not forget the 
disrespectful way in which you have just spoken of me, in allude to 
the scent." 

she signal to a taxi, and give kelson a friendly good-night, 
jump into it and was speedy whirl away. 

on the whole, the evening had been a disappointment. she had want to 
see the unknown--the awful thing that had inspired kelson and his 
colleague with such unmitigated horror--and instead she had seen only 
an obsess policeman--a cataleptic "copper"--who, had he not spoken 
in a strange uncanny voice, would certainly have seem to her 
absolutely ordinary. 

with regard to hamar's displeasure, she was not in the slightest 
degree disturbed. he would never dare say anything to her. and after 
all that had occur he would never venture to "sack her." all the 
same she hate him. there was just sufficient in her conduct to make 
the name he had call her by applicable--therefore her bitterest 
wrath and indignation were arouse against him. he had behave 
unpardonably. she could kill him for it. 

"i'll just show him," she said to herself, "what that uncivil tongue 
of his can do. he shall see that it can do him infinite more harm 
than all kelson's love-making. for one thing i'll spoil his chance 
with glady martin; and--i wonder if i could make use of what i know 
about him, as a means of get friendly again with shiel. at all 
event i'll try." 

with this object in view she went round to shiel's lodgings, and was 
informed by the landlady that shiel was ill. 

"nothing serious i hope?" she asked. 

"it has been," the landlady replied, "but he is better now. it all 
came through his not taking proper care of himself." 

"may i see him, do you think?" lilian rosenberg inquired. 

"i don't know," the landlady grumbled. "he's in a very touchy mood--no 
one can do nothing right for him. but maybe there won't be any harm in 
your trying," she added, her eyes wandering to the half-crown in 
lilian rosenberg's fingers. 

she open the door somewhat wider, and lilian rosenberg entered. 
shiel was immensely surprise to see her. illness and solitude had 
very considerably subdued him, and though at first he show some 
resentment, he speedy soften under her sympathetic solicit 
for his health. she put his room straight and dust the furniture, 
got tea for him, and when she had completely won him over by these 
kindly actions, and made him beg her pardon for ever have spoken 
harsh to her, she broach the subject all the while uppermost in 
her mind--the subject of hamar and gladys. 

"he hasn't the slightest intention of marry her," she said. "all he 
wants is to make her his mistress, so as to be able to throw her over 
the moment he get tired of her, and then marry some one of title. he 
is tremendous taken with her of course--her physical beauty, which 
he had the impudence to tell me surpass that of any other woman he 
had seen, appeal strong to his gross sensual nature. if she won't 
give in to him now, she will be oblige to do so in six months' time." 

"i don't understand you," shiel said feebly; "why in six months' 
time?" 

lilian rosenberg then told him what she knew about the compact. 

"so you see," she added, "that if the final stage is reach no woman 
will be safe--the trio will have any girl they fancy entire at their 
mercy." 

"how inconceivable awful!" shiel exclaimed. "surely there is some way 
of stopping them." 

"there is only one way," lilian said slowly, "the union between the 
three must be broken--they must quarrel, and dissolve partnership." 

"you may be sure they will take good care not to do that." 

"don't be too sure," lilian rosenberg replied. "matthew kelson is very 
fond of me. with a little persuasion he would do anything i asked." 

"then do you think you could bring about a rupture between him and 
hamar!" shiel ask eagerly. 

"i might!" 

"and you will--you will save glady martin after all!" 

lilian did not reply at once. 

"do you think she is the sort of girl who would marry poverty," she 
said, evasively, "poverty like this!" and she glance round the room. 

"i won't ask her to!" shiel exclaimed. "whilst i have been lie in 
bed, ill, i have thought of many things--and have come to the 
conclusion i have no right ever to think of marrying. it is difficult 
for me to earn enough to keep one person in comfort--and i've lost all 
hope of ever earn enough to keep two." 

"well, if you don't ask her," lilian rosenberg said, "there's one 
thing, she will never ask you. and i think you are remarkably well out 
of it. if you do ever marry, marry a girl that has grit--a girl that 
would be a real 'pal' to you--a girl that would help you to win fame!" 




chapter xxviii 

whom will he marry? 


had lilian rosenberg been able to see the effect of her conversation 
upon shiel after she had left him, she would have been disappointed. 
he had, prior to this interview with lilian rosenberg, as he told her, 
made up his mind to abandon all idea of marry glady martin; and 
there is a possibility that had her name not been mentioned, had she 
not been recall so vivid to his mind, he would have adhere to 
that resolution--at all event so long as he refrain from seeing 
her. but such is human nature--or at least man's nature--that directly 
lilian rosenberg had left him, shiel's love for glady burst out with 
such wild, invigorate force that it swept reason and everything else 
before it. gladys! he could think of nothing else! every detail in her 
appearance, every word she had spoken, came back to him with 
exaggerate intensity. her beauty was sublime. there was no one like 
her, no one that could inspire him with such a sense of ideality, no 
one that could lead him on to such dizzy heights of greatness. it was 
all nonsense to say, as lilian rosenberg had said, there were just as 
many good fish in the sea as had ever come out of it--there was only 
one gladys. hamar should never marry her--he would marry her himself. 
she must be told at once of hamar's infamous designs. a mad desire to 
see her came over him, and disregardful of the doctor's orders that he 
should remain in bed several more days, he got up, and dressing as 
fast as his weak condition would allow him, took a taxi and drove to 
waterloo. 

on reach the cottage, at kew, he found glady at home, and to his 
great joy, alone. 

there is nothing that appeal to a woman more than a sick man, and 
shiel, in coming to glady in his present condition, had unwitting 
play a trump card. had he appear well and strong she would 
probably have received him none too cordially--for she was very tired 
of men just then; but the moment her eyes alight on his thin cheek 
and she saw the dark ring under his eyes, pity conquered. this man at 
least was not to blame--he was not of the same pattern as other men, 
he was not like so many men whose adulation had grown fulsome to her, 
and--he was total unlike hamar. 

in very sympathetic tone she inquire how he was, and on learning 
that he had been sufficient ill to be kept in bed, ask why he had 
not told her. 

"aunty and i would have call to see you," she said, "and brought you 
jelly and other nice things. who wait on you, had you no nurse?" 

fearful lest he should give her the impression he was speak for 
effect, or try to trade on her feelings (shiel was one of those 
people who are painful exact), he told her as simply as he could 
just how he had been placed. 

"but why come here," glady demanded, "when you were told to stay in 
bed till the end of the week. it is frightfully risky." 

shiel then explain to her the purport of his visit. 

"then it was to warn me, to put me on my guard against hamar, that you 
disobey the doctor's orders," she said. 

shiel nodded. "you are not displeased, are you?" he ask nervously. 

"i am displease with you for thinking so little of yourself," glady 
said, "and more than oblige to you for thinking so much of me. you 
know i only consent to marry mr. hamar to save my father--and you 
say he no long has the power to work spells?" 

"i believe that to be a fact," shiel replied. 

"then he lie to me!" glady observed. "he threaten that unless i 
saw him as often as he wished, and went with him wherever he wanted, 
and a good many more things, he would inflict my father with every 
conceivable disease. you are quite sure your information is correct?" 

"absolutely!" 

"then, thank god!" glady said with a great sigh of relief. "i shall 
know how to act now." 

"you will break off your engagement?" shiel inquire eagerly. 

"no! i can't do that!" glady said sadly. "i've promise to marry mr. 
hamar, and, therefore, marry him i must." 

"promises made under such conditions are mere extortions, they don't 
count." 

"i fear they do," glady replied. "i've never yet broken my word." 

"then there's no hope for me," shiel gasped. "i must go--it madden me 
to see you the affiance bride of that devil." 

he rose to go, but had hardly gain his feet, when his strength 
utterly fail and he collapsed. glady help him into a chair, and 
then flew for some brandy. in the hall, she met her aunt, who had just 
return from an afternoon call. in a few words she explain what had 
happened. 

"poor young man," miss templeton said. "i thought he look very ill 
the last time i saw him. and he came here solely to benefit you! well, 
you have a good deal to answer for, and your face is not only your own 
misfortune, but other people's too. but it will never do for your 
father to see mr. davenport. he went off in a very bad temper this 
morning, and if he come back and find him here, there'll be a 
scene." 

miss templeton and glady consult together for some minutes, and 
then decided to send for a taxi and have shiel convey back to his 
rooms, miss templeton accompany him. 

miss templeton knew that shiel was poor, but like most people who have 
live in comfortable surroundings all their lives, she had no idea of 
what poverty was like--the poverty of a seven-and-sixpenny a week room 
in a back street; and when she saw it she nearly swooned. 

"why this is a slum!" she ejaculate as the taxi stop next door to 
a fry fish shop in a narrow street swarm with children suck 
bread and jam, and rolling each other over in the gutters. 

"i don't wonder the man is ill here!" she said to herself, as the door 
of the house they stop at open and she snuff the atmosphere. 
"the place reeks--and--oh! gracious! is this the landlady?" 

yet the woman was ordinary enough--the type of landlady one see in 
all back streets--greasy face, straggle hair, dirty blouse, black 
hands, bitten fingernails, short skirts, prodigious feet, a grubby 
child clinging on to her dress and every indication of the speedy 
arrival of another. 

"i suppose you're 'is mother hain't you, mum?" she said, gape at 
miss templeton's rather fashionable clothes in open-mouthed wonder. "i 
told 'im 'ee ought not to go out, but 'ee never 'eeds what i says." 

miss templeton, though not particularly flatter at being taken for 
shiel's mother--since, like most ladies of mature age, she wish to 
be regard as much younger--nevertheless, thought it better not to 
disillusion the woman. the poor, she told herself, often have very 
decided view on propriety. with the woman's aid she got shiel 
upstairs, and, as he was too feeble to undress himself, despite his 
protestations, help to disrobe him. she had thought, when she first 
saw the slum, of return to kew at once, but she did no such thing. 
she stay with shiel; persuade the landlady to make him some gruel 
(which prove to be a sorry mess, but had at least the advantage of 
being hot), and bribe one of the children to fetch the doctor. shiel 
nearly died. had it not been for the careful nursing and good food 
provided by miss templeton, who visit him every day, he would never 
have turn the corner. 

"the poor boy is terribly fond of you," miss templeton said to gladys. 
"in his delirium he talk of nothing but saving you from leon 
hamar--from that devil leon hamar--and if one can place any reliance 
at all, on the ravings of a sick man, a devil, leon hamar undoubted 
is. what a pity it is shiel hasn't money." 

these remark were naturally not without effect on gladys, and she 
could not help grow more and more interested in the man, whose love 
for her had prove so deep-rooted and ideal, that he had practically 
sacrifice his life, in an attempt to serve her. finally, she found 
herself await her aunt's daily report of his illness with an 
anxiety that was almost acute. 

in the meanwhile, john martin came home one evening in a rare state of 
excitement. 

"what do you think!" he exclaimed, throw a bundle of letters on the 
table, "one of dick's speculation has turn out trumps, after all. 
he had invest several thousand of pounds--in shiel's name--in 
enamel-ivorine, the new stuff for stopping teeth, which looks exactly 
like part of the teeth. i remember i thought it an absurd venture at 
the time, but for once in a way i was wrong--" 

"ahem!" interrupt gladys. 

"there has been a sudden boom in the patent, every dentist is use 
it, and, as a consequence, the shares have risen enormously. i've 
heard from dick's lawyer to-day that shiel is now worth fifty thousand 
pounds!" 

"good heavens!" miss templeton ejaculated, "and glady has bound 
herself to hamar! i suppose," she said afterwards, when john martin 
and she were alone together, "that you would not have any objection to 
shiel now, if glady were free to marry him." 

"certainly not!" john martin said, "certainly not, i always like 
shiel. a fine manly young fellow, very different to the type one 
usually meet nowadays. i only wish glady were free!" 

"you would raise no obstacle to her becoming engaged to shiel?" 

"none whatsoever! but what's the good of talk about an 
impossibility. glady is stubborn itself--when once she has made 
up her mind to do a thing, nothing in god's world will make her not do 
it." 

"wait," miss templeton said, "wait and see. i think i can see a 
possible way out of it." 

she had learned much from shiel in his "wanderings." he had constant 
allude to hamar, curtis, kelson--and lilian rosenberg; to the great 
compact, and to the one possible way of break that compact--namely 
through the instigation of a quarrel between the trio. from several of 
the statement he had made, miss templeton deduce that kelson was 
greatly under the influence of lilian rosenberg--and it was from these 
statement that she finally received an inspiration. 

miss templeton saw deep than shiel--it had always been her custom to 
read between the lines. "now," she argued, "if kelson were so easily 
influence by lilian rosenberg, who was young and attractive, it was 
almost a _sine quâ non_ that he was in love with her," and as marriage 
was one of the eventuality strict forbidden to the trio in the 
compact--"they must neither quarrel nor marry," shiel had 
exclaimed--here was their chance. kelson must marry lilian rosenberg, 
and by so doing, break the compact and overwhelm the trio in some 
sudden and dire catastrophe. but the marriage must take place within 
six months' time. how could that be arranged? could lilian rosenberg 
be bribe or persuade into it? for of course miss templeton being a 
woman--albeit an old maid--had at once divine that lilian rosenberg 
was in love with shiel--that she did not care a straw for kelson, and 
that to marry the latter she would need some very strong inducement. 
and the only inducement she could think of was lilian's genuine love 
for shiel. 

"yes, it is upon this one weakness of lilian's that i must work," she 
said to herself. "it is the only way i can see of saving gladys." 

resolve at any rate to experiment upon these lines, she lost no time 
in seek out lilian rosenberg, who received her very cold and was 
distinct rude. 

"what have my affair to do with you? who sent you here?" she 
demanded. 

"humanity!" miss templeton replied. "i have come entire of my own 
accord to plead the cause of one who is seriously ill--possibly 
dying!" 

"seriously ill!--possibly dying!" lilian rosenberg said incredulously, 
nevertheless, turning pale. "mr. davenport is surely not as bad as all 
that!" 

"when did you see him last?" miss templeton asked. 

"a fortnight ago," lilian rosenberg replied. "i have been inundate 
with work the past two weeks." 

"then you've not heard that he's had a relapse," miss templeton said, 
"and is now in a most critical condition! he has something on his 
mind, and the doctor assure me that whilst he is still worry over 
that something, there is no chance of his recovery." 

"do you know what it is--the something?" lilian rosenberg asked, the 
white on her cheek intensifying. 

"yes!" miss templeton said slowly, and try to appear calm. "he is 
very worried about miss martin's engagement to mr. hamar." 

"and why, pray?" 

"because he know all about mr. hamar--and the compact." 

"he has told you?" 

"i have glean it from what he has said in his delirium." 

"has he been as ill as that?" 

"yes, he has. he had a temperature of a hundred and four the day 
before yesterday." 

for a few moments there was silence. then lilian rosenberg said, "can 
you believe what a man say in delirium?" 

"in this instance i feel sure you can," miss templeton replied. 

"why should miss martin's engagement be of such interest to mr. 
davenport?" 

miss templeton thought for a moment. "because," she said at last, "he 
is in love with her." 

"are you sure of it?" 

"absolutely!" 

"do you think she care for him, even as much as that?" and she 
snap her fingers. 

"i think she may care for him a very great deal some day--she has 
begun to care for him already!" 

"but she would never dream of marry any one as badly off as mr. 
davenport. he is practically starving." 

"he was--but he's not now. he's come into money." and she explain 
about the fifty thousand pounds. 

"i see!" lilian rosenberg said after a prolonged pause, "that account 
for her have just begun to care for him. supposing there was some 
one who had been fond of him all along--in the days when he hadn't a 
halfpenny to his name, and every one else shun him!" 

"i should feel very sorry for that person," miss templeton said, "but 
setting aside the sacrifice of his happiness--it would be wrong for 
him to marry her if his heart was fixed elsewhere." 

"which you say it is." 

"which i am sure it is!" 

"well, supposing it is--what do it concern me? why tell me all 
this?" 

"because it lie in your power to put an end to the compact and bring 
about the catastrophe the unknown threatened." 

"i think you credit me with rather too much. i do not quite see how i 
can accomplish all this?" 

"but i do," miss templeton said, briskly. "i believe i am right in 
saying mr. kelson is in love with you--that you can make him do pretty 
well anything you please. well, all you have to do is to lead him on 
to propose and insist on his marry you at once--or at all event 
before the expiration of the compact. if you succeed in do this the 
compact will be broken!" 

"that may be," lilian rosenberg exclaimed, "but where, pray, should i 
come in? why on earth should i marry a man i don't care a snap for?" 

"why!" miss templeton replied, slowly, "why, because by marry a man 
you don't care a snap for, you would save the life of a man--i am 
quite sure, you care a very great deal for." 




chapter xxix 

the end and "the beyond" 


it took lilian rosenberg some time to make up her mind. 

"it's extraordinary," she said to herself, "how fond i am of shiel. i 
use to think it an impossible for me to be really fond of 
anyone.... the question is, however, am i sufficient in love with 
him, to give him up to that soft little cat--gladys martin! if it 
weren't for this illness--if i could only persuade myself that he 
isn't as ill as miss whatever-her-name-is--said, i shouldn't think 
twice--i should let things be--but as i feel sure he is really 
ill--dangerously ill--and the only chance of his recovery lie in the 
possibility of his marry martin--i must deliberate. shall i or 
shall i not? if it were any other woman i shouldn't so much 
mind--but--gladys martin! i can't endure her. there is one hope, 
however, namely--that if he marry her, he will soon tire of 
her--and--and come to me. what a tremendous score off her that would 
be! but, no! i wouldn't do that! because--because--well there--just 
like my infernal luck--i love him. could i marry him, i wonder, even 
if there were no glady martin? it is doubtful! yet i believe i could. 
but what is the good of conceive impossibilities! there is a glady 
martin--and--i can never have shiel. the only question i have to 
settle is--shall she have him? shall i marry kelson so that martin can 
marry shiel?" 

lilian rosenberg turn this question over in her mind for a whole day 
and night, sometimes arrive at one decision, sometimes at another. 
in the end--very elaborate dressed, and look dainty than she 
had ever done in her life, she waylaid kelson and ask him to have 
tea with her. 

any pretty face, accentuate by all the allurement of a large 
mushroom hat and hobble skirt, was enough for kelson; but when that 
face belong to the one girl for whom, above all other girls, he had 
a colossal weakness, he simply could not feast his eyes enough on it. 

"have tea with you? of course i will," he said. "but we must be 
careful. hamar is about. if you walk on up the haymarket, i'll follow 
in a taxi, and pick you up, directly i get to a safe distance." 

"i see you are as much in awe of mr. hamar as ever," lilian rosenberg 
laughed. "i'm not! i've found him out--he's all talk. but do as you 
will--get your taxi and i'll walk on--we'll have tea in my new flat." 

kelson was so delight he hardly knew if he stood on his head or his 
heels. "you are pretty than ever," he said, as the taxi-door shut 
and they sped away. "i declare there seem no limit to your beauty." 

"only because you're partial," she said. "i shall grow ugly one day. 
perhaps--soon." with a savage energy, she set to work to completely 
overcome him. with a languish expression in her eyes--eyes, which 
she made use of mercilessly, without give him a moment's 
respite--she watch his whole being vibrate with love and adoration. 

they had hardly enter the drawing-room of her flat when he threw 
himself at her feet, and pour forth his worship of her in the most 
extravagant phrases. 

"look here, mr. kelson," she said at length, withdraw the hand it 
seem as if he would never leave off kissing, "this is all very well; 
but i daresay you make love to countless other girl in this same 
fashion. how can i tell if you are really serious?" 

"don't i look as if i am?" he cried. 

"one can never judge correct by looks," she replied; "they are 
terribly deceptive. you are very emphatic in your avowal of love, but 
you say nothing about marriage." 

"then you do care for me! jerusalem! how happy i should be if only i 
thought that!" 

"think it, then," lilian rosenberg said, "and let us come to an 
understanding. can you afford to keep a wife--keep her, as i should 
expect to be kept--plenty of new dresses, jewelry, theatres, balls, 
motors, ascot, henley, cowes?" 

"i reckon i could do all that," kelson replied. "i've just over a 
hundred and fifty thousand pound in the bank, and with this 'cure' 
business, i'm taking on an average ten thousand per week. i would 
settle a hundred thousand on you, and make you a handsome allowance--a 
thousand a week--more if you want it." 

"well!" lilian rosenberg said after a slight pause, during which 
kelson had again seize her hand and was kiss it convulsively, "to 
quote one of your americanisms--i reckon i'll fix up with you. on one 
condition, however." 

"and that," kelson murmured, still kiss her feverishly. 

"that we marry a week to-day!" 

kelson drop her hand as if he had been shot. "we can't!" he cried. 
"the compact!" 

"oh, damn the compact!" lilian rosenberg said coolly. "you marry me 
then--or not at all!" 

"you are joking--you know what the compact means!" 

"i know what you think it means. for my own part i don't see that you 
have the slightest reason to fear. the unknown cannot really harm you. 
all you have to do is to turn religious. anyhow you must risk it--that 
is to say, if you want me." 

"it will lead to a quarrel with hamar," kelson said desperately. "the 
firm will dissolve--and i shan't get a cent more money." 

"i'll be content with what you have in the bank now. we can live on 
the interest of fifty thousand. the hundred thousand you will, of 
course, settle on me at once." 

he was silent. she taunt him, she ridicule him; she at last lost 
her temper with him--whereupon he succumbed. the marriage should take 
place at a registry office within the week. 

"there'll be no time for a trousseau!" he said. 

"oh, hang the trousseau!" she said. "i shall have the hundred thousand 
pounds. and now for a word of advice. be sure that you do not let 
hamar get any inkling of our approach marriage, and be most careful 
to avoid do anything that might arouse his suspicions. it isn't 
that i'm afraid of him--but i don't want rows--i'm sick to death of 
them!" 

"you can rely on me to be careful, darling!" kelson said, kiss her 
on the lips. "i'll be discretion itself," and so he meant to be. all 
the same--as is the case with every lover--every lover worthy of the 
name of lover--who love with all the full, ripe vigour of genuine 
passion, his heart play havoc with his head; and he was blind to 
everything save vision of his beloved. in other circumstances this 
would not have matter very much, but with hamar's lynx eyes 
continual watch him, it was certain to lead to disaster. 

"ed!" hamar said to curtis one day. "matt's been get into 
mischief. i know the symptom well. he can't look me in the face, and 
every now and then, when he fancies my attention is attract 
elsewhere, i catch him peep furtive at me as if he were 
frightened out of his life i should ferret out some secret. it would 
be deplorable if now that we have got so near the end of the compact, 
we should be held up by some idiot blunder--some nonsensical love 
affair of his. i wonder whether it's rosenberg or some other girl. 
will you find out?" 

"how can i?" curtis growled. "i'm not his keeper." 

"i know that!" hamar said. "come be reasonable. you want to be a 
croesus--so that you can eat and drink your head off--don't you! 
well! you will! you will be one of the three wealthiest men in the 
world--you will have the world at your feet, if only you stick to me 
for the next seven months: till we have pass the seventh stage. if 
you don't--if either you or matt deliberate quarrel with me, or 
marry--then, as i've din into your ear a thousand times, the 
compact will be broken, and--not only that, but some frightful 
catastrophe will wipe us off. now will you do what i ask? come--a 
dinner with me every night this week, at the piccadilly--champagne--and 
no vegetables!" 

"all right," curtis said sulkily, "for the good of the cause i suppose 
i must, but i hate spying." 

two nights later in a private room at the piccadilly, after dinner, 
when the champagne and liqueur had got into curtis's head and he was 
leaning back in his chair, smile and silly, hamar sudden said, 
"ed! you remember what i told you--about watch kelson. have you 
discover anything?" 

"shupposing i have," curtis replied, "shupposing i haven't--whatch 
then?" 

"ah, but i know you have," hamar said, strive to hide his eagerness. 
"come, tell me, another liqueur--i'll square it with the unknown--it 
won't hurt you!" 

"won't it!" curtis gurgled. "wont'ch it! i'll tell you everything. 
no--nothingsh, i mean." 

but hamar when once he had smelt a rat, was not easily put off. he 
coaxed, and coaxed, and eventually succeeded. 

"leonsh!" curtis said, with a sudden burst of drunken confidence. 
"leonsh! it's worse than either you or i shuspected. i caught them 
alone this morning--in my offish." 

"them! rosenberg and matt!" 

"yesh, of course, shilly! i told matt i was go out. he thought i 
had--so into the room i came--quite unshuspected, unobsherved. she was 
sitting on hish knees, cuddling--and he was putt a ring on her 
finger. 'four more days, darling,' shay he, 'and we are married! 
jerushalem! damn the compact and damnsh hamar!' 'hamar doesn't 
shuspect, do he?' rosenberg shays. 'not a bit--not in the 
slightest,' old matt replieshes, 'why it is i who amsh brave now.' 
then he kisshe her, and fear they would detect my presence, i 
slipsh quiet out." 

"will you swear this is true?" leon said, his voice tremble with 
excitement. 

"i'll schwear it!" curtis answered, "but you look crossh. whatsh the 
matter, leon? _god! what's the matter!_" 

an hour later, as kelson was rising from his chair in front of the 
fire to gaze, for the hundredth time that evening, into the eyes of 
lilian rosenberg's portrait on the mantelshelf, the door of his room 
flew open and in stagger curtis--white, wet and bloated. 

"great heavens!" kelson cried. "what the deuce have you been do to 
yourself? you look a perfect devil!" 

"i am one!" curtis groaned. "i am one, matt! i've given your show 
away." 

"my show away! why, what the deuce do you mean?" 

in a string of broken sentence curtis explain what had happened. 
"i'm damn sorry, matt, old man," he pleaded. "it was the drink that 
did it--i didn't know what i was saying till it was too late--till i 
saw leon's face--and that clear my brain--brought me to myself. it 
was hellish. i remember the moment i mention the word marriage--he 
sprang up from his chair, and as he hurried out, i heard him mutter, 
'i'll go to her straight--i'll--' matt, old man, he meant mischief. 
i'm certain of it. come with me to her flat--for god's sake--come." 
and catching hold of kelson, who lean against the mantelshelf, daze 
and stupefied, he drag him into the street. 

to revert to hamar. curtis's information had transform him. he was, 
now, another creature. prior to his conversation with curtis, he had 
suspected, at the most, that kelson might be contemplate a secret 
engagement to lilian rosenberg--but a hasty marriage--a marriage in a 
few days' time--he had never dreamt that kelson could be as mad as 
that. it was outrageous! it was abominable! it was sheer wholesale 
homicide! at all costs the marriage must be stopped. and mad with 
rage, hamar dashed out of the hotel, and calling a taxi, drove direct 
to lilian rosenberg's flat. 

he found her alone--alone--and with a strange expression in her 
eyes--an expression he had never notice in them before. she was in 
the act of examine a magnificent diamond ring. 

"you're quite out of breath," she said coolly, "didn't you come up by 
the lift?" 

"i've come to talk business," hamar panted. "it's no use look like 
that. i know your secret." 

"my secret!" lilian rosenberg replied, opening her eyes and simulate 
the greatest unconcern, "what secret? i don't understand." 

"oh, yes, you do!" hamar said, "you understand only too well--you 
deceitful minx. had i only been smart--i should have given you the 
sack month ago. this marriage of yours with kelson shall not come 
off." 

"my marriage with mr. kelson!" lilian rosenberg said, turning a trifle 
pale. "i really don't know what you are talk about." 

"you do!" hamar shouted, his fury rising. "you do! you know all about 
it. you were seen sitting on his knee this morning, and all your 
conversation was overheard. i have found out everything. and i tell 
you, you shan't marry him." 

"i shan't marry him!" lilian rosenberg said with provoking coolness. 
"whoever think i want to marry him?" 

"he does--i do!" hamar shouted--his voice rising to a scream. "you've 
hoodwink me long enough--you hoodwink me no longer. you've 
encourage him from the first--made eyes at him every time you've seen 
him--taken advantage of my absence to prowl about the passage to 
waylay him--had him round to your rooms and visit him in his. you've 
no sense of shame or honour--you've broken your promise to me--you're 
a liar!" 

"anything else mr. hamar!" lilian rosenberg said, her eyes glittering. 
"when you've quite finished, perhaps--you'll kindly go and leave me in 
peace." 

"go! leave you in peace!" hamar shouted. "damn you, curse your 
impertinence! go! i'll not budge an inch till i wring from you an 
oath--a solemn binding oath, that you'll break off your engagement 
with kelson at once." 

"really, mr. hamar!" lilian rosenberg said, "i cannot put up with 
quite so much noise. will you go, or shall i ring for the porter to 
turn you out?" 

she move in the direction of the bell as she spoke, but before she 
could touch it hamar had intercept her. 

"stop this foolery!" he said catching hold of her wrist, "i'm in grim 
earnest--the lives of all three of us are at stake--jeopardized 
through you--through your infernal greed and selfishness. do you 
hear!" 

"please let go my wrist," she said quietly. 

"i won't!" he shouted. "i'll squeeze, crush it, break it! break you, 
too, unless you swear to break off your marriage!" 

"i'll swear nothing," lilian rosenberg said faintly. "you're a brute. 
let me go or i'll cry for help." 

she screamed, but before she could repeat the scream, hamar had her by 
the throat--and then blind with passion and before he fully realize 
what he was about, he had shaken her to and fro--like a terrier shakes 
a rat--and had dashed her on the floor. 

for some minutes he stood rock with passion, and then, his eyes 
fall on the inanimate form at his feet, he gave a great gasp cry 
and bent over it. 

"god in heaven!" he ejaculated, "she's dead! i've kill her!" 

he was still bend over her--still feeling her lifeless pulse, still 
try to resuscitate her--feebly wonder how he had kill her, 
feverishly debate the best course to pursue--when curtis and kelson 
burst in on him. 

at the sight of lilian rosenberg's lifeless body both men start 
back. "great god! hamar!" curtis gasped. "what have you done to her?" 

"nothing!" hamar said, turning a ghastly face to them. "i--i found her 
like this!" 

"liar!" kelson shout beside himself with fury. "liar! we heard her 
scream. look at your hands--there's blood on them! you've kill her!" 

before curtis could stop him he sprang at hamar, and the next moment 
both men were rolling on the floor. 

"call for the police, ed!" kelson gasped, "the police--or--" but 
before he could utter another syllable, walls, floor and ceiling shook 
with loud, devilish laughter. there was then silence--enthralling, 
impressive, omnipotent silence--the electric light went out--and the 
room fill with luminous, striped figures. 


[illustration: the room fill with luminous, striped figures] 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the sorcery club*** 


******* this file should be name 14317-8.txt or 14317-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/3/1/14317 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
