the project gutenberg ebook of the ghost ship, by richard middleton 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the ghost ship 

author: richard middleton 

release date: february 11, 2004 [ebook #11045] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the ghost ship *** 




produce by tom harris 




the ghost-ship 

by richard middleton 



thanks are due to the editor of _the century_, 
_english review_, _vanity fair_, and _the academy_, for 
permission to reproduce most of the story in this volume. 




preface 

the other day i said to a friend, "i have just been reading in proof 
a volume of short story by an author name richard middleton. he is 
dead. it is an extraordinary book, and all the work in it is full of 
a quite curious and distinctive quality. in my opinion it is very 
fine work indeed." 

it would be so simple if the business of the introduce or 
preface-writer were limited to such a straightforward, honest, and 
direct expression of opinion; unfortunately that is not so. for most 
of us, the happy one of the world, it is enough to say "i like 
it," or "i don't like it," and there is an end: the critic has to 
answer the everlasting "why?" and so, i suppose, it is my office, 
in this present instance, to say why i like the collection of tale 
that follows. 

i think that i have found a hint as to the right answer in two of 
these stories. one is call "the story of a book," the other "the 
biography of a superman." each is rather an essay than a tale, though 
the form of each is narrative. the first relate the sad bewilder 
of a successful novelist who feel that, after all, his great work 
was something less than nothing. 

he could not help notice that london had discover the 
secret which made his intellectual life a torment. the 
street were more than a mere assemblage of houses, 
london herself was more than a tangle skein of streets, 
and overhead heaven was more than a meeting-place of 
individual stars. what was this secret that made words 
into a book, house into cities, and restless and 
measurable stars into an unchang and immeasurable 
universe? 

then from "the biography of a superman" i select this very striking 
passage:-- 

possessed of an intellect of great analytic and 
destructive force, he was almost entire lacking 
in imagination, and he was therefore unable 
to raise his work to a plane in which the mutual 
combative elements of his nature might have been 
reconciled. his light moments of envy, anger, and 
vanity pass into the crucible to come forth 
unchanged. he lack the magic wand, and his work 
never took wings above his conception. 

now compare the two places; "the street were more than a mere 
assemblage of houses;" . . . "his light moments . . . pass into the 
crucible to come forth unchanged. he lack the magic wand." i think 
these two passage indicate the answer to the "why" that i am forced 
to resolve; show something of the secret of the strange charm which 
"the ghost-ship" possesses. 

it delight because it is significant, because it is no mere 
assemblage of words and fact and observations and incidents, it 
delight because its matter has not pass through the crucible 
unchanged. on the contrary, the jumble of experience and impression 
which fell to the lot of the author as to us all had assured been 
placed in the athanor of art, in that furnace of the sage which is 
said to be govern with wisdom. lead enter the burning of the 
fire, gold came forth from it. 

this analogy of the process of alchemy which richard middleton has 
himself suggest is one of the finest and the fittest for our 
purpose; but there are many others. the "magic wand" analogy come to 
much the same thing; there is the like notion of something ugly and 
insignificant change to something beautiful and significant. 
something ugly; shall we not say rather something formless transmute 
into form! after all, the latin dictionary declare solemn that 
"beauty" is one of the meaning of "forma" and here we are away from 
alchemy and the magic wand ideas, and pass to the thought of the 
first place that i have quoted: "the street were more than a mere 
assemblage of houses," the puzzle is solved; the jig-saw--i think 
they call it--has been successful fitted together, there in a box 
lay all the jagged, irregular pieces, each in itself crazy and 
meaningless and irritate by its very lack of meaning: now we see 
each part adapt to the other and the whole is one picture and one 
purpose. 

but the first thing necessary to this achievement is the recognition 
of the fact that there is a puzzle. there are many people who go 
through life persuade that there isn't a puzzle at all; that it was 
only the infancy and rude childhood of the world which dream a vain 
dream of a picture to be made out of the jagged bit of wood, there 
never has been a picture, these person say, and there never will be 
a picture, all we have to do is to take the bit out of the box, look 
at them, and put them back again. or, return to richard 
middleton's excellent example: there is no such thing as london, 
there are only houses. no man has seen london at any time; the very 
word (meaning "the fort on the lake") is nonsensical; no human eye 
has ever beheld aught else but a number of houses; it is clear that 
this "london" is as mythical and monstrous and irrational a concept 
as many other of the same class. well, people who talk like that are 
doubtless sent into the world for some useful but mysterious process; 
but they can't write real books. richard middleton knew that there 
was a puzzle; in other words, that the universe is a great mystery; 
and this consciousness of his is the source of the charm of "the 
ghost ship." 

i have compare this orthodox view of life and the 
universe and the fine art that result from this view to the solve 
of a puzzle; but the analogy is not an absolutely perfect one. for if 
you buy a jig-saw in a box in the haymarket, you take it home with 
you and begin to put the pieces together, and soon or later the 
toil is over and the difficulty are overcome: the picture is clear 
before you. yes, the toil is over, but so is the fun; it is but poor 
sport to do the trick all over again. and here is the vast 
inferior of the things they sell in the shop to the universe: our 
great puzzle is never perfectly solved. we come across marvellous 
hints, we join line to line and our heart beat with the rapture of a 
great surmise; we follow a certain track and know by sure sign and 
signal that we are not mistaken, that we are on the right road; we 
are furnish with certain chart which tell us "here there be 
water-pools," "here is a waste place," "here a high hill riseth," and 
we find as we journey that so it is. but, happily, by the very nature 
of the case, we can never put the whole of the picture together, we 
can never recover the perfect utterance of the lost word, we can 
never say "here is the end of all the journey." man is so made that 
all his true delight arise from the contemplation of mystery, and 
save by his own frantic and invincible folly, mystery is never taken 
from him; it rise within his soul, a well of joy unending. 

hence it is that the consciousness of this mystery, resolve into the 
form of art, express itself usually (or always) by symbols, by the 
part put for the whole. now and then, as in the case of dante, as it 
was with the great romance-cycle of the holy graal, we have a sense 
of completeness. with the vision of the angel rose and the sentence 
concerning that love which move the sun and the other stars there is 
the shadow of a catholic survey of all things; and so in a less 
degree it is as we read of the translate of galahad. still, the 
rose and the graal are but symbol of the eternal verities, not those 
verity themselves in their essences; and in these later days when 
we have become clever--with the clever of the perform pig--it 
is a great thing to find the most obscure and broken indication of 
the things which really are. there is the true enchantment of true 
romance in the don quixote--for those who can understand--but it is 
deliver in the mode of parody and burlesque; and so it is with the 
extraordinary fantasy, "the ghost-ship," which give its name to this 
collection of tales. take this story to bits, as it were; analyse it; 
you will be astonish at its frantic absurdity: the ghostly galleon 
blown in by a great tempest to a turnip-patch in fairfield, a little 
village lie near the portsmouth road about half-way between london 
and the sea; the farmer grumbling at the loss of so many turnips; the 
captain of the weird vessel acknowledge the justice of the claim 
and toss a great gold brooch to the landlord by way of satisfying 
the debt; the deplorable fact that all the decent village ghost 
learned to riot with captain bartholomew roberts; the visit of the 
parson and his godly admonition to the captain on the evil work he 
was doing; mere craziness, you will say? 

yes; but the strange thing is that as, in spite of all jocose trick 
and low-comedy misadventures, don quixote depart from us with a 
great light shining upon him; so this ghost-ship of richard 
middleton's, somehow or other, sail and anchor and re-sails in an 
unearthly glow; and captain bartholomew's rum that was like hot oil 
and honey and fire in the vein of the mortal who drank of it, has 
become for me one of the _nobilium poculorum_ of story. and thus did 
the ship put forth from the village and sail away in a great tempest 
of wind--to what unimaginable sea of the spirit! 

the wind that had been howling outside 
like an outrageous dog had all of a sudden 
turn as melodious as the carol-boys of a 
christmas eve. 

we went to the door, and the wind burst it 
open so that the handle was driven clean into 
the plaster of the wall. but we didn't think 
much of that at the time; for over our heads, 
sailing very comfortable through the windy 
stars, was the ship that had pass the 
summer in landlord's field. her porthole 
and her bay-window were blazing with lights, 
and there was a noise of singing and fiddling 
on her decks. "he's gone," shout landlord 
above the storm, "and he's taken half the 
village with him!" i could only nod in 
answer, not have lung like bellows of 
leather. 

i declare i would not exchange this short, crazy, enchanting fantasy 
for a whole wilderness of seemly novels, proclaim in decorous 
accent the undoubted truth that there are milestone on the 
portsmouth road. 

arthur machen. 




the ghost-ship 

fairfield is a little village lie near the portsmouth road about 
half-way between london and the sea. stranger who find it by 
accident now and then, call it a pretty, old-fashioned place; we who 
live in it and call it home don't find anything very pretty about it, 
but we should be sorry to live anywhere else. our mind have taken 
the shape of the inn and the church and the green, i suppose. at all 
event we never feel comfortable out of fairfield. 

of course the cockneys, with their vasty house and noise-ridden 
streets, can call us rustic if they choose, but for all that 
fairfield is a better place to live in than london. doctor say that 
when he go to london his mind is bruise with the weight of the 
houses, and he was a cockney born. he had to live there himself when 
he was a little chap, but he know better now. you gentlemen may 
laugh--perhaps some of you come from london way--but it seem to me 
that a witness like that is worth a gallon of arguments. 

dull? well, you might find it dull, but i assure you that i've 
listen to all the london yarn you have spun tonight, and they're 
absolutely nothing to the things that happen at fairfield. it's 
because of our way of thinking and mind our own business. if one 
of your londoner were set down on the green of a saturday night when 
the ghost of the lad who die in the war keep tryst with the lass 
who lie in the church-yard, he couldn't help being curious and 
interfering, and then the ghost would go somewhere where it was 
quieter. but we just let them come and go and don't make any fuss, 
and in consequence fairfield is the ghostiest place in all england. 
why, i've seen a headless man sitting on the edge of the well in 
broad daylight, and the children play about his feet as if he were 
their father. take my word for it, spirits know when they are well 
off as much as human beings. 

still, i must admit that the thing i'm go to tell you about was 
queer even for our part of the world, where three pack of 
ghost-hounds hunt regularly during the season, and blacksmith's 
great-grandfather is busy all night shoe the dead gentlemen's 
horses. now that's a thing that wouldn't happen in london, because of 
their interfere ways, but blacksmith he lie up aloft and sleep as 
quiet as a lamb. once when he had a bad head he shout down to them 
not to make so much noise, and in the morning he found an old guinea 
left on the anvil as an apology. he wear it on his watch-chain now. 
but i must get on with my story; if i start telling you about the 
queer happening at fairfield i'll never stop. 

it all came of the great storm in the spring of '97, the year that we 
had two great storms. this was the first one, and i remember it very 
well, because i found in the morning that it had lift the thatch of 
my pigsty into the widow's garden as clean as a boy's kite. when i 
look over the hedge, widow--tom lamport's widow that was--was 
prod for her nasturtium with a daisy-grubber. after i had 
watch her for a little i went down to the "fox and grapes" to tell 
landlord what she had said to me. landlord he laughed, being a 
married man and at ease with the sex. "come to that," he said, "the 
tempest has blow something into my field. a kind of a ship i 
think it would be." 

i was surprise at that until he explain that it was only a 
ghost-ship and would do no hurt to the turnips. we argue that 
it had been blown up from the sea at portsmouth, and then we 
talk of something else. there were two slate down at the 
parsonage and a big tree in lumley's meadow. it was a rare 
storm. 

i reckon the wind had blown our ghost all over england. 
they were coming back for days afterwards with founder horse 
and as footsore as possible, and they were so glad to get back 
to fairfield that some of them walk up the street crying like 
little children. squire said that his great-grandfather's 
great-grandfather hadn't look so dead-beat since the battle 
of naseby, and he's an educated man. 

what with one thing and another, i should think it was a week before 
we got straight again, and then one afternoon i met the landlord on 
the green and he had a worried face. "i wish you'd come and have a 
look at that ship in my field," he said to me; "it seem to me it's 
leaning real hard on the turnips. i can't bear thinking what the 
missus will say when she see it." 

i walk down the lane with him, and sure enough there was a 
ship in the middle of his field, but such a ship as no man had 
seen on the water for three hundred years, let alone in the 
middle of a turnip-field. it was all paint black and cover 
with carvings, and there was a great bay window in the stern 
for all the world like the squire's drawing-room. there was a 
crowd of little black cannon on deck and look out of her 
port-holes, and she was anchor at each end to the hard 
ground. i have seen the wonders of the world on picture-postcards, 
but i have never seen anything to equal that. 

"she seem very solid for a ghost-ship," i said, seeing the landlord 
was bothered. 

"i should say it's a betwixt and between," he answered, puzzle it 
over, "but it's go to spoil a matter of fifty turnips, and missus 
she'll want it moved." we went up to her and touched the side, and it 
was as hard as a real ship. "now there's folks in england would call 
that very curious," he said. 

now i don't know much about ships, but i should think that that 
ghost-ship weigh a solid two hundred tons, and it seem to me 
that she had come to stay, so that i felt sorry for landlord, who was 
a married man. "all the horse in fairfield won't move her out of my 
turnips," he said, frown at her. 

just then we heard a noise on her deck, and we look up and saw that 
a man had come out of her front cabin and was look down at us very 
peaceably. he was dress in a black uniform set out with rusty gold 
lace, and he had a great cutlass by his side in a brass sheath. "i'm 
captain bartholomew roberts," he said, in a gentleman's voice, "put 
in for recruits. i seem to have brought her rather far up the 
harbour." 

"harbour!" cry landlord; "why, you're fifty mile from the sea." 

captain robert didn't turn a hair. "so much as that, is it?" he said 
coolly. "well, it's of no consequence." 

landlord was a bit upset at this. "i don't want to be unneighbourly," 
he said, "but i wish you hadn't brought your ship into my field. you 
see, my wife set great store on these turnips." 

the captain took a pinch of snuff out of a fine gold box that he 
pull out of his pocket, and dust his finger with a silk 
handkerchief in a very genteel fashion. "i'm only here for a few 
months," he said; "but if a testimony of my esteem would pacify your 
good lady i should be content," and with the words he loose a great 
gold brooch from the neck of his coat and toss it down to landlord. 

landlord blush as red as a strawberry. "i'm not deny she's fond 
of jewellery," he said, "but it's too much for half a sackful of 
turnips." and indeed it was a handsome brooch. 

the captain laughed. "tut, man," he said, "it's a forced sale, and 
you deserve a good price. say no more about it;" and nod good-day 
to us, he turn on his heel and went into the cabin. landlord walk 
back up the lane like a man with a weight off his mind. "that tempest 
has blow me a bit of luck," he said; "the missus will be much 
pleased with that brooch. it's better than blacksmith's guinea, any 
day." 

ninety-seven was jubilee year, the year of the second jubilee, you 
remember, and we had great doings at fairfield, so that we hadn't 
much time to bother about the ghost-ship though anyhow it isn't our 
way to meddle in things that don't concern us. landlord, he saw his 
tenant once or twice when he was hoe his turnip and pass the 
time of day, and landlord's wife wore her new brooch to church every 
sunday. but we didn't mix much with the ghost at any time, all 
except an idiot lad there was in the village, and he didn't know the 
difference between a man and a ghost, poor innocent! on jubilee day, 
however, somebody told captain robert why the church bell were 
ringing, and he hoist a flag and fire off his gun like a loyal 
englishman. 'tis true the gun were shotted, and one of the round 
shot knock a hole in farmer johnstone's barn, but nobody thought 
much of that in such a season of rejoicing. 

it wasn't till our celebration were over that we notice that 
anything was wrong in fairfield. 'twas shoemaker who told me first 
about it one morning at the "fox and grapes." "you know my great 
great-uncle?" he said to me. 

"you mean joshua, the quiet lad," i answered, knowing him well. 

"quiet!" said shoemaker indignantly. "quiet you call him, coming home 
at three o'clock every morning as drunk as a magistrate and waking up 
the whole house with his noise." 

"why, it can't be joshua!" i said, for i knew him for one of the most 
respectable young ghost in the village. 

"joshua it is," said shoemaker; "and one of these nights he'll find 
himself out in the street if he isn't careful." 

this kind of talk shock me, i can tell you, for i don't like to 
hear a man abuse his own family, and i could hardly believe that a 
steady youngster like joshua had taken to drink. but just then in 
came butcher aylwin in such a temper that he could hardly drink his 
beer. "the young puppy! the young puppy!" he kept on saying; and it 
was some time before shoemaker and i found out that he was talk 
about his ancestor that fell at senlac. 

"drink?" said shoemaker hopefully, for we all like company in our 
misfortunes, and butcher nod grimly. 

"the young noodle," he said, empty his tankard. 

well, after that i kept my ear open, and it was the same story all 
over the village. there was hardly a young man among all the ghost 
of fairfield who didn't roll home in the small hour of the morning 
the worse for liquor. i use to wake up in the night and hear them 
stumble past my house, singing outrageous songs. the worst of it was 
that we couldn't keep the scandal to ourselves and the folk at 
greenhill began to talk of "sodden fairfield" and taught their 
children to sing a song about us: 

"sodden fairfield, sodden fairfield, has no use for bread-and-butter, 
rum for breakfast, rum for dinner, rum for tea, and rum for supper!" 

we are easy-going in our village, but we didn't like that. 

of course we soon found out where the young fellow went to get the 
drink, and landlord was terribly cut up that his tenant should have 
turn out so badly, but his wife wouldn't hear of parting with the 
brooch, so that he couldn't give the captain notice to quit. but as 
time went on, things grew from bad to worse, and at all hour of the 
day you would see those young reprobate sleep it off on the 
village green. nearly every afternoon a ghost-wagon use to jolt down 
to the ship with a lading of rum, and though the old ghost seem 
inclined to give the captain's hospitality the go-by, the youngster 
were neither to hold nor to bind. 

so one afternoon when i was taking my nap i heard a knock at the 
door, and there was parson look very serious, like a man with a 
job before him that he didn't altogether relish. "i'm go down to 
talk to the captain about all this drunken in the village, and i 
want you to come with me," he said straight out. 

i can't say that i fancy the visit much, myself, and i try to 
hint to parson that as, after all, they were only a lot of ghost it 
didn't very much matter. 

"dead or alive, i'm responsible for the good conduct," he said, "and 
i'm go to do my duty and put a stop to this continue disorder. 
and you are coming with me john simmons." so i went, parson being a 
persuasive kind of man. 

we went down to the ship, and as we approach her i could see the 
captain taste the air on deck. when he saw parson he took off his 
hat very polite and i can tell you that i was relieved to find that 
he had a proper respect for the cloth. parson acknowledge his salute 
and spoke out stout enough. "sir, i should be glad to have a word 
with you." 

"come on board, sir; come on board," said the captain, and i could 
tell by his voice that he knew why we were there. parson and i 
climb up an uneasy kind of ladder, and the captain took us into the 
great cabin at the back of the ship, where the bay-window was. it was 
the most wonderful place you ever saw in your life, all full of gold 
and silver plate, sword with jewelled scabbards, carve oak chairs, 
and great chest that look as though they were burst with guineas. 
even parson was surprised, and he did not shake his head very hard 
when the captain took down some silver cup and pour us out a drink 
of rum. i taste mine, and i don't mind saying that it change my 
view of things entirely. there was nothing betwixt and between about 
that rum, and i felt that it was ridiculous to blame the lad for 
drink too much of stuff like that. it seem to fill my vein with 
honey and fire. 

parson put the case square to the captain, but i didn't listen much 
to what he said; i was busy sip my drink and look through the 
window at the fish swimming to and fro over landlord's turnips. 
just then it seem the most natural thing in the world that they 
should be there, though afterwards, of course, i could see that that 
prove it was a ghost-ship. 

but even then i thought it was queer when i saw a drown sailor 
float by in the thin air with his hair and beard all full of bubbles. 
it was the first time i had seen anything quite like that at 
fairfield. 

all the time i was regarding the wonders of the deep parson was 
telling captain robert how there was no peace or rest in the village 
owe to the curse of drunkenness, and what a bad example the 
youngster were setting to the old ghosts. the captain listen 
very attentively, and only put in a word now and then about boys 
being boys and young men sow their wild oats. but when parson had 
finished his speech he fill up our silver cup and said to parson, 
with a flourish, "i should be sorry to cause trouble anywhere where i 
have been made welcome, and you will be glad to hear that i put to 
sea tomorrow night. and now you must drink me a prosperous voyage." 
so we all stood up and drank the toast with honour, and that noble 
rum was like hot oil in my veins. 

after that captain show us some of the curiosity he had brought 
back from foreign parts, and we were greatly amazed, though 
afterwards i couldn't clearly remember what they were. and then i 
found myself walking across the turnip with parson, and i was 
telling him of the glory of the deep that i had seen through the 
window of the ship. he turn on me severely. "if i were you, john 
simmons," he said, "i should go straight home to bed." he has a way 
of putt things that wouldn't occur to an ordinary man, has parson, 
and i did as he told me. 

well, next day it came on to blow, and it blew hard and harder, 
till about eight o'clock at night i heard a noise and look out into 
the garden. i dare say you won't believe me, it seem a bit tall even 
to me, but the wind had lift the thatch of my pigsty into the 
widow's garden a second time. i thought i wouldn't wait to hear what 
widow had to say about it, so i went across the green to the "fox and 
grapes", and the wind was so strong that i dance along on tiptoe 
like a girl at the fair. when i got to the inn landlord had to help 
me shut the door; it seem as though a dozen goat were push 
against it to come in out of the storm. 

"it's a powerful tempest," he said, drawing the beer. "i hear there's 
a chimney down at dickory end." 

"it's a funny thing how these sailor know about the weather," i 
answered. "when captain said he was go tonight, i was thinking it 
would take a capful of wind to carry the ship back to sea, but now 
here's more than a capful." 

"ah, yes," said landlord, "it's tonight he go true enough, and, 
mind you, though he treat me handsome over the rent, i'm not sure 
it's a loss to the village. i don't hold with gentrice who fetch 
their drink from london instead of helping local trader to get their 
living." 

"but you haven't got any rum like his," i said, to draw him out. 

his neck grew red above his collar, and i was afraid i'd gone too 
far; but after a while he got his breath with a grunt. 

"john simmons," he said, "if you've come down here this windy night 
to talk a lot of fool's talk, you've waste a journey." 

well, of course, then i had to smooth him down with praise his rum, 
and heaven forgive me for swear it was better than captain's. for 
the like of that rum no living lip have taste save mine and 
parson's. but somehow or other i brought landlord round, and 
presently we must have a glass of his best to prove its quality. 

"beat that if you can!" he cried, and we both raise our glasses to 
our mouths, only to stop half-way and look at each other in amaze. 
for the wind that had been howling outside like an outrageous dog had 
all of a sudden turn as melodious as the carol-boys of a christmas 
eve. 

"surely that's not my martha," whisper landlord; martha being his 
great-aunt that live in the loft overhead. 

we went to the door, and the wind burst it open so that the handle 
was driven clean into the plaster of the wall. but we didn't think 
about that at the time; for over our heads, sailing very comfortable 
through the windy stars, was the ship that had pass the summer in 
landlord's field. her porthole and her bay-window were blazing with 
lights, and there was a noise of singing and fiddling on her decks. 
"he's gone," shout landlord above the storm, "and he's taken half 
the village with him!" i could only nod in answer, not have lung 
like bellows of leather. 

in the morning we were able to measure the strength of the storm, and 
over and above my pigsty there was damage enough wrought in the 
village to keep us busy. true it is that the children had to break 
down no branch for the fire that autumn, since the wind had 
strewn the wood with more than they could carry away. many of our 
ghost were scattered abroad, but this time very few came back, all 
the young men have sail with captain; and not only ghosts, for a 
poor half-witted lad was missing, and we reckon that he had stow 
himself away or perhaps ship as cabin-boy, not knowing any better. 

what with the lamentation of the ghost-girls and the grumbling of 
family who had lost an ancestor, the village was upset for a while, 
and the funny thing was that it was the folk who had complain most 
of the carryings-on of the youngsters, who made most noise now that 
they were gone. i hadn't any sympathy with shoemaker or butcher, who 
ran about saying how much they miss their lads, but it made me 
grieve to hear the poor bereaved girl calling their lovers by name 
on the village green at nightfall. it didn't seem fair to me that 
they should have lost their men a second time, after give up life 
in order to join them, as like as not. still, not even a spirit can 
be sorry for ever, and after a few month we made up our mind that 
the folk who had sail in the ship were never coming back, and we 
didn't talk about it any more. 

and then one day, i dare say it would be a couple of years after, 
when the whole business was quite forgotten, who should come 
trapese along the road from portsmouth but the daft lad who had 
gone away with the ship, without wait till he was dead to become a 
ghost. you never saw such a boy as that in all your life. he had a 
great rusty cutlass hanging to a string at his waist, and he was 
tattoo all over in fine colours, so that even his face look like 
a girl's sampler. he had a handkerchief in his hand full of foreign 
shell and old-fashioned pieces of small money, very curious, and he 
walk up to the well outside his mother's house and drew himself a 
drink as if he had been nowhere in particular. 

the worst of it was that he had come back as soft-headed as he went, 
and try as we might we couldn't get anything reasonable out of him. 
he talk a lot of gibberish about keel-hauling and walking the 
plank and crimson murders--things which a decent sailor should know 
nothing about, so that it seem to me that for all his manners 
captain had been more of a pirate than a gentleman mariner. but to 
draw sense out of that boy was as hard as pick cherry off a 
crab-tree. one silly tale he had that he kept on drift back to, 
and to hear him you would have thought that it was the only thing 
that happen to him in his life. "we was at anchor," he would say, 
"off an island call the basket of flowers, and the sailor had 
caught a lot of parrot and we were teaching them to swear. up and 
down the decks, up and down the decks, and the language they use 
was dreadful. then we look up and saw the mast of the spain 
ship outside the harbour. outside the harbour they were, so we threw 
the parrot into the sea and sail out to fight. and all the 
parrot were drownde in the sea and the language they use was 
dreadful." that's the sort of boy he was, nothing but silly talk of 
parrot when we ask him about the fighting. and we never had a 
chance of teaching him better, for two days after he ran away again, 
and hasn't been seen since. 

that's my story, and i assure you that things like that are happening 
at fairfield all the time. the ship has never come back, but somehow 
as people grow old they seem to think that one of these windy 
nights she'll come sailing in over the hedge with all the lost 
ghost on board. well, when she comes, she'll be welcome. there's one 
ghost-lass that has never grown tired of wait for her lad to 
return. every night you'll see her out on the green, strain her 
poor eyes with look for the mast-lights among the stars. a 
faithful lass you'd call her, and i'm thinking you'd be right. 

landlord's field wasn't a penny the worse for the visit, but they do 
say that since then the turnip that have been grown in it have 
taste of rum. 




a drama of youth 

i 

for some days school had seem to me even more tedious than usual. 
the long train journey in the morning, the walk through farringdon 
meat market, which æsthetic butcher made hideous with mosaic of the 
intestine of animals, as if the horror of suety pavement and bloody 
sawdust did not suffice, the weary of invent lie that no one 
believe to account for my late and neglect homework, and the 
monotonous lesson that held me from my dream without ever for a 
single instant capture my interest--all these things made me ill 
with repulsion. worst of all was the society of my cheerful, 
contented comrades, to avoid which i was compel to mope in 
desert corridors, the prey of a sorrow that could not be enjoyed, a 
hatred that was in no way stimulating. at the best of times the 
atmosphere of the place disgust me. desks, windows, and floors, and 
even the grass in the quadrangle, were greasy with london soot, and 
there was nowhere any clean air to breathe or smell. i hate the 
gritty asphalt that gave no peace to my feet and cut my knee when my 
clumsy made me fall. i hate the long stone corridor whose 
echo seem to me to mock my hesitate footstep when i pass 
from one dull class to another. i hate the stuffy malodorous 
classrooms, with their whistle gas-jets and noise of inharmonious 
life. i would have hate the yellow fog had they not sometimes 
shorten the hour of my bondage. that five hundred boys share this 
horrible environment with me did not abate my suffering a jot; for 
it was clear that they did not find it distasteful, and they 
therefore became as unsympathetic for me as the smell and noise and 
rot stone of the school itself. 

the master move as it were in another world, and, as the class 
were large, they understood me as little as i understood them. they 
knew that i was idle and untruthful, and they could not know that i 
was as full of nerves as a girl, and that the mere task of get to 
school every morning made me physically sick. they punish me 
repeatedly and in vain, for i found every hour i pass within the 
wall of the school an overwhelming punishment in itself, and nothing 
i made any difference to me. i lie to them because they expect it, 
and because i had no words in which to express the truth if i knew 
it, which is doubtful. for some reason i could not tell them at home 
why i got on so badly at school, or no doubt they would have taken me 
away and sent me to a country school, as they did afterwards. nearly 
all the real sorrow of childhood are due to this dumb of the 
emotions; we teach children to convey fact by means of words, but we 
do not teach them how to make their feelings intelligible. 
unfortunately, perhaps, i was very happy at night with my story-books 
and my dreams, so that the real misery of my days escape the 
attention of the grown-up people. of course i never even thought of 
do my homework, and the labour of invent new lie every day to 
account for my negligence became so wearisome that once or twice i 
told the truth and simply said i had not done it; but the master 
held that this frank aggravate the offence, and i had to take up 
anew my tiresome tale of improbable calamities. sometimes my story 
were so wild that the whole class would laugh, and i would have to 
laugh myself; yet on the strength of this elaborate polite to 
authority i came to believe myself that i was untruthful by nature. 

the boys dislike me because i was not sociable, but after a time 
they grew tired of bully me and left me alone. i detest them 
because they were all so much alike that their numbers fill me with 
horror. i remember that the first day i went to school i walk round 
and round the quadrangle in the luncheon-hour, and every boy who 
pass stop me and ask me my name and what my father was. when i 
said he was an engineer every one of the boys replied, "oh! the man 
who drive the engine." the reiterate of this childish joke made me 
hate them from the first, and afterwards i discover that they were 
equally unimaginative in everything they did. sometimes i would stand 
in the midst of them, and wonder what was the matter with me that i 
should be so different from all the rest. when they tease me, 
repeating the same question over and over again, i cry easily, 
like a girl, without quite knowing why, for their stupidity could 
not hurt my reason; but when they bully me i did not cry, because 
the pain made me forget the sad of my heart. perhaps it was 
because of this that they thought i was a little mad. 

grey day follow grey day, and i might in time have abandoned 
all effort to be faithful to my dreams, and achieve a kind of 
beast-like submission that was all the authority expect of 
notorious dunces. i might have taught my senses to accept the 
evil conditions of life in that unclean place; i might even have 
succeed in making myself one with the army of shadow that 
throng in the quadrangle and fill the air with meaningless 
noise. 

but one evening when i reach home i saw by the face of the 
grown-up people that something had upset their elaborate 
precaution for an ordered life, and i discover that my brother, 
who had stay at home with a cold, was ill in bed with the 
measles. for a while the significance of the news escape me; 
then, with a sudden movement of my heart, which made me feel ill, 
i realise that probably i would have to stay away from school 
because of the infection. my feet tap on the floor with joy, 
though i try to appear unconcerned. then, as i nurse my sudden 
hope of freedom, a little fearful lest it should prove an 
illusion, a new and enchanting idea came to me. i slip from the 
room, ran upstairs to my bedroom and, standing by the side of my 
bed, tore open my waistcoat and shirt with clumsy, tremble 
fingers. one, two, three, four, five! i count the spot in a 
triumphant voice, and then with a sudden revulsion sat down on the 
bed to give the world an opportunity to settle back in its place. 
i had the measles, and therefore i should not have to go back to 
school! i shut my eyes for a minute and open them again, but 
still i had the measles. the cup of happiness was at my lips, but 
i sip delicate because it was full to the brim, and i would 
not spill a drop. 

this mood did not last long. i had to run down the house and tell 
the world the good news. the grown-up people rebuke my joyousness, 
while admit that it might be as well that i should have the 
measles then as later on. in spite of their air of resignation i 
could hardly sit still for excitement. i want to go into the 
kitchen and show my measles to the servants, but i was told to stay 
where i was in front of the fire while my bed was move into my 
brother's room. so i stare at the glowing coal till my eyes 
smarted, and dream long dreams. i would be in bed for days, all 
warm from head to foot, and no one would interrupt my pleasant 
excursion in the world i prefer to this. if i had heard of the 
beneficent microbe to which low my happiness, i would have 
mention it in my prayers. 

late that night, i call over to my brother to ask how long measles 
lasted. he told me to go to sleep, so that i knew he did not know the 
answer to my question. i lay at ease tranquil turning the problem 
over in my mind. four weeks, six weeks, eight weeks; why, if i was 
lucky, it would carry me through to the holidays! at all events, 
school was already very far away, like a nightmare remember at 
noon. i said good-night to my brother, and received an irritate 
grunt in reply. i did not mind his surliness; tomorrow when i woke 
up, i would begin my dreams. 

ii 

when i found myself in bed in the morning, already sick at heart 
because even while i slept i could not forget the long torment of my 
life at school, i would lie still for a minute or two and try to 
concentrate my shudder mind on something pleasant, some little 
detail of the moment that seem to justify hope. perhaps i had some 
money to spend or a holiday to look forward to; though often enough i 
would find nothing to save me from realise with childish intensity 
the grey of the world in which it was my fate to move. i did not 
want to go out into life; it was dull and gruel and greasy with soot. 
i only want to stop at home in any little quiet corner out of 
everybody's way and think my long, heroic thoughts. but even while i 
mumble my hasty breakfast and ran to the station to catch my train 
the atmosphere of the school was all about me, and my dreamer's 
courage tremble and vanished. 

when i woke from sleep the morning after my good fortune, i did not 
at first realise the extent of my happiness; i only knew that deep in 
my heart i was conscious of some great cause for joy. then my eyes, 
still dim with sleep, discover that i was in my brother's bedroom, 
and in a flash the joyful truth was reveal to me. i sat up and 
hasty examine my body to make sure that the rash had not 
disappeared, and then my spirit sang a song of thanksgiving of which 
the refrain was, "i have the measles!" i lay back in bed and enjoy 
the exquisite luxury of thinking of the evil that i had escaped. for 
once my morbid sense of atmosphere was a desirable possession and 
helpful to my happiness. it was delightful to pull the bedclothes 
over my shoulder and conceive the feelings of a small boy who should 
ride to town in a jolt train, walk through a hundred kind of dirt 
and a hundred disgust smell to win to prison at last, where he 
should perform meaningless task in the distressing society of five 
hundred mock apes. it was pleasant to see the morning sun and feel 
no sickness in my stomach, no sense of depression in my tired brain. 
across the room my brother gurgle and choke in his sleep, and in 
some subtle way contribute to my ecstasy of tranquillity. i was no 
long concerned for the duration of my happiness. i felt that this 
peace that i had desire so long must surely last for ever. 

to the grown-up folk who came to see us during the day--the 
doctor, certain germ-proof unmarried aunts, truculent maternal, 
and the family itself--my brother's case was far more interesting 
than mine because he had caught the measles really badly. i just 
had them comfortably; enough to be infectious, but not enough to 
feel ill, so i was left in pleasant solitude while the women 
compete for the honour of smooth my brother's pillow and 
tiptoe in a fidget manner round his bed. i lay on my back 
and look with placid interest at the crack in the ceiling. they 
were like the main road in a map, and i amuse myself by building 
little house beside them--houses full of books and warm 
hearthrugs, and with a nice pond lively with tadpole in the 
garden of each. from the window of the house you could watch all 
the traffic that went along the road, men and women and horses, 
and best of all, the boys go to school in the morning--boys who 
had not done their homework and who would be late for prayers. 
when i talk about the crack to my brother he said that perhaps 
the ceiling would give way and fall on our heads. i thought about 
this too, and found it quite easy to picture myself lie in the 
bed with a smashed head, and blood all over the pillow. then it 
occur to me that the plaster might smash me all over, and my 
impression of farringdon meat market add a gruesome vivid 
to my conception of the consequences. i always found it pleasant 
to imagine horrible things; it was only the reality that made me 
sick. 

towards nightfall i became a little feverish, and i heard the 
grown-ups say that they would give me some medicine later on. 
medicine for me signify the nauseous powder of dr. gregory, 
so i pretended to be asleep every time anyone came into the 
room, in order to escape my destiny, until at last some one 
stood by my bedside so long that i became cramped and had to 
pretend to wake up. then i was given the medicine, and found to 
my surprise that it was delicious and taste of oranges. i felt 
that there had been a mistake somewhere, but my head sat a 
little heavy on my shoulders, and i would not trouble to fix 
the responsibility. this time i fell asleep in earnest, and woke 
in the middle of the night to find my brother standing by my 
bed, making noise with his mouth. i thought that he had gone 
mad, and would kill me perhaps, but after a time he went back to 
bed saying all the bad words he knew. the excitement had made me 
wide awake, and i toss about thinking of the cracked ceiling 
above my head. the room was quite dark, and i could see nothing, 
so that it might be bulge over me without my knowing it. i 
stood up in bed and stretch up my arm, but i could not reach 
the ceiling; yet when i lay down again i felt as though it had 
sunk so far, that it was touching my hair, and i found it 
difficult to breathe in such a small space. i was afraid to move 
for fear of bring it down upon me, and in a short while the 
pressure upon my body became unbearable, and i shriek out for 
help. some one came in and lit the gas, and found me look 
very foolish and my brother delirious. i fell asleep almost 
immediately, but was conscious through my dream that the gas 
was still alight and that they were watch by my brother's 
bedside. 

in the morning he was very ill and i was no long feverish, so it 
was decided to move me back into my own bedroom. i was wrap up in 
the bedclothes and told to sit still while the bed was moved. i sat 
in an armchair, feeling like a bundle of old clothes, and look at 
the crack in the ceiling which seem to me like roads. i knew that 
i had already lost all importance as an invalid, but i was very 
happy nevertheless. for from the window of one of my little house i 
was watch the boys go to school, and my heart was warm with 
the knowledge of my own emancipation. as my leg hung down from the 
chair i found it hard to keep my slipper on my stockingless feet. 

iii 

there follow for me a period of deep and unbroken 
satisfaction. i was soon considered well enough to get up, and i 
live pleasant between the sofa and the fireside wait on my 
brother's convalescence, for it had been settled that i should 
go away with him to the country for a change of air. i read 
dickens and duma in english, and made up long story in which 
i myself play important but not always heroic parts. by means 
of intellectual exercises of this kind i achieve a tranquill 
like that of an old man, fear nothing, desire nothing, 
regret nothing. i no long reckon the days or the hours, 
i content to enjoy a passionless condition of being that ask 
no question and sought none of me, nor did i trouble to number 
my journey in the world of infinite shadows. but in that long 
hour of peace i realise that in some inexplicable way i was 
interested in the body of a little boy, whose hand obey my 
unspoken wishes, whose leg sprawl before me on the sofa. i 
knew that before i met him, this boy, whose little surprise 
me, had suffer ill dream in a nameless world, and now, worn 
out with tear and humiliate and dread of life, he slept, and 
while he slept i watch him dispassionately, as i would have 
look at a cripple daddy-long-legs. to have felt compassion 
for him would have disturbed the tranquill that was a 
necessary condition of my existence, so i contented myself with 
notice his presence and give him a small part in the pageant 
of my dreams. he was not so beautiful as i wish all my 
comrade to be, and he was besides very small; but shadow are 
amiable play-friends, and they did not blame him because he 
cry when he was tease and did not cry when he was beaten, or 
because the wild unreason of his sorrow made him find cause for 
tear in the very full of his rare enjoyment. for the first 
time in my life it seem to me i saw this little boy as he was, 
squat-bodied, big-headed, thick-lipped, and with a face swept 
clean of all emotion save where his two great eyes glow with 
a sulky fire under exaggerate eyebrows. i notice his grimy 
nails, his soil collar, his unbrushed clothes, the patent 
sign of defeat change to utter rout, and from the heights of 
my great peace i was not sorry for him. he was like that, other 
boys were different, that was all. 

and then on a day fear return to my heart, and my newly discover 
utopia was no more. i do not know what chance word of the grown-up 
people or what random thought of mine did the mischief; but of a 
sudden i realise that for all my dream i was only separate by a 
measurable number of days from the horror of school. already i was 
sick with fear, and in place of my dream i distress myself by 
visualise the scene of the life i dreaded--the meat market, the 
dusty shadow of the gymnasium, the sombre reticence of the great 
hall. all that my lost tranquill had given me was a keen sense 
of my own being; my smallness, my ugliness, my helpless in the 
face of the great cruel world. before i had sometimes been able to 
dull my emotion in unpleasant circumstances and thus achieve a 
dogged calm; now i was horrible conscious of my physical sensations, 
and, above all, of that deadly sink in my stomach call fear. i 
clench my hands, telling myself that i was happy, and try to 
force my mind to pleasant thoughts; but though my head swam with the 
effort, i continue to be conscious that i was afraid. in the midst 
of my mental struggle i discover that even if i succeed in 
thinking happy things i should still have to go back to school after 
all, and the knowledge that thought could not avert calamity was 
like a bruise on my mind. i pinched my arms and legs, with the idea 
that immediate pain would make me forget my fear for the future; 
but i was not brave enough to pinch them really hard, and i could 
not forget the motive for my action. i lay back on the sofa and 
kick the cushion with my feet in a kind of forlorn anger. thought 
was no use, nothing was any use, and my stomach was sick, sick with 
fear. and sudden i became aware of an immense fatigue that 
overwhelm my mind and my body, and made me feel as helpless as a 
little child. the tear that were always near my eyes stream down 
my face, making my cheek sore against the wet cushion, and my breath 
came in painful, ridiculous gulps. for a moment i made an effort to 
control my grief; and then i gave way utterly, crying with my whole 
body like a little child, until, like a little child, i fell asleep. 

when i awoke the room was grey with dusk, and i sat up with a 
sway head, glad to hide the shame of my foolish swollen face 
amongst the shadows. my mouth was still salt with tears, and i was 
very thirsty, but i was always anxious to hide my weakness from 
other people, and i was afraid that if i ask for something to 
drink they would see that i had been crying. the fire had gone out 
while i slept, and i felt cold and stiff, but my abandon of 
restraint had relieved me, and my fear was now no more than a vague 
unrest. my mind thought slow but very clearly. i saw that it was a 
pity that i had not been more ill than i was, for then, like my 
brother, i should have gone away for a month instead of a fortnight. 
as it was, everybody laugh at me because i look so well, and 
said they did not believe that i had been ill at all. if i had 
thought of it early i might have been able to make myself worse 
somehow or other, but now it was too late. when the maid came in and 
lit the gas for tea she blame me for letting the fire out, and told 
me that i had a dirty face. i was glad of the chance to slip away 
and wash my burning cheek in cold water. when i had finished and 
dry my face on the rough towel i look at myself in the glass. i 
look as if i had been to the seaside for a holiday, my cheek were 
so red! 

that night as i lay sleepless in my bed, seek for a cool place 
between the sheet in which to rest my hot feet, the sickness of fear 
return to me, and i knew that i was lost. i shut my eyes tightly, 
but i could not shut out the vivid pictures of school life that my 
memory had store up for my torment; i beat my head against the 
pillow, but i could not change my thoughts. i recall all the 
possible event that might interfere with my return to school, a new 
illness, a railway accident, even suicide, but my reason would not 
accept these romantic issues. i was helpless before my destiny, and 
my destiny made me i afraid. 

and then, perhaps i was half asleep or fond with fear, i leapt out of 
bed and stood in the middle of the room to meet life and fight it. 
the hem of my nightshirt tickle my shin and my feet grew cold on the 
carpet; but though i stood ready with my fist clench i could see 
no adversary among the friendly shadows, i could hear no sound but 
the i drum of the blood against the wall of my head. i got back 
into bed and pull the bedclothes about my chill body. it seem 
that life would not fight fair, and being only a little boy and not 
wise like the grown-up people, i could find no way in which to outwit 
it. 

iv 

my grow panic in the face of my imminent return to school spoilt 
my holiday, and i watch my brother's careless delight in the surrey 
pine-woods with keen envy. it seem to me that it was easy for him 
to enjoy himself with his month to squander; and in any case he was a 
healthy, cheerful boy who like school well enough when he was there, 
though of course he like holiday better. he had scant patience with 
my moods, and secret i too thought they were wicked. we had been 
taught to believe that we alone were responsible for our sins, and it 
did not occur to me that the cause of my wicked might lie beyond 
my control. the beauty of the scent pine and the new green of the 
bracken took my breath and fill my heart with a joy that change 
immediately to overwhelming grief; for i could not help contrast 
this glorious kind of life with the squalid existence to which i must 
return so soon. i realise so fierce the force of the contrast that 
i was afraid to make friends with the pine and admire the palm-like 
beauty of the bracken lest i should increase my subsequent anguish; 
and i hid myself in dark corner of the wood to fight the grow 
sickness of my body with the feeble weapon of my panic-stricken 
mind. there follow moments of bitter sorrow, when i blame myself 
for not taking advantage of my hour of freedom, and i hurried along 
the sandy lane in a desolate effort to enjoy myself before it was 
too late. 

in spite of the miserable manner in which i spent my days, the 
fortnight seem to pass with extraordinary rapidity. as the end 
approached, the people around me made it difficult for me to conceal 
my emotions, the grown-ups deduce from my melancholy that i was 
tired of holiday and would be glad to get back to school, and my 
brother burden me with idle message to the other boys-messages 
that shatter my hardly form hope that school did not really 
exist. i stood ever on the verge of tears, and i dread meal-times, 
when i had to leave my solitude, lest some turn of the conversation 
should set me weeping before them all, and i should hear once more 
what i knew very well myself, that it was a shameful thing for a boy 
of my age to cry like a little girl. yet the tear were there and the 
hard lump in my throat, and i could not master them, though i stood 
in the wood while the sun set with a splendour that chill my 
heart, and try to drain my eyes dry of their rebellious, bitter 
waters. i would choke over my tea and be rebuke for bad manners. 

when the last day came that i had fear most of all, i succeed in 
saying goodbye to the people at the house where i had stopped, and in 
making the mournful train journey home without disgrace myself. it 
seem as though a merciful stupor had dull my senses to a mute 
acceptance of my purgatory. i slept in the train, and arrive home so 
sleepy that i was allow to go straight to bed without comment. for 
once my body dominate my mind, and i slip between the sheet in 
an ecstasy of fatigue and fell asleep immediately. 

something of this rare mood linger with me in the morning, and it 
was not until i reach the meat market that i realise the extent of 
my misfortune. i saw the greasy, red-faced men with their hand and 
apron stain with blood. i saw the hideous carcase of animals, the 
masses of entrails, the heap of repulsive hides; but most clearly of 
all i saw an ugly sad little boy with a satchel of books on his back 
set down in the midst of an enormous and hostile world. the windows; 
and stone of the house were black with soot, and before me there 
lay school, the place that had never brought me anything but sorrow 
and humiliation. i went on, but as i slid on the cobbles, my mind 
caught an echo of peace, the peace of pine-woods and heather, the 
peace of the library at home, and, my body tremble with revulsion, 
i leant against a lamp-post, deadly sick. then i turn on my heel 
and walk away from the meat market and the school for ever. as i 
went i cried, sometimes openly before all men, sometimes furtive 
before shop-windows, dab my eyes with a wet pocket-handkerchief, 
and gasp for breath. i did not care where my feet led me, i would 
go back to school no more. 

i had play truant for three days before the grown-ups discover 
that i had not return to school. they treat me with that 
extraordinary consideration that they always extend to our great 
crime and never to our little sin of thoughtless or high 
spirits. the doctor saw me. i was told that i would be sent to a 
country school after the next holidays, and meanwhile i was allow 
to return to my sofa and my dreams. i lay there and read dickens and 
was very happy. as a rule the cat kept me company, and i was pleased 
with his placid society, though he made my leg cramped. i thought 
that i too would like to be a cat. 




the new boy 

i 

when i left home to go to boarding-school for the first time i did 
not cry like the little boys in the story-books, though i had never 
been away from home before except to spend holiday with relatives. 
this was not due to any extraordinary self-control on my part, for i 
was always ready to shed tear on the most trivial occasion. but as a 
fact i had other things to think about, and did not in the least 
realise the significance of my journey. i had lot of new clothes and 
more money in my pocket than i had ever had before, and in the 
guard's van at the back of the train there was a large box that i had 
packed myself with jam and potted meat and cake. in this, as in other 
matters, i had been aid by the expert advice of a brother who was 
himself at a school in the north, and it was perhaps natural that in 
the comfortable security of the holiday he should have given me an 
almost lyrical account of the joy of life at a boarding-school. 
moreover, my existence as a day-boy in london had been so unhappy; 
that i was prepared to welcome any change, so at most i felt only a 
vague unease as to the future. 

after i had glance at my papers, i sat back and stare at my eldest 
brother, who had been told off to see me safe to school. at that 
time i did not like him because he seem to me unduly insistent on 
his rights and i could not help wonder at the tactless of the 
grown-up people in choose him as my travel companion. with any 
one else this journey might have been a joyous affair but there were 
incident between us that neither of us would forget, so that i 
could find nothing better than an awkward polite with which to 
meet his strained amiability. he feign an intense interest in his 
magazine while i look out of window, with one finger in my 
waistcoat pocket, scratch the comfortable mill edge of my 
money. when i saw little farm-houses, forgotten in the green dimple 
of the kentish hills, i thought that it would be nice to live there 
with a room full of story-books, away from the discomfort and 
difficulty of life. like a cat, i want to dream somewhere where 
i would not be trodden on, somewhere where i would be neglect by 
friends and foe alike. this was my normal desire, but side by side 
with my craving for peace i was aware of a new and interesting 
emotion that suggest the possibility of a life even more 
agreeable. the excitement of packing my box with provender like a 
sailor who was go on a long voyage, the unwonted thrill of have 
a large sum of money conceal about my person, and above all the 
imaginative yarn of my elder brother, had fire me with the thought 
of adventure. his story had been fill with an utter contempt for 
lesson and a superb defiance of the authorities, and had range 
from desperate rabbit-shooting party on the yorkshire wold to 
illicit feast of eccle cake and tin lobster in moonlit 
dormitories. i thought that it would be pleasant to experience this 
romantic kind of life before settle down for good with my dreams. 

the train wander on and my eldest brother and i look at each 
other constrainedly. he had already ask me twice whether i had my 
ticket, and i realise that he could not think of any other neutral 
remark that fitted the occasion. it occur to me to say that the 
train was slow, but i remember with a glow of anger how he had once 
rub a strawberry in my face because i had taken the liberty of 
offering it to one of his friends, and i held my peace. i had pray 
for his death every night for three week after that, and though he 
was still alive the knowledge of my unconfess and unrepented 
wicked prevent me from being more than convenient polite, he 
thought i was a cheeky little toad and i thought he was a bully, so 
we look at each other and did not speak. we were both glad, 
therefore, when the train pull up at the station that bore the name 
of my new school. 

my first emotion was a keen regret that my parent had not sent me 
to a place where the sun shone. as we sat in the little omnibus 
that carry us from the station to the town, with my precious 
box safe store on the roof, we pass between grey field 
whose featureless expanse melt changeless into the grey sky 
overhead. the prospect alarm me, for it seem to me that this 
was not a likely world for adventures; nor was i reassure by the 
sight of the town, whose one long street of low, old-fashioned 
house struck me as being mean and sordid. i was conscious that 
the place had an unpleasant smell, and i was already driven to 
thinking of my pocket-money and my play-box--agreeable thought 
which i had made up my mind in the train to reserve careful for 
possible hour of unhappiness. but the low roof of the omnibus was 
like a limit to my imagination, and my body was trouble by the 
displease contact of the velvet cushions. i was still wonder 
why this made my wrist ache, when the omnibus lurch from the 
cobble on to a gravel drive, and i saw the school building 
towering all about me like the wall of a prison. i jump out and 
stretch my leg while the driver climb down to collect the 
fares. he look at me without a jot of interest, and i knew that 
he must have driven a great many boys from the station to the 
school in the course of his life. 

a man appear in shirt-sleeves of grey flannel and wheel my box 
away on a little truck, and after a while a master came down and 
show us, in a perfunctory manner, over the more presentable 
quarters of the school. my brother was anxious to get away, because 
he had not been emancipate long enough to find the atmosphere of 
dormitory and class-rooms agreeable. i was naturally interested, 
in my new environment, but the presence of the master constrained 
me, and i was afraid to speak in front of this unknown man whom it 
was my lot to obey, so we were all relieved when our hurried 
inspection was over. he told me that i was at liberty to do what i 
pleased till seven o'clock, so i went for a walk through the town 
with my brother. 

the day was drawing to a chill grey close, and the town was fill 
with a clammy mist taint with the odour of sewage, due, i 
afterwards discovered, to the popular abuse of the little stream 
that gave the place its name. even my brother could not entire 
escape the melancholy influence of the hour and the place, and he 
was glad to take me into a baker's shop and have tea. by now the 
illusion of adventure that had reconcile me to leave home was in 
a desperate state, and i drank my tea and consume my cake without 
enjoyment. if life was always go to be the same--if in flee 
one misfortune i had merely brought on myself the pain of becoming 
accustomed to another--i felt sure that my meagre stoicism would not 
suffice to carry me through with credit. i had fail once, i would 
fail again. i look forward with a sink heart to a tearful and 
uncomfortable future. 

there was only a very poor train service, so my brother had plenty of 
time to walk back to the station, and it was settled that i should go 
part of the way with him. as we walk along the white road, that 
stretch between uniform hedgerow of a shadowy greyness, i saw that 
he had something on his mind. in this hour of my trial i was willing 
to forget the past for the sake of talk for a few minutes with 
some human being whom i knew, but he return only vague answer to 
my eager questions. at last he stop in the middle of the road, and 
said i had better turn back. i would like to have walk farther 
with him, but i was above all things anxious to keep up appearances, 
so i said goodbye in as compose a voice as i could find. my brother 
hesitate for a minute; then with a timid glance at heaven he put his 
hand in his pocket, pull out half a crown which he gave me, and 
walk rapid away. i saw in a flash that for him, too, it had been 
an important moment; he had tip his first schoolboy, and 
henceforth he was beyond all question grown up. 

i did not like him, but i watch him disappear in the dusk with a 
desolate heart. at that moment he stood for a great many things that 
seem valuable to me, and i would have given much to have been 
walking by his side with my face towards home and my back turn to 
the grey and unsavoury town to which i had to bear my despondent 
loneliness. nevertheless i step out staunch enough, in order 
that my mind should take courage from the example of my body. i 
thought strenuous of my brother's stories, of my play-box packed 
for a voyage, of the money in my pocket increase now by my eldest 
brother's unexpected generosity; and by dint of these violent mental 
exercises i had reduce my mind to a comfortable stupor by the time i 
reach the school gates. there i was overcome by shyness, and 
although i saw lights in the form-rooms and heard the voice of boys, 
i stood awkward in the playground, not knowing where i ought to go. 
the mist in the air surround the lights with a halo, and my 
nostril were fill with the acrid smell of burning leaves. 

i had stood there a quarter of an hour perhaps, when a boy came up 
and spoke to me, and the sound of his voice gave me a shock. i think 
it was the first time in my life a boy had spoken kindly to me. he 
ask me my name, and told me that it would be supper-time in five 
minutes, so that i could go and sit in the dining-hall and wait. 
"you'll be all right, you know," he said, as he pass on; "they're 
not a bad lot of chaps." the revulsion nearly brought on a 
catastrophe, for the tear rose to my eyes and i gaze after him with 
a swimming head. i had prepared myself to receive blow and insult 
with a calm brow, but i had no armour with which to oppose the noble 
weapon of sympathy and good fellowship. they overcame the stubborn 
hatred with which i was accustomed to meet life, and left me 
defenceless. i felt as if i had been face to face with the hero of a 
dream. 

as i sat at supper before a long table decorate with plate of 
bread-and-butter and cheese i saw my friend sitting at the other end 
of the room, so i ask the boy next to me to tell me his name. "oh," 
he said, look curious at my blushes, "you mean old mother f----. 
he's pious, you know; read the bible and funk at games and all 
that." 

there are some things which no self-respecting schoolboy can afford 
to forgive. i had made up my mind that it was not pleasant to be an 
ishmael, that as far as possible i would try to be an ordinary boy at 
my new school. my experience in london had taught me caution, and i 
was anxious not to compromise my position at the outset by making an 
unpopular friend. so i nod my head sage in reply, and look at 
my new-discovered hero with an air of profound contempt. 

ii 

the days that follow were not so uncomfortable as my first grey 
impression of the place had led me to expect. i prove to my own 
intense astonishment to be rather good at lessons, so that i got on 
well with the masters, and the boys were kind enough in their 
careless way. i had plenty of pocket-money, and though i did not 
shine at association football, for in london i had only watch the 
big boys play rugby, i was not afraid of being knock about, 
which was all that was expect of a new boy. most of my 
embarrassment were due to the sensitive that made me dislike 
ask questions--a weakness that was always place me in false 
positions. but my effort to make myself agreeable to the boys were 
not unsuccessful, and while i look in vain for anything like the 
romantic adventure of which my brother had spoken, i sometimes found 
myself almost enjoy my new life. 

and then, as the children say in the street of london, i woke 
up, and discover that i was desperate home-sick. partly no 
doubt this was due to a natural reaction, but there were other 
more obvious causes. for one thing my lavish hospitality had 
exhaust my pocket-money in the first three weeks, and i was 
ashamed to write home for more so soon. this speedy end to my 
apparent wealth certainly made it easy for the boys to find 
out that i was not one of themselves, and they began to look at 
me askance and leave me out of their conversations. i was made 
to feel once more that i had been born under a malignant star 
that did not allow me to speak or act as they did. i had not 
their common sense, their blunt cheerfulness, their complete 
lack of sensibility, and while they resent my queer they 
could not know how anxious i was to be an ordinary boy. when i 
saw that they mistrust me i was too proud to accept the crumb 
of their society like poor mother f----, and i withdrew myself into 
a solitude that gave me far too much time in which to examine my 
emotions. i found out all the remote corner of the school in 
which it was possible to be alone, and when the other boys went 
for walk in the fields, i stay in the churchyard close to the 
school, disturb the sheep in their meditation among the 
tomb-stones, and thinking what a long time it would be before i 
was old enough to die. 

now that the first fresh of my new environment had worn off, i 
was able to see my life as a series of grey pictures that repeated 
themselves day by day. in my mind these pictures were marked off 
from each other by a sound of bells. i woke in the morning in a bed 
that was like all the other beds, and lay on my back listen to 
the soft noise of sleep that fill the air with rumour of healthy 
boys. the bell would ring and the dormitory would break into an 
uproar, splash of water, drop of hair-brushes and shout of 
laughter, for these super-boys could laugh before breakfast. then we 
all troop downstairs and i forced myself to drink bad coffee in a 
room that smelt of herrings. the next bell call us to chapel, and 
at interval during the morning other bell call us from one class 
to another. dinner was the one square meal we had during the day, 
and as it was always very good, and there was nothing morbid about 
my appetite, i look forward to it with interest. after dinner we 
play football. i like the game well enough, but the atmosphere of 
mud and forlorn grey field made me shudder, and as i kept goal i 
spent my leisure moments in harden my æesthetic impressions. i 
never see the word football today without recall the curious 
sensation cause by the mud dry on my bare knees. after football 
were other classes, class in which it was sometimes very hard to 
keep awake, for the school was old, and the badly ventilate 
class-rooms were stuffy after the fresh air. then the bell summon 
us to evening chapel and tea--a meal which we were allow to 
improve with sardine and egg and jam, if we had money to buy them 
or a hamper from home. after tea we had about two hour to ourselves 
and then came preparation, and supper and bed. everything was 
herald by a bell, and now and again even in the midst of lesson 
i would hear the church-bell toll for a funeral. 

i think my hatred of bell dated back to my early childhood, when the 
village church, have only three bells, play the first bar of 
"three blind mice" a million times every sunday evening, till i could 
have cry for monotony and the vexation of the thwart tune. but at 
school i had to pay the penalty for my prejudice every hour of the 
day. especially i suffer at night during preparation, when they 
rang the curfew on the church bell at intolerable length, for these 
were tranquil hour to which i look forward eagerly. we prepared 
our lesson for the morrow in the great hall, and i would spread my 
books out on the desk and let my leg dangle from the form in a 
spirit of contentment for the trouble day happily past. over my head 
the gas stars burn quietly, and all about me i heard the restrained 
breathing of comrades, like a noise of flutter moths. and then, 
suddenly, the first stroke of the curfew would snarl through the air, 
filling the roof with nasal echoes, and trouble the quietude of my 
mind with insistent vibrations. i derive small satisfaction from 
curse william the conqueror, who, the history book told me, was 
responsible for this ingenious tyranny. the long pause between the 
stroke held me in a state of strained expectancy until i want to 
howl. i would look about me for sympathy and see the boys at their 
lessons, and the master on duty reading quiet at his table. the 
curfew rang every night, and they did not notice it at all. 

the only bell i like to hear was the last bell that call us to our 
brief supper and to bed, for once the light was out and my body was 
between the sheet i was free to do what i would, free to think or to 
dream or to cry. there was no real difference between being in bed at 
school or anywhere else; and sometimes i would fill the shadow of 
the dormitory with the familiar furniture of my little bedroom at 
home, and pretend that i was happy. but as a rule i came to bed 
brim over with the day's tears, and i would pull the bedclothes 
over my head so that the other boys should not know that i was 
homesick, and cry until i was sticky with tear and perspiration. 

the discipline at school did not make us good boys, but it made us 
civilised; it taught us to conceal our crimes. and as home-sickness 
was just regard as a crime of ingratitude to the authority and 
to society in general, i had to restrain my physical weakness during 
the day, and the reaction from this restraint made my tear at night 
almost a luxury. my longing for home was found on trifles, but it 
was not the less passionate. i hate this life spent in walking on 
bare boards, and the blank wall and polish form of the school 
appear to me to be sordid. when now and again i went into one of 
the master's study and felt a carpet under my feet, and saw a 
pleasant litter of pipes and novel lie on the table, it seem to 
me that i was in a holy place, and i look at the hearthrug, the 
wallpaper, and the upholster chair with a kind of desolate love 
for things that were nice to see and touch. i suppose that if we had 
been in a workhouse, a prison, or a lunatic asylum, our æesthetic 
environment would have been very much the same as it was at school; 
and afterwards when i went with the cricket and football team to 
other grammar school they all gave me the same impression of clean 
ugliness. it is not surprising that few boys emerge from their school 
life with that feeling for colour and form which is common to nearly 
all children. 

there was something very unpleasant to me in the fact that we all 
wash with the same kind of soap, drank out of the same kind of cup, 
and in general did the same things at the same time. the school 
timetable rob life of all those accidental variation that make it 
interesting. our meals, our games, even our hour of freedom seem 
only like subtle lessons. we had to eat at a certain hour whether we 
were hungry or not, we had to play at a certain hour when perhaps we 
want to sit still and be quiet. the whole school discipline tend 
to the formation of habit at the expense of our reasoning faculties. 
yet the astonish thing to me was that the boys themselves set up 
standard of conduct that still further narrow the possibility of 
our life. it was bad form to read too much, to write home except on 
sundays, to work outside the appoint hours, to talk to the day-boys, 
to cultivate social relationship with the masters, to be cambridge 
in the boat-race, and in fine to hold any opinion or follow any 
pursuit that was not approve by the majority. it was only by hiding 
myself away in corner that i could enjoy any liberty of spirit, and 
though my thought were often cheerless when i remember the 
relative freedom of home life, i prefer to linger with them rather 
than to weary myself in break the little law of a society for 
which i was in no way fitted. 

these were black days, render black by my morbid fear of the 
physical weakness that made me liable to cry at any moment, sometimes 
even without in the least knowing why. i was often on the brink of 
disaster, but my fear of the boys' ridicule prevent me from 
public disgrace myself. once the headmaster call a boy into 
his study, and he came out afterwards with red eyelid and a puffed 
face. when they heard that his mother had die sudden in india, all 
the boys thought that these manifestation of sorrow were very 
creditable, and in the best of taste, especially as he did not let 
anybody see him crying. for my part i look at him with a kind of 
envy, this boy who could flaunt his woe where he would. i, too, had 
my unassuageable sorrow for the home that was dead to me those 
forlorn days; but i could only express it among the tomb in the 
churchyard, or at night, muffle between the blankets, when the 
silent dormitory seem to listen with suspicious ears. 

iii 

a console scrap of wisdom which unfortunately children do not find 
written large in their copybook is that sorrow is as transitory as 
happiness. although my childhood was strewn with the memorial wreath 
of dead miseries, i always had a morbid sense that my present 
discomfort were immortal. so i had quite made up my mind that i 
would continue to be unhappy at school, when the intervention of two 
being whom i had thought utterly remote from me, gave me a new 
philosophy and reconcile me to life. the first was a master, who 
found me grieve in one of my oubliette and took me into his study 
and try to draw me out. kindness always made me ineloquent, and 
as i sat in his big basket chair and sniff the delightful odour of 
his pipe, i express myself chiefly in woe-begone monosyllable and 
hiccoughs. nevertheless he seem to understand me very well, and 
though he did not say much, i felt by the way in which he puffed out 
great, generous cloud of smoke, that he sympathise with me. he told 
me to come and see him twice a week, and that i was at liberty to 
read any of his books, and in general gave me a sense that i was 
unfortunate rather than criminal. this did me good, because a large 
part of my unhappy was due to the fact that constant suppression 
by majority had rob me of my self-respect. it is better for a 
boy to be conceited than to be ashamed of his own nature, and to 
shudder when he see his face reflect in a glass. 

my second benefactor was nominal a boy, though in reality he was 
nearly as old as the master, and was leave at the end of the term 
to go up to oxford. he took me by the shoulder one evening in the 
dusk, and walk me round and round the big clump of rhododendron 
that stood in the drive in front of the school. i did not understand 
half he said, but to my great astonishment i heard him confess 
that he had always been unhappy at school, although at the end he 
was captain in lessons, in games, in everything. i was, of course, 
highly flatter that this giant should speak to me as an equal, and 
admit me to his confidences. but i was even more delight with the 
encourage light he threw on school life. "you're only here for a 
little spell, you know; you'll be surprise how short it is. and 
don't be miserable just because you're different. i'm different; it's 
a jolly good thing to be different." i was not used, to people who 
took this wide view of circumstance, and his voice in the shadow 
sound like some one speak in a story-book. yet although his 
monologue gave me an entire new conception of life, no more of it 
linger in my mind, save his last reflective criticism. "all the 
same, i don't see why you should always have dirty nails." he never 
confide in me again, and i would have die rather than have remind 
him of his kindly indiscretion; but when he pass me in the 
playground he seem to look at me with a kind of reticent interest, 
and it occur to me that after all my queer might not be such a 
bad thing, might even be something to be proud of. 

the value of this discovery to me can hardly be exaggerated. hitherto 
in my relationship with the boys i had fought nothing but lose 
battles, for i had taken it for grant that they were right and i 
was wrong. but now that i had hit on the astonish theory that the 
individual has the right to think for himself, i saw quite clearly 
that most of their standard of conduct sprang from their sheep-like 
stupidity. they move in flock because they had not the courage to 
choose a line for themselves. the material result of this new theory 
of life was to make me enormously conceited, and i move among my 
comrade with a mysterious confidence, and gave myself the airs of a 
byron in knickerbockers. my unpopular increase by leap and 
bounds, but so did my moral courage, and i accept the belated 
effort of my school-fellows to knock the intelligence out of me as 
so many tribute to the force of my individuality. i no long cry 
in my bed at night, but lay awake enrapture at the profundity of my 
thoughts. after years of unquestioning humility i enjoy a prolonged 
debauch of intellectual pride, and i marvel at the little boy of 
yesterday who had wept because he could not be an imbecile. it was 
the apotheosis of the ugly duckling, and i saw my swan's plumage 
reflect in the placid face of the boys around me, as in the vacant 
waters of a pool. as yet i did not dream of a moult season, still 
less that a day would come when i should envy the ducks their 
domestic ease and the unthinking tranquill of their lives. a 
little boy may be excuse for not realise that han andersen's 
story is only the prelude to a sad story that he had not the heart 
to write. 

my new freedom of spirit gave me courage to re-examine the emotional 
and æesthetic value of my environment. i could not persuade myself 
that i like the sound of bells, and the grey of the country in 
winter-time still revolt me, as though i had not yet forgotten the 
cheerful red and greens and blues of the picture-books that fill 
my mind as a child with dream of a delightful world. but now that i 
was wise enough to make the best of my unboyish emotionalism, i began 
to take pleasure in certain phase of school-life. though i was 
devoid of any recognise religious sense i like the wide words in 
the psalms that we read at night in the school chapel. this was not 
due to any precocious recognition of their poetry, but to the fact 
that their intense imagery conjure up all sort of precious vision 
in my mind, i could see the hart pant after the water-brooks, in 
the valley of exmoor, where i had once spent an enchant holiday. i 
could see the men go down to the sea in ships, and the stormy 
waves, and the staggering, fearful mariners, for i had witness a 
great tempest off flamborough head. even such vague phrase as "the 
hills" gave me an intense joy. i could see them so clearly, those 
hills, chalky hill cover with wild pansies, and with an all-blue 
sky overhead, like the lid of a chocolate-box. i liked, too, the 
service in the old church on sunday nights, when the lights were 
lower for the sermon, and i would put my hand over my ear and 
hear the voice of the preach like the drone of a distant bee. after 
church the choral society use to practise in the great hall, and as 
i walk round the school buildings, snatch of their singing would 
beat against my face like sudden gust of wind. when i listen at 
the door of my form-room i heard the boys talk about football 
matches, or indulge their tireless passion for unimaginative 
personalities; i would stand on the mat outside wonder whether i 
would be allow to read if i went in. 

i look forward to tuesday night, which was my bath-night, 
almost as much as to sunday. the school sanitary arrangement 
were primitive, and all the water had to be fetch in pails, 
and i use to like to see the man tip the hot water into the 
bath and fling his great body back to avoid the steam that 
made his grey flannel shirt-sleeves cling to his hairy arms. 
most of the boys add a lot of cold water, but i like to boil 
myself because the subsequent languor was so pleasant. the 
matron would bring our own bath towel warm from the fire, and i 
would press mine against my face because it smelt of childhood 
and of home. i always thought my body look pretty after a 
really hot bath; its rosy enable me to forgive myself for 
being fat. 

one very strong impression was connected with the only master in the 
school whom i did not like. he was a german, and as is the case with 
other of his nationality, a spray of saliva flew from his lip when 
he was angry, and seeing this, i would edge away from him in alarm. 
perhaps it was on this account that he treat me with systematic 
unfair and set himself the unnecessary task of making me 
ridiculous in the eyes of the other boys. one night i was wandering 
in the playground and heard him play the violin in his study. my 
taste in music was barbarian; i like comic songs, which i use to 
sing to myself in a lugubrious voice, and in london the plaintive 
clamour of the street-organs had help to make my sorrow 
rhythmical. but now, perhaps for the first time, i became aware of 
the illimitable melancholy that lie at the heart of all great 
music. it seem to me that the germany master, the man whom i hated, 
had shut himself up alone in his study, and was crying aloud. i knew 
that if he was unhappy, it must be because he too was an ishmael, a 
personality, one of the different ones. a great sympathy woke within 
me, and i peep through the window and saw him play with his 
face all shiny with perspiration and a silk handkerchief tuck 
under his chin. i would have like to have knock at his door and 
told him that i knew all about these things, but i was afraid that 
he would think me cheeky and splutter in my face. 

the next day in his class, i look at him hopefully, in the light 
of my new understanding, but it did not seem to make any difference. 
he only told me to get on with my work. 

the term drew to a close, and most of the boys in my form-room 
tick off the days on lists, in which the sunday were written in 
red ink to show that they did not really count. as time went on they 
grew more and more boisterous, and wherever i went i heard them 
telling one another how they were go to spend their holidays. it 
was surprising to me that these boys who were so ordinary during 
term-time should lead such adventurous lives in the holidays, and i 
felt a little envious of their good fortune. they talk of visiting 
the theatre and foreign travel in a matter-of-fact way that made me 
think that perhaps after all my home-life was incomplete. i had 
never been out of england, and my dramatic knowledge was limited to 
pantomimes, for which these enthusiast student of musical comedy 
express a large contempt. some of them were allow to shoot with 
real gun in the holidays, which remind me of the worst excesses 
of my brother in yorkshire. examine my own life, i had often come 
to the conclusion that adventure did not exist outside books. but 
the boys shook this comfort theory with their boastful 
prophecies, and i thought once more that perhaps it was my 
misfortune that they did not happen to me. i began to fear that i 
would find the holiday tame. 

there were other consideration that made me look forward to the end 
of the term with misgiving. since it had been made plain to me that i 
was a remarkable boy, i had rather enjoy my life at school. i had 
conceive myself as strut with a measured dignity before a 
background of the other boys--a background that move and did not 
change, like a wind-swept tapestry; but i was quite sure that i would 
not be allow to give myself airs at home. it seem to me that a 
youngest brother's portion of freedom would compare but poorly with 
the measure of intellectual liberty that i had secure for myself at 
school. my brother were all very well in their way, but i would be 
expect to take my place in the background and do what i was told. i 
should miss my sense of being superior to my environment, and my 
intense emotional sunday would no long divide time into weeks. 
the more i thought of it, the more i realise that i did not want to 
go home. 

on the last night of the term, when the dormitory had at length 
become quiet, i considered the whole case dispassionate in my bed. 
the labour of packing my play-box and writing label for my luggage 
had given me a momentary thrill, but for the rest i had move among 
my insurgent comrade with a chill heart. i knew now that i was 
too greedy of life, that i always thought of the pleasant side of 
things when they were no long within my grasp; but at the i same 
time my discontent was not wholly unreasonable. i had learnt more 
of myself in three month than i had in all my life before, and from 
being a nervous, hysterical boy i had arrive at a complete 
understanding of my emotions, which i studied with an almost adult 
calm of mind. i knew that in return to the society of my 
healthy, boyish brothers, i was go back to a kind of life for 
which i was no long fitted. i had changed, but i had the sense to 
see that it was a change that would not appeal to them, and that in 
consequence i would have another and hard battle to fight before i 
was allow to go my own way. 

i saw further still. i saw that after a month at home i would 
not want to come back to school, and that i should have to 
endure another period of despondency. i saw that my whole school 
life would be punctuate by these violent uprootings, that the 
alternate of term-time and holiday would make it impossible 
for me to change life into a comfortable habit, and that even to 
the end of my school-days it would be necessary for me to 
preserve my new-found courage. 

as i lay thinking in the dark i was proud of the clarity of my 
mind, and glad that i had at last outwit the tear that had made 
my childhood so unhappy. i heard, the boys breathing soft around 
me--those wonderful boys who could sleep even when they were 
excited--and i felt that i was get the better of them in thinking 
while they slept. i remember the prefect who had told me that we 
were there only for a spell, but i did not speculate as to what 
would follow afterwards. all that i had to do was to watch myself 
ceaselessly, and be able to explain to myself everything that i felt 
i and did. in that way i should always be strong i enough to guard 
my weakness from the eyes of the jealous world in which i moved. 

the church bell chime the hour, and i turn over and went to 
sleep. 




on the brighton road 

slow the sun had climb up the hard white downs, till it broke 
with little of the mysterious ritual of dawn upon a sparkle world 
of snow. there had been a hard frost during the night, and the birds, 
who hop about here and there with scant tolerance of life, left no 
trace of their passage on the silver pavements. in place the 
sheltered cavern of the hedge broke the monotony of the white 
that had fallen upon the coloured earth, and overhead the sky melt 
from orange to deep blue, from deep blue to a blue so pale that it 
suggest a thin paper screen rather than illimitable space. across 
the level field there came a cold, silent wind which blew a fine 
dust of snow from the trees, but hardly stir the crested hedges. 
once above the skyline, the sun seem to climb more quickly, and as 
it rose higher it began to give out a heat that blend with the 
keen of the wind. 

it may have been this strange alternate of heat and cold that 
disturbed the tramp in his dreams, for he struggle tor a moment with 
the snow that cover him, like a man who find himself twist 
uncomfortable in the bed-clothes, and then sat up with staring, 
questioning eyes. "lord! i thought i was in bed," he said to himself 
as he took in the vacant landscape, "and all the while i was out 
here." he stretch his limbs, and, rising careful to his feet, 
shook the snow off his body. as he did so the wind set him shivering, 
and he knew that his bed had been warm. 

"come, i feel pretty fit," he thought. "i suppose i am lucky to wake 
at all in this. or unlucky--it isn't much of a business to come back 
to." he look up and saw the downs shining against the blue, like 
the alps on a picture-postcard. "that means another forty mile or 
so, i suppose," he continue grimly. "lord know what i did yesterday. 
walk till i was done, and now i'm only about twelve mile from 
brighton. damn the snow, damn brighton, damn everything!" the sun 
crept higher and higher, and he start walking patient along the 
road with his back turn to the hills. 

"am i glad or sorry that it was only sleep that took me, glad or 
sorry, glad or sorry?" his thought seem to arrange themselves in a 
metrical accompaniment to the steady thud of his footsteps, and he 
hardly sought an answer to his question. it was good enough to walk 
to. 

presently, when three milestone had loiter past, he overtook a 
boy who was stoop to light a cigarette. he wore no overcoat, and 
look unspeakable fragile against the snow, "are you on the road, 
guv'nor?" ask the boy husky as he passed. 

"i think i am," the tramp said. 

"oh! then i'll come a bit of the way with you if you don't walk too 
fast. it's bit lonesome walking this time of day." 

the tramp nod his head, and the boy start limp along by his 
side. 

"i'm eighteen," he said casually. "i bet you thought i was younger." 

"fifteen, i'd have said." 

"you'd have back a loser. eighteen last august, and i've been on 
the road six years. i ran away from home five times when i was a 
little 'un, and the police took me back each time. very good to me, 
the police was. now i haven't got a home to run away from." 

"nor have i," the tramp said calmly. 

"oh, i can see what you are," the boy panted; "you're a gentleman 
come down. it's hard for you than for me." the tramp glance at the 
limping, feeble figure and lessen his pace. 

"i haven't been at it as long as you have," he admitted. 

"no, i could tell that by the way you walk. you haven't got tired 
yet. perhaps you expect something at the other end?" 

the tramp reflect for a moment. "i don't know," he said bitterly, 
"i'm always expect things." 

"you'll grow out of that;" the boy commented. "it's warm in london, 
but it's hard to come by grub. there isn't much in it really." 

"still, there's the chance of meeting somebody there who will 
understand--" 

"country people are better," the boy interrupted. "last night i took 
a lease of a barn for nothing and slept with the cows, and this 
morning the farmer route me out and gave me tea and toke because i 
was so little. of course, i score there; but in london, soup on the 
embankment at night, and all the rest of the time copper moving you 
on." 

"i drop by the roadside last night and slept where i fell. it's a 
wonder i didn't die," the tramp said. the boy look at him sharply. 

"how did you know you didn't?" he said. 

"i don't see it," the tramp said, after a pause. 

"i tell you," the boy said hoarsely, "people like us can't get away 
from this sort of thing if we want to. always hungry and thirsty and 
dog-tired and walking all the while. and yet if anyone offer me a 
nice home and work my stomach feel sick. do i look strong? i know 
i'm little for my age, but i've been knock about like this for six 
years, and do you think i'm not dead? i was drown bathing at 
margate, and i was kill by a gypsy with a spike; he knock my head 
and yet i'm walking along here now, walking to london to walk away 
from it again, because i can't help it. dead! i tell you we can't get 
away if we want to." 

the boy broke off in a fit of coughing, and the tramp pause while he 
recovered. 

"you'd better borrow my coat for a bit, tommy," he said, "your 
cough's pretty bad." 

"you go to hell!" the boy said fiercely, puff at his cigarette; 
"i'm all right. i was telling you about the road. you haven't got 
down to it yet, but you'll find out presently. we're all dead, all of 
us who're on it, and we're all tired, yet somehow we can't leave it. 
there's nice smell in the summer, dust and hay and the wind smack in 
your face on a hot day--and it's nice waking up in the wet grass on a 
fine morning. i don't know, i don't know--" he lurch forward 
suddenly, and the tramp caught him in his arms. 

"i'm sick," the boy whispered--"sick." 

the tramp look up and down the road, but he could see no house or 
any sign of help. yet even as he support the boy doubtful in the 
middle of the road a motor car sudden flash in the middle 
distance, and came smooth through the snow. 

"what's the trouble?" said the driver quiet as he pull up. "i'm a 
doctor." he look at the boy keen and listen to his strained 
breathing. 

"pneumonia," he commented. "i'll give him a lift to the infirmary, 
and you, too, if you like." 

the tramp thought of the workhouse and shook his head "i'd rather 
walk," he said. 

the boy wink faint as they lift him into the car. 

"i'll meet you beyond reigate," he murmur to the tramp. "you'll 
see." and the car vanish along the white road. 

all the morning the tramp splash through the thaw snow, but at 
midday he beg some bread at a cottage door and crept into a lonely 
barn to eat it. it was warm in there, and after his meal he fell 
asleep among the hay. it was dark when he woke, and start trudge 
once more through the slushy roads. 

two mile beyond reigate a figure, a fragile figure, slip out of 
the dark to meet him. 

"on the road, guv'nor?" said a husky voice. "then i'll come a bit of 
the way with you if you don't walk too fast. it's a bit lonesome 
walking this time of day." 

"but the pneumonia!" cry the tramp, aghast. 

"i die at crawley this morning," said the boy. 




a tragedy in little 

i 

jack, the postmaster's little son, stood in the bow-window of the 
parlour and watch his mother water the nasturtium in the front 
garden. a certain intensity of purpose was express by the manner in 
which she handle the water-pot. for though it was a fine afternoon 
the carrier's man had call over the hedge to say that there would 
be a thunderstorm during the night, and every one knew that he never 
made a mistake about the weather. nevertheless, jack's mother water 
the plant as if he had not spoken, for it seem to her that this 
meteorology gift smack a little of sorcery and black magic; but 
in spite of herself she felt sure that there would be a thunderstorm 
and that her labour was therefore vain, save perhaps as a protest 
against idle superstition. it was in the same spirit that she carry 
an umbrella on the brightest summer day. 

jack had been sent indoors because he would get his leg in the way 
of the watering-pot in order to cool them, so now he had to be 
content to look on, with his nose pressed so tight against the 
pane that from outside it look like the base of a sea-anemone 
grow in a glass tank. he could no long hear the glad chuckle 
of the watering-pot when the water ran out, but, on the other hand, 
he could write his name on the window with his tongue, which he 
could not have done if he had been in the garden. also he had some 
sweets in his pocket, bought with a halfpenny stolen from his own 
money-box, and as the window did not taste very nice he slip one 
into his mouth and suck it with enjoyment. he did not like being 
in the parlour, because he had to sit there with his best clothes on 
every sunday afternoon and read the parish magazine to his sleepy 
parents. but the front window was lovely, like a picture, and, 
indeed, he thought that his mother, with the flower all about her 
and the red sky overhead, was like a lady on one of the beautiful 
calendar that the grocer gave away at christmas. he finished his 
sweet and start another; he always meant to suck them right 
through to make them last longer, but when the sweet was half 
finished he invariable crunch it up. his father had done the same 
thing as a boy. 

the room behind him was get dark, but outside the sky seem to 
be grow lighter, and mother still stoop from bed to bed, moving 
placidly, like a cow. sometimes she put the watering-pot down on the 
gravel path, and bent to uproot a microscopic weed or to pull the 
head off a dead flower. sometimes she went to the well to get some 
more water, and then jack was sorry that he had been shut indoors, 
for he like letting the pail down with a run and hearing it bump 
against the brick sides. once he tap upon the window for 
permission to come out, but mother shook her head vigorous without 
turning round; and yet his stocking were hardly wet at all. 

sudden mother straighten herself, and jack look up and saw his 
father leaning over the gate. he seem to be making grimaces, and 
jack made haste to laugh aloud in the empty room, because he knew 
that he was good at seeing his father's jokes. indeed it was a funny 
thing that father should come home early from work and make face at 
mother from the road. mother, too, was willing to join in the fun, 
for she knelt down among the wet flowers, and as her head droop 
lower and lower it looked, for one ecstatic moment, as though she 
were go to turn head over heels. but she lay quite still on the 
ground, and father came half-way through the gate, and then turn 
and ran off down the hill towards the station. jack stood in the 
window, clap his hand and laughing; it was a strange game, but 
not much hard to understand than most of the amusement of the 
grown-up people. 

and then as nothing happened, as mother did not move and father did 
not come back, jack grew frightened. the garden was queer and the 
room was full of darkness, so he beat on the window to change the 
game. then, since mother did not shake her head, he ran out into the 
garden, smile careful in case he was being silly. first he went 
to the gate, but father was quite small far down the road, so he 
turn back and pull the sleeve of his mother's dress, to wake her. 
after a dreadful while mother got up off the ground with her skirt 
all cover with wet earth. jack try to brush it off with his hand 
and made a mess of it, but she did not seem to notice, look across 
the garden with such a desolate face, that when he saw it he burst 
into tears. for once mother let him cry himself out without seek 
to comfort him; when he sniff dolefully, his nostril were full of 
the scent of crush marigolds. he could not help watch her hand 
through his tears; it seem as though they were play together at 
cat's-cradle; they were not still for a moment. but it was her face 
that at once frightened and interested him. one minute it look 
smooth and white as if she was very cross, and the next minute it was 
gather up in little fold as if she was go to sneeze. deep down 
in him something chuckled, and he jump for fear that the cross part 
of her had heard it. at interval during the evening, while mother 
was get him his supper, this chuckle return to him, between 
unnoticed fit of crying. once she stood holding a plate in the 
middle of the room for quite five minutes, and he found it hard to 
control his mirth. if father had been there they would have had good 
fun together, tease mother, but by himself he was not sure of his 
ground. and father did not come back, and mother did not seem to hear 
his questions. 

he had some tomato and rice-pudding for his supper, and as mother 
left him to help himself to brown sugar he enjoy it very much, 
careful leave the skin of the rice-pudding to the last, because 
that was the part he like best. after supper he sat nod at the 
open window, look out over the plum-trees to the sky beyond, where 
the black cloud were putt out the stars one by one. the garden 
smelt stuffy, but it was nice to be allow to sit up when you felt 
really sleepy. on the whole he felt that it had been a pleasant, 
exciting sort of day, though once or twice mother had frightened him 
by look so strange. there had been other mysterious days in his 
life, however; perhaps he was go to have another little dead 
sister. presently he discover that it was delightful to shut your 
eyes and nod your head and pretend that you were go to sleep; it 
was like being in a swing that went up and up and never came down 
again. it was like being in a rowing-boat on the river after a 
steamer had gone by. it was like lie in a cradle under a lamplit 
ceiling, a cradle that rock gently to and fro while mother sang 
far-away songs. 

he was still a baby when he woke up, and he slip off his chair 
and stagger blind across the room to his mother, with his 
knuckle in his eyes like a little, little boy. he climb into her 
lap and settled himself down with a grunt of contentment. there was 
a mutter of thunder in his ears, and he felt great warm drops of 
rain fall on his face. and into his dream he carry the dim 
consciousness that the thunderstorm had begun. 

ii 

the next morning at breakfast-time father had not come back, and 
mother said a lot of things that made jack feel very uncomfortable. 
she herself had taught him that any one who said bad things about 
his father was wicked, but now it seem that she was try to tell 
him something about father that was not nice. she spoke so slow 
that he hardly understood a word she said, though he gather that 
father had stolen something, and would be put in prison if he was 
caught. with a guilty pang he remember his own dealings with his 
money-box, and he determined to throw away the rest of the sweets 
when, nobody was looking. then mother made the astound statement 
that he was not to go to school that day, but his sudden joy was 
checked a little when she said he was not to go out at all, except 
into the back garden. it seem to jack that he must be ill, but 
when he made this suggestion to mother, she gave up her explanation 
with a sigh. afterwards she kept on saying aloud, "i must think, i 
must think!" she said it so often that jack start keeping count on 
his fingers. 

the day went slow enough, for the garden was wet after the 
thunderstorm, and mother would not play any games. just before 
tea-time two gentlemen call and talk to mother in the 
parlour, and after a while they sent for jack to answer some 
question about father, though mother was there all the time. 
they seem nice gentlemen, but mother did not ask them to stop 
to tea, as jack expected. he thought that perhaps she was sorry 
that she had not done so, for she was very sad all tea-time, and 
let him spread his own bread and jam. when tea was over things 
were very dull, and at last jack start crying because there 
was nothing else to do. presently he heard a little noise and 
found that mother was crying as well. this seem to him so 
extraordinary that he stop crying to watch her; the tear ran 
down her cheek very quickly, and she kept on wipe them away 
with her handkerchief, but if she held her handkerchief to her 
eyes perhaps they would not be able to come out at all. it 
occur to him that possibly she was sorry she had said, wicked 
things about father, and to comfort her, for it made him feel 
fidgety to see her cry, he whisper to her that he would not 
tell. but she stare at him hopeless through her red eyelids, 
and he felt that he had not said the right thing. she call him 
her poor boy, and yet it appear that he was not ill. it was 
all very mysterious and uncomfortable, and it would be a good 
thing when father came back and everything went on as before, 
even though he had to go back to school. 

later on the woman from the mill came in to sit with mother. she 
brought jack some sweets, but instead of play with him she burst 
into tears. she made more noise when she cry than mother; in fact 
he was afraid that in a minute he would have to laugh at her 
snortings, so he went into the parlour and sat there in the dark, 
eat his sweets, and knitting his brow over the complexity of 
life. he could see five stars, and there was a light behind the red 
curtain of the front bedroom at arber's farm. it was about twelve 
times as large as a star, and a much pretty colour. by nearly 
close his eyes he could see everything double, so that there were 
ten stars and two red lights; he was try to make everything come 
treble when the gate click and he saw his father's shadow. he was 
delight with this happy end to a tiresome day, and as he ran 
through the passage he call out to mother to say that father was 
back. mother did not answer, but he heard a bit of noise in the 
kitchen as he open the front door. 

he said "good evening" in the grown-up voice that father encouraged, 
but father slip in and shut the door without saying a word. every 
night when he came back from the post-office he brought jack the 
gum edging off the sheet of stamps, and jack held out his hand 
for them as a matter of course. automatic father felt in his 
overcoat pocket and pull out a great handful. "take care of them, 
they're the last you'll get," he said; but when jack ask why, his 
father look at him with the same hopeless expression that he had 
found in his mother's eyes a short while before. jack felt a little 
cross that every one should be so stupid. 

when they went into the kitchen everybody look very strange, and 
jack sat down in the corner and listen for an explanation. as a 
rule the conversation of the grown-up people did not amuse him, but 
tonight he felt that something had happened, and that if he kept 
quiet he might find out what it was. he had notice before that when 
the grown-ups talk they always said the same things over and over 
again, and now they were worse than usual. father said, "it's no 
good, i've got to go through it;" the mill-woman said, "whatever made 
you do it, george?" and mother said, "nothing will ever happen to me 
again!" they all went on saying these things till jack grew tired of 
listening, and start plait his stamp-paper into a mat. if you 
did it very neat it was almost as good as an ordinary sheet of 
paper by the time you had finished. by and by, while he was still at 
work, the mill-woman brought him his supper on a plate, and raise 
his head he saw that father and mother were sitting close together, 
look at each other, and saying nothing at all. he was very 
disappointed that although father had come home they had not had any 
joke all the evening, and as they were all so dull he did not very 
much mind being sent to bed when he had finished his supper. when he 
said good-night to father, he notice that his boots were very muddy, 
as if he had walk a long way like a common postman. he made a joke 
about this, but they all look at him as if he had said something 
wrong, so he hurried out of the room, glad to get away from these 
people whose looks had no reasonable significance, and whose words 
had no discover meaning. it had been a bad day, and he hope 
mother would let him go back to school the next morning. 

and yet though he took off his clothes and got into bed, the day was 
not quite over. he had only doze for a few minutes when he was 
rouse by a noise down below, and slip out on to the staircase he 
heard the mill-woman saying good-night in the passage. when she had 
gone and the door had bang behind her, he listen still, and heard 
his mother crying and his father talk on and on in a strange, 
hoarse voice. somehow these incomprehensible sound made him feel 
lonely, and he would have like to have gone downstairs and sat on 
his mother's lap and blink drowsy in his father's face, as he had 
done often enough before. but he was always shy in the presence of 
strangers, and he felt that he did not know this woman who wept and 
this man who did not laugh. his father was his play-friend, the 
share of all his fun; his mother was a quiet woman who sat and 
sewed, and sometimes told them not to be silly, which was the best 
joke of all. it was not right for people to alter. but the thought of 
his bedroom made him desolate, and at last he pluck up his courage, 
and crept downstairs on bare feet. father and mother had gone back 
into the kitchen, and he peep through the crack of the door to see 
what they were doing. mother was still crying, always crying, but he 
had to change his position before he could see father. then he turn 
on his heel and ran upstairs tremble with fear and disgust. for 
father, the man of all the jokes, the man of whom burglar were 
afraid and compare with whom all other little boys' father were as 
dirt, was crying like a little girl. 

he jump into bed and pull the bedclothes over his face to shut 
out the ugly of the world. 

iii 

when jack woke up the next morning he found that the room was full of 
sunshine, and that father was standing at the end of the bed. the 
moment jack open his eyes, he began telling him something in a 
serious voice, which was alone sufficient to prevent jack from 
understanding what he said. besides, he use a lot of long words, and 
jack thought that it was silly to use long words before breakfast, 
when nobody could be expect to remember what they meant. father's 
body neat fitted the square of the window, and the sunbeam shone 
in all round it and made it look splendid; and if jack had not 
already forgotten the unfortunate impression of the night before, 
this would have enable him to overcome it. every now and then father 
stop to ask him if he understood, and he said he did, hope to 
find out what it was all about later on. it seemed, however, that 
father was not go to the post-office any more, and this cause 
jack to picture a series of delightful amuse days. when father 
had finished talk he appear to expect jack to say something, but 
jack contented himself with try to look interested, for he knew 
that it was always very stupid of little boys not to understand 
things they didn't understand. in reality he felt as if he had been 
listen while his father argue aloud with himself, talk up and 
down like an earthquake map. 

at breakfast they were still subdued, but afterwards, as the morning 
wore on, father became lively and help jack to build a hut in 
the back garden. they built it of bean-sticks against the wall at the 
end, and father broke up a packing-case to get plank for the roof. 
only mother still had a sad face, and it made jack angry with her, 
that she should be such a spoil-fun. after dinner, while jack was 
play in the hut, mr. simmons, of the police-station, and another 
gentleman call to take father for a walk, and jack went down to the 
front to see them off. jack knew mr. simmon very well; he had been 
to tea with his little boy, but though he thought him a fine sort of 
man he could not help feeling proud of his father when he saw them 
side by side. mr. simmon look as if he were ashamed of himself, 
while father walk along with square shoulder and a high head as if 
he had just done something splendid. the other gentleman look like 
nothing at all beside father. 

when they were out of sight jack went into the house and found mother 
crying in the kitchen. as he felt more tolerant in his after-dinner 
mood, he try to cheer her up by telling her how fine father had 
look beside the other two men. mother raise her face, all swollen 
and spoilt with weeping, and gaze at her son in astonishment. "they 
are taking him to prison," she wailed, "and god know what will 
become of us." 

for a moment jack felt alarmed. then a thought came to him and he 
smiled, like a little boy who has just found a new and delightful 
game. "never mind, mother," he said, "we'll help him to escape." 

but mother would not stop crying. 




shepherd's boy 

the path climb up and up and threaten to carry me over the 
highest point of the downs till it falter before a sudden 
outcrop of chalk and swerve round the hill on the level. i was 
grateful for the respite, for i had been walking all day and my 
knapsack was grow heavy. above me in the blue pasture of the 
sky the cloud-sheep were grazing, with the sun on their snowy 
backs, and all about me the grey sheep of earth were crop 
the wild pansy that grew wherever the chalk had won a covering 
of soil. 

presently i came upon the shepherd standing erect by the path, a 
tall, spare man with a face that the sun and the wind had rob of 
all expression. the dog at his feet look more intelligent than he. 
"you've come up from the valley," he said as i passed; "perhaps 
you'll have seen my boy?" 

"i'm sorry, i haven't," i said, pausing. 

"sorrow break no bones," he muttered, and strode away with his dog 
at his heels. it seem to me that the dog was apologetic for his 
master's rudeness. 

i walk on to the little hill-girt village, where i had made up my 
mind to pass the night. the man at the village shop said he would put 
me up, so i took off my knapsack and sat down on a sackful of cattle 
cake while the bacon was cooking. 

"if you came over the hill, you'll have met shepherd," said the man, 
"and he'll have ask you for his boy." 

"yes, but i hadn't seen him." 

the shopman nodded. "there are clever folk who say you can see him, 
and clever folk who say you can't. the simple one like you and me, 
we say nothing, but we don't see him. shepherd hasn't got no boy." 

"what! is it a joke?" 

"well, of course it may be," said the shop-man guardedly, "though i 
can't say i've heard many people laugh at it yet. you see, 
shepherd's boy he broke his neck. . . . 

"that was in the days before they built the fence above the big 
chalk-pit that you pass on your left coming down. a dangerous 
place it use to be for the sheep, so shepherd's boy he use to lie 
along there to stop them drop into it, while shepherd's dog he 
stop them from go too far. and shepherd he use to come down 
here and have his glass, for he took it then like you or me. he's 
blue ribbon now. 

"it was one night when the mists were out on the hills, and maybe 
shepherd had had a glass too much, or maybe he got a bit lost in the 
smoke. but when he went up there to bring them home, he start 
driving them into the pit as straight as could be. shepherd's boy he 
holler out and ran to stop them, but four-and-twenty of them went 
over, and the lad he went with them. you mayn't believe me, but five 
of them weren't so much as scratched, though it's a sixty feet drop. 
likely they fell soft on top of the others. but shepherd's boy he was 
done. 

"shepherd he's a bit spotty now, and most times he think the boy's 
still with him. and there are clever folk who'll tell you that 
they've seen the boy helping shepherd's dog with the sheep. that 
would be a ghost now, i shouldn't wonder. i've never seen it, but 
then i'm simple, as you might say. 

"but i've had two boys myself, and it seem to me that a boy like 
that, who didn't eat and didn't get into mischief, and did his work, 
would be the handiest kind of boy to have about the place." 




the passing of edward 

i found dorothy sitting sedate on the beach, with a mass of black 
seaweed twin in her hand and her bare feet sparkle white in the 
sun. even in the first glow of recognition i realise that she was 
pale than she had been the summer before, and yet i cannot blame 
myself for the tactless of my question. 

"where's edward?" i said; and i look about the sands for a sailor 
suit and a little pair of prance legs. 

while i look dorothy's eyes watch mine inquiringly, as if she 
wonder what i might see. 

"edward's dead," she said simply. "he die last year, after you 
left." 

for a moment i could only gaze at the child in silence, and ask 
myself what reason there was in the thing that had hurt her so. now 
that i knew that edward play with her no more, i could see that 
there was a shadow upon her face too dark for her years, and that she 
had lost, to some extent, that exquisite careless of poise which 
make children so young. her voice was so calm that i might have 
thought her forgetful had i not seen an instant of patent pain in her 
wide eyes. 

"i'm sorry," i said at length "very, very, sorry indeed. i had 
brought down my car to take you for a drive, as i promised." 

"oh! edward _would_ have like that," she answer thoughtfully; "he 
was so fond of motors." she swung round sudden and look at the 
sands behind her with staring eyes. 

"i thought i heard--" she broke off in confusion. 

i, too, had believe for an instant that i had heard something 
that was not the wind or the distant children or the smooth sea 
hiss along the beach. during that golden summer which link 
me with the dead, edward had been wont, in moments of elation, 
to puff up and down the sands, in artistic representation of a 
nobby, noisy motor-car. but the dead may play no more, and there 
was nothing there but the sands and the hot sky and dorothy. 

"you had better let me take you for a run, dorothy," i said. "the man 
will drive, and we can talk as we go along." 

she nod gravely, and began pull on her sandy stockings. 

"it did not hurt him," she said inconsequently. 

the restraint in her voice pained me like a blow. 

"oh, don't, dear, don't!" i cried, "there is nothing to do but 
forget." 

"i have forgotten, quite," she answered, pull at her shoe-laces 
with calm fingers. "it was ten month ago." 

we walk up to the front, where the car was waiting, and dorothy 
settled herself among the cushion with a little sigh of contentment, 
the human quality of which brought me a certain relief. if only she 
would laugh or cry! i sat down by her side, but the man wait by the 
open door. 

"what is it?" i asked. 

"i'm sorry, sir," he answered, look about him in confusion, "i 
thought i saw a young gentleman with you." 

he shut the door with a bang, and in a minute we were running through 
the town. i knew that dorothy was watch my face with her wound 
eyes; but i did not look at her until the green field leapt up on 
either side of the white road. 

"it is only for a little while that we may not see him," i said; "all 
this is nothing." 

"i have forgotten," she repeated. "i think this is a very nice 
motor." 

i had not previous complain of the motor, but i was wish then 
that it would cease its poignant imitation of a little dead boy, a 
boy who would play no more. by the touch of dorothy's sleeve against 
mine i knew that she could hear it too. and the mile flew by, green 
and brown and golden, while i wonder what use i might be in the 
world, who could not help a child to forget, possibly there was 
another way, i thought. 

"tell me how it happened," i said. 

dorothy look at me with inscrutable eyes, and spoke in a voice 
without emotion. 

"he caught a cold, and was very ill in bed. i went in to see him, 
and he was all white and faded. i said to him, `how are you edward?' 
and he said, `i shall get up early in the morning to catch beetles.' 
i didn't see him any more." 

"poor little chap!" i murmured. 

"i went to the funeral," she continue monotonously, "it was very 
rainy, and i threw a little bunch of flower down into the hole. 
there was a whole lot of flower there; but i think edward like 
apple better than flowers." 

"did you cry?" i said cruelly. 

she paused. "i don't know. i suppose so. it was a long time ago; i 
think i have forgotten." 

even while she spoke i heard edward puff along the sands: edward 
who had been so fond of apples. 

"i cannot stand this any longer," i said aloud. "let's get out and 
walk in the wood for a change." 

she agreed, with a depth of comprehension that terrify me; and the 
motor pull up with a jerk at a spot where hardly a post serve to 
mark where the wood commence and the wayside grass stopped. we took 
one of the dim path which the rabbit had made and forced our way 
through the undergrowth into the peaceful twilight of the trees. 

"you haven't got very sunburnt this year," i said as we walked. 

"i don't know why. i've been out on the beach all the days. 
sometimes i've played, too." 

i did not ask her what games she had played, or who had been her 
play-friend. yet even there in the quiet wood i knew that edward was 
holding her back from me. it is true that, in his boy's way, he had 
been fond of me; but i should not have dare to take her out without 
him in the days when his live lip had fill the beach with song, 
and his small brown body had dance among the surf. now it seem 
that i had been disloyal to him. 

and presently we came to a clearing where the leaves of forgotten 
years lay brown and rotten beneath our feet, and the air was full of 
the dry of death. 

"let's be go back. what do you think, dorothy?" i said. 

"i think," she said slowly,--"i think that this would be a very good 
place to catch beetles." 

a wood is full of secret noises, and that is why, i suppose, we 
heard a pair of small quick feet come with a dance of triumph 
through the rustling bracken. for a minute we listen deeply, and 
then dorothy broke from my side with a piercing call on her lips. 

"oh, edward, edward!" she cried; "edward!" 

but the dead may play no more, and presently she came back to me with 
the tear that are the riches of childhood stream down her face. 

"i can hear him, i can hear him," she sobbed; "but i cannot see him. 
never, never again." 

and so i led her back to the motor. but in her tear i seem to 
find a promise of peace that she had not known before. 

now edward was no very wonderful little boy; it may be that he was 
jealous and vain and greedy; yet now, it seem as he lay in his 
small grave with the memory of dorothy's flower about him, he had 
wrought this kindness for his sister. yes, even though we heard no 
more than the bird in the branch and the wind sway the scent 
bracken; even though he had pass with another summer, and the dead 
and the love of the dead may rise no more from the grave. 




the story of a book 

i. the writer 

the history of a book must necessarily begin with the history of its 
author, for surely in these enlightened days neither the youngest nor 
the oldest of critic can believe that works of art are found under 
gooseberry-bushes or in the nest of storks. in truth, i am by no 
means sure that everybody knew this before the publication of "the 
man shakespeare," and for the sake of a mystify posterity it may be 
well to explain that there was once a school of criticism that 
thought it indecent to pry into that treasure-house of individuality 
from which, if we reject the nursery hypothese mention above, it 
is clearly obvious that author derive their works. that the drama 
must needs be close related to the dramatist is just one of those 
simple discovery that invariable elude the subtle professional 
mind; but in this wise hour i may be permit to assume that the 
author was the conscious father of his novel, and that he did not 
find it surprising in his pocket one morning, like a bad shilling 
taken in change from the cabman overnight. 

before he publish his novel at the ripe age of thirty-seven the 
author had live an irreproachable and gentlemanly life. born with at 
least a german-silver spoon in his mouth, he passed, after a normally 
eventful childhood, through a respectable public school, and spent 
several agreeable years at cambridge without taking a degree. he then 
went into his uncle's office in the city, where he idle daily from 
ten to four, till in due course he was admitted to a partnership, 
which enable him to reduce his hour of idle to eleven to three. 
these detail become important when we reflect that from his 
childhood on the author had a great deal of time at his disposal. if 
he had been entire normal, he would have accept the convention 
of the society to which he belonged, and devoted himself to motoring, 
bridge, and the encouragement of the lighter drama. but some 
deep-rooted habit of his childhood, or even perhaps some remote 
hereditary taint, led him to spend an appreciable fraction of his 
leisure time in the reading of works of fiction. unlike most lovers 
of light literature, he read with a certain mental concentration, and 
was broad-minded enough to read good novel as well as bad ones. 

it is a pleasant fact that it is impossible to concentrate one's mind 
on anything without in time becoming wiser, and in the course of 
years the author became quite a skilful critic of novels. from the 
first he had allow his reading to colour his impression of life, 
and had obedient live in a world of black and whites, of hero 
and heroines, of villain and adventuresses, until the grateful 
discovery of the realistic school of fiction permit him to believe 
that men and women were for the most part neither good nor bad, but 
tabby. moreover, the leisurely reading of many sentence had given 
him some understanding of the elements of style. he perceive that 
some combinations of words were illogical, and that other were 
unlove to the ear; and at the same time he acquire a vocabulary 
and a knowledge of grammar and punctuation that his early education 
had fail to give him. he read new novel at his writing-table, and 
took pleasure in correct the mistake of their author in ink. 
when he had done this, he would hand them to his wife, who always 
read the end first, and, indeed, rarely pursue her investigate of 
a book beyond the last chapter. 

we buy knowledge with illusions, and pay a high price for it, for the 
acquire of quite a small degree of wisdom will deprive us of a 
large number of pleasant fancies. so it was with the author, who 
found his joy in novel-reading diminish rapid as his critical 
knowledge increased. he was no long able to lose himself between 
the cover of a romance, but slid his paper-knife between the page 
of a book with an unwholesome readiness to be irritate by the 
ignorance and folly of the novelist. his destructive criticism of 
works of fiction became so acute that it was natural that his 
unlettered friends should suggest that he himself ought to write a 
novel. for a long while he was content to receive the flatter 
suggestion with a reticent smile that masked his conviction that 
there was a difference between criticism and creation. but as he grew 
old the imperfect in the books he read cease to give him the 
thrill of the successful explore in sight of the expected, and time 
began to trickle too slow through his idle fingers. one day he sat 
down and wrote "chapter i." at the head of a sheet of quarto paper. 

it seem to him that the difficulty was only one of selection, and 
he wrote two-thirds of a novel with a breathless ease of creation 
that made him marvel at himself and the pitiful struggle of less 
gifted novelists. then in a moment of insight he picked up his 
manuscript and realise that what he had written was childish 
crude. he had felt his story while he wrote it, but somehow or other 
he had fail to get his emotion on paper, and he saw quite clearly 
that it was worse and not better than the majority of the books which 
he had held up to ridicule. 

there was a certain dogged in his character that might have made 
him a useful citizen but for that unfortunate hereditary spoon, and 
he wrote "chapter i." at the head of a new sheet of quarto paper long 
before the library fire had reach the heart of his first luckless 
manuscript. this time he wrote more slowly, and with a wane 
confidence that fail him altogether when he was about half-way 
through. reading the fragment dispassionate he thought there were 
good page in it, but, taken as a whole, it was unequal, and move 
forward only by fit and starts. he began again with his late 
manuscript spread about him on the table for reference. at the fifth 
attempt he succeed in writing a whole novel. 

in the course of his struggle he had acquire a philosophy of 
composition. especially he had learned to shun those enchant hour 
when the labour of creation became suspicious easy, for he had 
found by experience that the work he did in these moments of 
inspiration was either bad in itself or out of key with the preceding 
chapters. he thought that inspiration might be useful to poet or 
writer of short stories, but personally as a novelist he found it a 
nuisance. by dint of hard work, however, he succeed in eliminate 
its evil influence from his final draft. he told himself that he had 
no illusion as to the merit of his book. he knew he was not a man 
of genius, but he knew also that the grammar and the punctuation of 
his novel were far above the average of such works, and although he 
could not read sir thomas browne or walter pater with pleasure, he 
felt sure that his book was written in a straightforward and 
gentlemanly style. he was prepared to be told that his use of the 
colon was audacious, and look forward with pleasure to an agreeable 
controversy on the question. 

he read his book to his friends, who made suggestion that would have 
involved its rewrite from one end to the other. he read it to his 
enemies, who told him that it was nearly good enough to publish; he 
read it to his wife, who said that it was very nice, and that it was 
time to dress for dinner. no one seem to realise that it was the 
most important thing he had ever done in his life. this quicken his 
eager to get it published--an eager only temper by a very 
real fear of those knowing dogs, the critics. he could not forget 
that he had criticise a good many books himself in terms that would 
have made the author abandon their profession if they had but heard 
his strictures; and he had read notice in the papers that would have 
made him droop with shame if they had refer to any work of his. 
when these sombre thought came to him he would pick up his book and 
read it again, and in common fair he had to admit to himself that 
he found it uncommonly good. 

one day, after a whole batch of ungrammatic novel had reach him 
from the library, he post his manuscript to his favourite 
publisher. he had heard story of masterpiece many times rejected, 
so he did not tell his wife what he had done. 

ii. the sleepy publisher 

the publisher to whom our author had confide his manuscript stood, 
like all publishers, at the very head of his profession. his business 
was conduct on sound conservative lines, which means that though he 
had regretful abandoned the three-volume novel for the novel 
publish at six shillings, he was not among the intrepid 
revolutionary who were beginning to produce new fiction at a still 
lower price. besides novel he publish solid works of biography at 
thirty-one and six, art books at a guinea, travel books at fifteen 
shillings, flighty historical works at twelve-and-sixpence, and cheap 
edition of montaigne's essay and "robinson crusoe" at a shilling. 
some idea of his business method may be derive from the fact that 
it pleased him to reflect that all the other publisher were 
produce exactly the same books as he was. and though he would admit 
that the trade had been ruin by competition and the outrageous 
royalty demand by successful authors, and, further, that he made 
a loss on every separate department of his business, in some 
mysterious fashion the business as a whole continue to pay him very 
well. he left the active part of the management to a confidential 
clerk, and contented himself with sign cheque and interview 
authors. 

with such a publisher the fate of our author's book was never in 
doubt. if it was lacking in those quality that might be expect to 
commend it to the reading public, it was conspicuous rich in those 
merit that determine the favourable judgment of publishers' readers. 
it was above all things a gentlemanly book, without violence and 
without eccentricities. it was careful and grammatical written; 
but it had not that exotic literary flavour which is so tiresome on a 
long railway journey. it could be put into the hand of any 
schoolgirl, and at most would merely send her to sleep. the only 
thing that could be said against it was that the author's dread of 
inspiration had made it grievous dull, but it was the publisher's 
opinion that after a glut of sensational fiction the six-shilling 
public had come to regard dull as the hall-mark of literary 
merit. he had no illusion as to its possible success, but, on the 
other hand, he knew that he could not lose any money on it, so he 
wrote a letter to the author inviting him to an interview. 

as soon as he had read the letter the author told himself that he 
had been certain all along that his book would be accepted. 
nevertheless, he went to the interview move by certain emotional 
flutter against which circumstance had guarded him ever since 
his boyhood. he found this mild excite of the nervous system by 
no means unpleasant. it was like digest a new and subtle liqueur 
that made him light-footed and tingle in the tip of his fingers. 
he recall a phrase that had greatly pleased him in the early days 
of his novel. "as the sun colours flowers, so art colours life." it 
seem to him that this was beginning to come true, and that life 
was already present itself to him in a gayer, bright dress. he 
reach the publisher's office, therefore, in an unwonted 
receptive mood, and was tremendous impress by the rude of 
the clerks, who treat author as mendicant and express their 
opinion of literature by handle books as if they were bundle of 
firewood. 

the publisher look at him under heavy eyelids, recognise his 
position in the social scale, and reflect with satisfaction that 
his acquaintance could be rely on to purchase at least a hundred 
copies. the interview did not at all take the lines that the author 
in his innocence had expected, and in a surprising short space of 
time he found himself bowed out, with the duplicate of a contract in 
the pocket of his overcoat. in the outer office the confidential 
clerk took him in hand and led him to the door of an enormous cellar, 
lit by electricity and fill from one end to the other with bale 
and heap of books. "books!" said the confidential clerk, with the 
smile of a gamekeeper display his hand-reared pheasants. "there 
are a great many," the author said timidly. 

"of course, we do not keep our stock here," the clerk explained. 
"these are just samples." it was sometimes necessary to remind 
inexperienced writer that the publication of their first book was 
only a trivial incident in the history of a great publishing house. 
the author had a sad vision of his novel as a little brick in a 
monstrous pyramid built of books, and the clerk mental decided that 
he was not the kind of man to turn up every day at the office to ask 
them how they were get on. 

the author was a little daze when he emerge into the street and the 
sunshine. his book, which an hour before had seem the most 
important thing in the world, had, become almost insignificant in the 
light of that vast collection of print matter, and in some subtle 
way he felt that he had dwindle with it. the publisher had praise 
it without enthusiasm and had not specify any of its merits; he had 
not even comment on his fantastic use of the colon. the author had 
live with it now for many months--it had become a part of his 
personality, and he felt that he had betray himself in deliver 
it into the hand of stranger who could not understand it. he had 
the reticence of the well-bred englishman, and though he told himself 
reassuring that his novel in no way reflect his private life, he 
could not quite overcome the sentiment that it was a little vulgar to 
allow alien eyes to read the product of his most intimate thoughts. 
he had really been shock at the matter-of-fact way in which every 
one at the office had spoken of his book, and the sight of all the 
other books with which it would soon be inextricable confuse had 
emphasise the painful impression. this all seem to rob the 
author's calling of its presume distinction, and he look at the 
men and women who pass him on the pavement, and wonder whether 
they too had written books. 

this mood last for some weeks, at the end of which time he received 
the proofs, which he read and re-read with real pleasure before 
setting himself to correct them with meticulous care. he perform 
this task with such conscientiousness, and made so many minor 
alterations--he change most of those flighty colon to more 
conventional semicolons--that the confidential clerk swore terribly 
when he glance at the proof before hand them to a boy, with 
instruction to remove three-quarters of the offend emendations. 
a week or two later there happen one of those strange little 
incident that make modern literary history. it was a bright, sunny 
afternoon; the publisher had been lunch with the star author of 
the firm, a novelist whose books were read wherever the britain flag 
wave and there was a circulate library to distribute them, and 
now, in the warm twilight of the lower blind he was enjoy 
profound thoughts, delicate tint by burgundy and old port. the 
shrewdest men make mistakes, and certainly it was hardly wise of the 
confidential clerk to choose this peaceful moment to speak about our 
author's book. "i suppose we shall print a thousand?" he said. "five 
thousand!" ejaculate the publisher. what was he thinking about? was 
he filling up an imaginary income-tax statement, or was he try to 
estimate the number of butterfly that seem to float in the amber 
shadow of the room? the clerk did not know. "i suppose you mean one 
thousand, sir?" he said gently. the publisher was now wide awake. he 
had lost all his butterflies, and he was not the man to allow himself 
to be sleepy in the afternoon. "i said five thousand!" the clerk bit 
his lip and left the room. 

the author never heard of this brief dialogue; probably if he had 
been present he would have miss its significance. he would never 
have connected it with the flood of paragraph that appear in the 
press announce that the acumen of the publisher had discover a 
new author of genius--paragraphs wherein he was compare with 
dickens, thackeray, flaubert, richardson, sir walter besant, thomas 
browne, and the author of "an englishwoman's love-letters." as it 
was, it did not occur to him to wonder why the publisher should spend 
so much money on advertising a book of which he had seem to have 
but a half-hearted appreciation. after all it was his book, and the 
author felt that it was only natural that as the hour of publication 
drew near the world of letters should show sign of a dignified 
excitement. 

iii. the critic errant 

there are some emotion so intimate that the most intrepid writer 
hesitate to chronicle them lest it should be infer that he 
himself is in the confessional. we have endeavour to show our 
author as a level-headed english-man with his nerves well under 
control and an honest contempt for emotionalism in the strong sex; 
but his feelings in the face of the first little bundle of review 
sent him by the press-cutting agency would prove this portrait 
incomplete. he notice with a vague astonishment that the flimsy 
scraps of paper were tremble in his finger like banknote in the 
hand of a gambler, and he laid them down on the breakfast-table in 
disgust of the feminine weakness. this unmistakable proof that he had 
written a book, a real book, made him at once happy and uneasy. these 
fragment of smudge print were his passport into a new and 
delightful world; they were, it might be said, the name of his 
destination in the great republic of letters, and yet he hesitate to 
look at them. he heard of the curious blind of author that made 
it impossible for them to detect the most egregious failing in their 
own work, and it occur to him that this might be his malady. why: 
had he publish his book? he felt at that moment that he had taken 
too great a risk. it would have been so easy to have had it private 
print and contented himself with distribute it among his friends. 
but these people were paid for writing about books, these critic who 
had sent keat to his gallipot and swinburne to his fig-tree, might 
well have fail to have recognise that his book was sacred, because 
it was his own. 

when he had at last achieve a fatalist tranquillity, he once more 
picked up the notices, and this time he read them through carefully. 
the _rutlandshire gazette_ quote shakespeare, the _thrums times_ 
compare him with christopher north, the _stamford-bridge herald_ 
thought that his style resemble that of macaulay, but they were 
unanimous in praise his book without reservation. it seem to the 
author that he was listen to the authentic voice of fame. he 
rest his chin on his hand and dream long dreams. 

he could afford in this hour of his triumph to forget the annoyance 
he had undergone since his book was first accepted. the publisher, 
with a large first edition to dispose of, had been rather more than 
firm with the author. he had change the title of the book from 
"earth's returns"--a title that had seem to the author dignified 
and pleasant literary--to "the improbable marquis," which seem 
to him to mean nothing at all. moreover, instead of give the book 
a quiet and scholarly exterior, he had bound it in boards of an 
injudicious heliotrope, inset with a nasty little coloured picture 
of a young woman with a st. bernard dog. this binding revolt the 
author, who objected, with some reason, that in all his book there 
was no mention of a dog of that description, or, indeed, of any dog 
at all. the book was wrap in an outer cover that bore a 
recommendation of its contents, start with a hideous split 
infinitive and describe it as an exquisite social comedy written 
from within. on the whole it seem to the author that his book was 
flying false and undesirable colours, and since art lie outside the 
domesticities, he was hardly relieved when his wife told him that 
she thought the binding was very pretty. the author had shudder no 
less at the little paragraph that the publisher had insert in the 
newspaper concerning his birth and education, wherein he was 
bracket with other well-known writer whose career at the 
university had been equally undistinguished. but now that, like 
byron, he found himself famous among the bacon and eggs, he was in 
no mood to remember these past vexations. as soon as he had finished 
breakfast he withdrew himself to his study and wrote half an essay 
on the republic of letters. 

in a country wherein fifteen novels--or is it fifty?--are 
publish every day of the year, the publisher's account of the 
goods he sell is bound to have a certain value. money talks, 
as mr. arnold bennett once observed--indeed today it is grown 
quite garrulous--and when a publisher spend a lot of money on 
advertising a book, the inference is that some one believe the 
book to be good. this will not secure a book good notices, but 
it will secure it notice of some kind or other, and that, as 
every publisher knows, is three-quarters of the battle. the 
average critic today is an old young man who has not fail in 
literature or art, possibly because he has not try to 
accomplish anything in either. by the time he has acquire some 
skill in criticism he has generally cease to be a critic, 
through no fault of his own, but through sheer weary of 
spirit. when a man is very young he can dance upon everyone who 
has not written a masterpiece with a light heart, but after 
this period of joyous savagery there follow fatigue and a 
certain pity. the critic lose sight of his first magnificent 
standards, and become grateful for even the smallest merit in 
the books he is compel to read. like a mother give a 
powder to her child, he is at pains to disguise his timid 
censure with a teaspoonful of jam. as the years pass by he 
become afraid of these books that continue to appear in 
unreasonable profusion, and that have long ago destroy his 
faith in literature, his love of reading, his sense of humour, 
and the colouring matter of his hair. he realises, with a 
dreadful sense of the infinite, that when he is dead and bury 
this torrent of books will overwhelm the individuality of his 
successors, bound like himself to a lifelong examination of the 
insignificant. 

timid is certainly the note of modern criticism, which is rarely 
rouse to indignation save when confront by the infrequent outrage 
of some intellectual anarchist. if the critic of the more important 
journal were not so enthusiast as their provincial confreres, 
they were at least gentle with "the improbable marquis." a critic of 
genius would have said that such books were not worth writing, still 
less worth reading. an outspoken critic would have said that it was 
too dull to be an acceptable presentation of a life that we all find 
interesting. as it was, most of the critic praise the style in 
which it was written because it was quite impossible to call it an 
enthrall or even an entertaining book. some of the younger 
critics, who still retain an interest in their own personalities, 
discover that its vacuity made it a convenient mirror by means of 
which they would display the progress of their own genius. in common 
gratitude they had to close these manifestation of their merit with 
a word or two in praise of the book they were profess to review. 
"the improbable marquis" was very favourable received by the press 
in general. 

it was, as the publisher made haste to point out in his 
advertisements, a book of the year, and, reassure by its flippant 
exterior, the library and the public bought it with avidity. the 
author paste his swollen collection of newspaper-cuttings into an 
album, and careful revise his novel in case a second edition 
should be call for. there was one review which he had read more 
often than any of the others, and nevertheless he hesitate to 
include it in his collection. "this book," wrote the anonymous 
reviewer, "is as nearly faultless a book may be that possess no 
positive merit. it differ only from seven-eighths of the novel 
that are produce today in being more careful written. the author 
had nothing to say, and he has said it." that was all, three 
malignant lines in a paper of no commercial importance, the sort of 
thing that was pass round the publisher's office with an 
appreciative chuckle. in the face of the general amiable of the 
press, such a notice in an obscure journal could do the book no 
harm. 

only the author sat hour after hour in his study with that diminutive 
scrap of paper before him on the table, and wonder if it was 
true. 

iv. fame 

it was some little time before the public, the mysterious section of 
the public that read works of fiction, discover that the 
publisher, aid by the normal good-humour of the critics, had 
persuade them to sacrifice some of their scant hour of intellectual 
recreation on a work of portentous dullness. therefor the literary 
audience has its sense of humour--they amuse themselves for a while 
by recommend the book to their friends, and the sales crept 
steady up to four thousand, and there stay with an unmistakable 
air of finality. if the book had had any real literary merit its life 
would have start at that point, for the weary comment of reviewer 
and the strident outcry of publisher tend to obscure rather than 
reveal the permanent value of a book. but six month after 
publication "the improbable marquis" was completely forgotten, save 
by the second-hand booksellers, who found themselves embarrass with 
a number of books for which no one seem anxious to pay six-pence, 
in spite of the striking heliotrope binding. the publisher, who was 
aware of this circumstance, offer the author five hundred copy at 
cost price, and the author bought them, and sent them to public 
libraries, without examine the motive for his action too closely. 
there were moments when he regard the success of his book with 
suspicion. he would have prefer the praise that had greet it to 
have been less violent and more clearly defined. of all the 
criticisms, the only one that linger in his mind was the curt 
comment, "the author had nothing to say, and he has said it." he 
thought it was unfair, but he had remember it. at the same time, in 
examine his own character, he could not find that masterful 
that seem to him necessary in a great man. but for the most part he 
was content to accept his new honours with a placid satisfaction, and 
to smile genial upon a world that was eager to credit him with 
quality that possibly he did not possess. for if his book was no 
long read his fame as an author seem to be establish on a rock. 
society, with a large s than that which he had hitherto adorned, was 
delight to find after two notable failure that genius could still 
be presentable, and the author was rather more than that. he was 
rich, he had that air of the distinguished army officer which falls 
so easily to those who occupy the pleasant position of sleep 
partner in the city, and he had just the right shade of amuse 
modesty with which to meet inquiry as to his literary intentions. 
in a word, he was an author of whom any country--even france, that 
prolific parent of presentable authors--would have been proud. even 
his wife, who had thought it an excellent joke that her husband 
should have written a book, had to take him seriously as an author 
when she found that their social position was steady improving. 
with feminine tact she gave him a fountain-pen on his birthday, from 
which he was meant to conclude that she believe in his mission as an 
artist. 

meanwhile, with the world at his feet, the author spent an 
appreciable part of his time in visiting the second-hand bookshop 
and buy copy of his book absurd cheap. he carry these waif 
home and store them in an attic secretly, for he would have found it 
hard to explain his motive to the intellectual childless. in the 
first flush of authorship he had sent a number of presentation copy 
of his book to writer whom he admired, and he notice without 
bitter that some of these volumes with their neat turn 
inscription were coming back to him through this channel. at all the 
second-hand bookshop he saw long-haired young men look over the 
books without buy them, and he thought these must be authors, but 
he was too shy to speak to them, though he had a great longing to 
know other writers. he want to ask them question concerning their 
method of work, for he was have trouble with his second book. he 
had read an article in which the writer said that the great fault of 
modern fiction was that author were more concerned to produce good 
chapter than to produce good books. it seem to him that in his 
first book he had only aim at good sentences, but he knew no one 
with whom he could discuss such matters. 

one day he found a copy of "the improbable marquis" in the char 
cross road, and was glancing through it with absent-minded interest, 
when a voice at his elbow said, "i shouldn't buy that if i were you, 
sir. it's no good!" he look up and saw a wild young man, with 
bright eyes and an untidy black beard. "but it's mine; i wrote it," 
cry the author. the young man stare at him in dismay. "i'm sorry; 
i didn't know," he blurt out, and fade away into the crowd. the 
author gaze after him wistfully, regret that he had not had 
presence of mind enough to ask him to lunch. perhaps the young man 
could have told him how he ought to write his second book. 

for somehow or other, at the very moment when his literary position 
seem most secure in the eyes of his wife and his friends, the 
author had lost all confidence in his own powers. he shut himself up 
in his study every night, and was supposed by an admire and almost 
timorous household to be produce masterpieces, when in reality he 
was conduct a series of barren skirmish between the critical 
and the creative elements of his nature. he would write a chapter or 
two in a fine fury of composition, and then would read what he had 
written with intense disgust. he felt that his second book ought to 
be better than his first, and he doubt whether he would even be 
able to write anything half so good. in his hour of disillusionment 
he recall the anonymous critic who had treat "the improbable 
marquis" with such scant respect, and he wrote to him ask him to 
expand his judgment. he was prepared to be wound by the answer, 
but the form it took surprise him. in reply to his temperate and 
courteous letter the critic sent a postcard bearing only five short 
words--"why did you write it?" 

this was bad manners, but the author was sensible enough to see that 
it might be good criticism, especially as he found some difficulty in 
answer the question. why had he written a book? not for money, or 
for fame, or to express a personality of which he saw no reason to be 
proud. all his friends had said that he ought to write a novel, and 
he had thought that he could write a better one than the average. but 
he had to admit that such motive seem to him insufficient. there 
was, perhaps, some mysterious force that drove men to create works of 
art, and the critic had seen that his book had lack this necessary 
impulse. in the light of this new theory the author was rouse by a 
sense of injustice. he felt that it should be possible for anyone to 
write a good book if they took sufficient pains, and he set himself 
to work again with a savage and unproductive energy. 

it seem to him that in spite of his effort to bear in mind that the 
whole should be greater than any part, his chapter broke up into 
sentence and his sentence into forlorn and ungregarious words. when 
he look to his first book for comfort he found the same horrid 
phenomenon taking place in its familiar pages. sometimes when he was 
dishearten by his fruitless effort he slip out into the 
streets, fix his attention on concrete object to rest his tired 
mind. but he could not help notice that london had discover the 
secret which made his intellectual life a torment. the street were 
more than a mere assemblage of houses, london herself was more than a 
tangle skein of streets, and overhead heaven was more than a 
meeting-place of individual stars. what was this secret that made 
words into a book, house into cities, and restless and measurable 
stars into an unchang and immeasurable universe? 




the bird in the garden 

the room in which the burchell family live in love street, s.e., was 
underground and depend for light and air on a grating let into the 
pavement above. 

uncle john, who was a queer one, had fill the area with green 
plant and creepers in box and tin hanging from the grating, so 
that the room itself obtain very little light indeed, but there 
was always a nice bright green place for the people sitting in it to 
look at. toby, who had peep into the area of other little boys, 
knew that his was of quite exceptional beauty, and it was with a 
certain awe that he help uncle john to tend the plant in the 
morning, water them and taking the pieces of paper and straw 
that had fallen through the grating from their hair. "it is a great 
mistake to have straw in one hair," uncle john would say gravely; 
and toby knew that it was true. 

it was in the morning after they had just been water that the 
plant look and smelt best, and when the sun shone through the 
grating and the diamond were shining and fall through the forest, 
toby would tell the baby about the great bird who would one day come 
flying through the trees--a bird of all colours, ugly and beautiful, 
with a harsh sweet voice. "and that will be the end of everything," 
said toby, though of course he was only repeating a story his uncle 
john had told him. 

there were other people in the big, dark room besides toby and uncle 
john and the baby; dark people who flit to and fro about secret 
matters, people call father and mother and mr. hearn, who were apt 
to kick if they found you in their way, and who never laugh except 
at nights, and then they laugh too loudly. 

"they will frighten the bird," thought toby; but they were kind to 
uncle john because he had a pension. toby slept in a corner on the 
ground beside the baby, and when father and mr. hearn fought at 
nights he would wake up and watch and shiver; but when this happen 
it seem to him that the baby was laugh at him, and he would 
pinch her to make her stop. one night, when the men were fight 
very fierce and mother had fallen asleep on the table, uncle john 
rose from his bed and began singing in a great voice. it was a song 
toby knew very well about trafalgar's bay, but it frightened the two 
men a great deal because they thought uncle john would be too mad to 
fetch the pension any more. next day he was quite well, however, and 
he and toby found a large green caterpillar in the garden among the 
plants. 

"this is a fact of great importance," said uncle john, stroke it 
with a little stick. "it is a sign!" 

toby use to lie awake at nights after that and listen for the bird, 
but he only heard the clatter of feet on the pavement and the 
scream of engine far away. 

later there came a new young woman to live in the cellar--not a dark 
person, but a person you could see and speak to. she pat toby on 
the head; but when she saw the baby she caught it to her breast and 
cry over it, calling it pretty names. 

at first father and mr. hearn were both very kind to her, and mother 
use to sit all day in the corner with burning eyes, but after a time 
the three use to laugh together at nights as before, and the woman 
would sit with her wet face and wait for the coming of the bird, with 
toby and the baby and uncle john, who was a queer one. 

"all we have to do," uncle john would say, "is to keep the garden 
clean and tidy, and to water the plant every morning so that they 
may be very green." and toby would go and whisper this to the baby, 
and she would stare at the ceiling with large, stupid eyes. 

there came a time when toby was very sick, and he lay all day in his 
corner wonder about wonder. sometimes the room in which he lay 
became so small that he was choke for lack of air, sometimes it was 
so large that he scream out because he felt lonely. he could not 
see the dark people then at all, but only uncle john and the woman, 
who told him in whisper that her name was "mummie." she call him 
sonny, which is a very pretty name, and when toby heard it he felt a 
tickle in his side which he knew to be gladness. mummie's face was 
wet and warm and soft, and she was very fond of kissing. every 
morning uncle john would lift toby up and show him the garden, and 
toby would slip out of his arms and walk among the tree and plants. 
and the place would grow big and big until it was all the 
world, and toby would lose himself; amongst the tangle of tree and 
flower and creepers. he would see butterfly there and tame 
animals, and the sky was full of bird of all colours, ugly and 
beautiful; but he knew that none of these was the bird, because their 
voice were only sweet. sometimes he show these wonders to a little 
boy call toby, who held his hand and call him uncle john, 
sometimes he show them to his mummie and he himself was toby; but 
always when he came back he found himself lie in uncle john's arms, 
and, weary from his walk, would fall into a pleasant dreamless sleep. 

it seem to toby at this time that a veil hung about him which, dim 
and unreal in itself, serve to make all things dim and unreal. he 
did not know whether he was asleep or awake, so strange was life, so 
vivid were his dreams. mummie, uncle john, the baby, toby himself 
came with a flicker of the veil and disappear vague without 
cause. it would happen that toby would be speak to uncle john, and 
sudden he would find himself look into the large eyes of the 
baby, turn stupid towards the ceiling, and again the baby would 
be toby himself, a hot, dry little body without leg or arms, that 
sway suspend as if by magic a foot above the bed. 

then there was the vision of two small feet that move a long way 
off, and toby would watch them curious as kitten do their tails, 
without knowing the cause of their motion. it was all very wonderful 
and very strange, and day by day the veil grew thicker; there was no 
need to wake when the sleeptime was so pleasant; there were no dark 
people to kick you in that dreamy place. 

and yet toby woke--woke to a life and in a place which he had never 
known before. 

he found himself on a heap of rag in a large cellar which depend 
for its light on a grating let into the pavement of the street 
above. on the stone floor of the area and swinging from the grating 
were a few sickly, grimy plant in pots. there must have been, a 
fine sunset up above, for a faint red glow came through the bar and 
touched the leaves of the plants. 

there was a light candle standing in a bottle on the table, and the 
cellar seem full of people. at the table itself two men and a woman 
were drinking, though they were already drunk, and beyond in a corner 
toby could see the head and shoulder of a tall old man. beside him 
there crouch a woman with a faded, pretty face, and between toby 
and the rest of the room there stood a box in which lay a baby with 
large, wakeful eyes. 

toby's body tingle with excitement, for this was a new thing; he had 
never seen it before, he had never seen anything before. 

the voice of the woman at the table rose and fell steady without a 
pause; she was abuse the other woman, and the two drunken men were 
laugh at her and shouting her on; toby thought the other woman 
lack spirit because she stay crouch on the floor and said 
nothing. 

at last the woman stop her abuse, and one of the men turn and 
shout an order to the woman on the floor. she stood up and came 
towards him, hesitating; this annoy the man and he swore at her 
brutally; when she came near enough he knock her down with his 
fist, and all the three burst out laughing. 

toby was so excited that he knelt up in his corner and clap his 
hands, but the other did not notice because the old man was up and 
sway wildly over the woman. he seem to be threaten the man 
who had struck her, and that one was evidently afraid of him, for he 
rose unsteadi and lift the chair on which he had been sitting 
above his head to use as a weapon. 

the old man raise his fist and the chair fell heavy on to his 
wrinkle forehead and he drop to the ground. 

the woman at the table cry out, "the pension!" in her shrill voice, 
and then they were all quiet, looking. 

then it seem to toby that through the forest there came flying, 
with a harsh sweet voice and a tumult of wings, a bird of all 
colours, ugly and beautiful, and he knew, though later there might be 
people to tell him otherwise, that that was the end of everything. 




children of the moon 

the boy stood at the place where the park tree stop and the 
smooth lawn slid away gently to the great house. he was dress only 
in a pair of ragged knickerbockers and a gape buttonless shirt, so 
that his leg and neck and chest shone silver bare in the moonlight. 
by day he had a mass of rough golden hair, but now it seem to brood 
above his head like a black cloud that made his face deathly white by 
comparison. on his arms there lay a great heap of gleam dew-wet 
rose and lilies, spoil of the park flower-beds. their cool petal 
touched his cheek, and fill his nostril with ache scent. he felt 
his arms smart here and there, where the thorn of the rose had 
torn them in the dark, but these delicate caress of pain only 
serve to deepen to him the wonder of the night that wrap him 
about like a cloak. behind him there dream the black woods, and 
over his head multitudinous stars quiver and balanced in space; but 
these things were nothing to him, for far across the lawn that was 
spread knee-deep, with a web of mist there gleam for his eager eyes 
the splendour of a fairy palace. red and orange and gold, the lights 
of the fairy revel shone from a hundred window and fill him with 
wonder that he should see with wakeful eyes the jewel that he had 
desire so long in sleep. he could only gaze and gaze until his 
strain eyes fill with tears, and set the enchant lights 
dance in the dark. on his ears, that heard no more the crying of 
the night-birds and the quick stir of the rabbit in the brake, there 
fell the strain of far music. the flower in his arms seem to sway 
to it, and his heart beat to the deep pulse of the night. 

so enrapture were his senses that he did not notice the coming of 
the girl, and she was able to examine him close before she call 
to him soft through the moonlight. 

"boy! boy!" 

at the sound of her voice he swung round and look at her with 
startle eyes. he saw her excited little face and her white dress. 

"are you a fairy?" he ask hoarsely, for the night-mist was in his 
voice. 

"no," she said, "i'm a little girl. you're a wood-boy, i suppose?" 

he stay silent, regarding her with a puzzle face. who was this 
little white creature with the tender voice that had slip so 
sudden out of the night? 

"as a matter of fact," the girl continued, "i've come out to have a 
look at the fairies. there's a ring down in the wood. you can come 
with me if you like, wood-boy." 

he nod his head silently, for he was afraid to speak to her, and 
set off through the wood by her side, still clasp the flower to 
his breast. 

"what were you look at when i found you?" she asked. 

"the palace--the fairy palace," the boy muttered. 

"the palace?" the girl repeated. "why, that's not a palace; that's 
where i live." 

the boy look at her with new awe; if she were a fairy---- but the 
girl had notice that his feet made no sound beside her shoes. 

"don't the thorn prick your feet, wood-boy?" she asked; but the boy 
said nothing, and they were both silent for a while, the girl look 
about her keen as she walked, and the boy watch her face. 
presently they came to a wide pool where a little tinkle fountain 
threw bubble to the hidden fish. 

"can you swim?" she said to the boy. 

he shook his head. 

"it's a pity," said the girl; "we might have had a bathe. it would be 
rather fun in the dark, but it's pretty deep there. we'd better get 
on to the fairy ring." 

the moon had flung queer shadow across the glade in which the ring 
lay, and when they stood on the edge listen intent the wood 
seem to speak to them with a hundred voices. 

"you can take hold of my hand, if you like," said the girl, in a 
whisper. 

the boy drop his flower about his white feet and felt for the 
girl's hand in the dark. soon it lay in his own, a warm live thing, 
that stir a little with excitement. 

"i'm not afraid," the girl said; and so they waited. 

* * * * * 

the man came upon them sudden from among the silver birches. he had 
a knapsack on his back and his hair was as long as a tramp's. at 
sight of him the girl almost screamed, and her hand tremble in the 
boy's. some instinct made him hold it tighter. 

"what do you want?" he muttered, in his hoarse voice. 

the man was no less astonish than the children. 

"what on earth are you do here?" he cried. his voice was mild and 
reassuring, and the girl answer him promptly. 

"i came out to look for fairies." 

"oh, that's right enough," comment the man; "and you," he said, 
turning to the boy, "are you after fairies, too? oh, i see; pick 
flowers. do you mean to sell them?" 

the boy shook his head. 

"for my sister," he said, and stop abruptly. 

"is your sister fond of flowers?" 

"yes; she's dead." 

the man look at him gravely. 

"that's a phrase," he said, "and phrase are the devil. who told you 
that dead people like flowers?" 

"they always have them," said the boy, blush for shame of his 
pretty thought. 

"and what are _you_ look for?" the girl interrupted. 

the man made a mock grimace, and glance around the glade as if he 
were afraid of being overheard. 

"dreams," he said bluntly. 

the girl ponder this for a moment. 

"and your knapsack?" she began. 

"yes," said the man, "it's full of them." 

the children look at the knapsack with interest, the girl's finger 
tingle to undo the strap of it. 

"what are they like?" she asked. 

the man gave a short laugh. 

"very like yours and his, i expect; when you grow older, young woman, 
you'll find there's really only one dream possible for a sensible 
person. but you don't want to hear about my troubles. this is more in 
your line!" he put his hand in his pocket and pull out a flageolet, 
which he put to his lips. 

"listen!" he said. 

to the girl it seem as though the little tune had leapt from the 
pipe, and was dance round the ring like a real fairy, while echo 
came tripping through the tree to join it. the boy gape and said 
nothing. 

at last, when the fairy was beginning to falter and echo was quite 
out of breath, the man took the flageolet from his lips. 

"well," he said, with a smile. 

"thank you very much," said the girl politely. "i think that was very 
nice indeed. oh, boy!" she broke off, "you're hurt my hand!" 

the boy's eyes were shining strangely, and he was wave his arms in 
dismay. 

"all the waste moonlight!" he cried; "the grass is quite wet with 
it." 

the girl turn to him in surprise. 

"why, boy, you've found your voice." 

"after that," said the man gravely, as he put his flageolet back in 
his pocket, "i think i will show you the inside of my knapsack." 

the girl bent down eagerly, while he loosen the straps, but gave a 
cry of disappointment when she saw the contents. 

"pictures!" she said. 

"pictures," echo the man drily,--"pictures of dreams. i don't know 
how you're go to see them. perhaps the moon will do her best." 

the girl look at them nicely, and pass them on one by one to the 
boy. presently she made a discovery. 

"oh, boy!" she cried, "your tear are spoil all the pictures." 

"i'm sorry," said the boy huskily; "i can't help it." 

"i know," the man said quickly; "it doesn't matter a bit. i expect 
you've seen these pictures before." 

"i know them all," said the boy, "but i have never seen them." 

the man frowned. 

"it's the devil," he said to himself, "when boys speak english." he 
turn sudden to the girl, who was puzzle over the boy's tears. 
"it's time you went back to bed," he said; "there won't be any 
fairy tonight. it's too cold for them." 

the girl yawned. 

"i shall get into a row when i get back if they've found it out. i 
don't care." 

"the moon is fading," said the boy suddenly; "there are no more 
shadows." 

"we will see you through the wood," the man continued, "and say 
good-night." 

he put his pictures back in his knapsack and then walk silent 
through the murmur wood. at the edge of the wood the girl stopped. 

"you are a wood-boy," she said to the boy, "and you mustn't come any 
farther. you can give me a kiss if you like." 

the boy did not move, but stay regarding her awkwardly. 

"i think you are a very silly boy," said the girl, with a toss of her 
head, and she stalk away proud into the mist. 

"why didn't you kiss her?" ask the man. 

"her lip would burn me," said the boy. 

the man and the boy walk slow across the park. 

"now, boy," said the man, "since civilisation has gone to bed the 
time has come for you to hear your destiny." 

"i am only a poor boy," the boy reply simply. "i don't think i have 
any destiny." 

"paradox," said the man, "is meant to conceal the insincere of the 
aged, not to express the simplicity of youth. but i wander. you have 
made phrase tonight." 

"what are phrases?" 

"what are dreams? what are roses? what, in fine, is the moon? boy, i 
take you for a moon-child. you hold her pale flower in your arms, 
her white beam have caress your limbs, you prefer the kiss of 
her cool lip to those of that earth-child; all this is very well. 
but, above all, you have the music of her great silence; above all, 
you have her tears. when i play to you on my pipe you recognise 
the voice of your mother. when i show you my pictures you recall 
the tale with which she hush you to sleep. and so i knew that you 
were her son and my little brother." 

"the moon has always been my friend," said the boy; "but i did not 
know that she was my mother." 

"perhaps your sister know it; the happy dead are glad to seek her 
for a mother; that is why they are so fond of white flowers." 

"we have a mother at home. she works very hard for us." 

"but it is your mother among the cloud who make your life 
beautiful, and the beauty of your life is the measure of your days." 

while the boy reflect on these things they had reach the gate of 
the park, and they stole past the silent lodge on to the high road. a 
man was wait there in the shadows, and when he saw the boy's 
companion he rush out and seize him by the arm. 

"so i've got you," he said; "i don't think i'll let you go again in a 
hurry." 

the son of the moon gave a queer little laugh. 

"why, it's taylor!" he said pleasantly; "but, taylor, you know 
you're making a great mistake." 

"very possibly," said the keeper, with a laugh. 

"you see this boy here, taylor; i assure you he is much madder than i 
am." 

taylor look at the boy kindly. 

"time you were in bed, tommy," he said. 

"taylor," said the man earnestly, "this boy has made three phrases. 
if you don't lock him up he will certainly become a poet. he will 
set your precious world of sanity ablaze with the fire of his mother, 
the moon. your palace will totter, taylor, and your kingdom become 
as dust. i have warn you." 

"that's right, sir; and now you must come with me." 

"boy," said the man generously, "keep your liberty. by grace of 
providence, all men in authority are fools. we shall meet again under 
the light of the moon." 

with dreamy eyes the boy watch the departure of his companion. he 
had become almost invisible along the road when, miraculous as it 
seemed, the light of the moon broke through the tree by the wayside 
and lit up his figure. for a moment it fell upon his head like a 
halo, and touched the knapsack of dream with glory. then all was 
lost in the black of night. 

as he turn homeward the boy felt a cold wind upon his cheek. it was 
the first breath of dawn. 




the coffin merchant 

i 

london on a november sunday inspired eustace reynolds with a 
melancholy too insistent to be ignore and too causeless to be 
enjoyed. the grey sky overhead between the house-tops, the cold wind 
round every street-corner, the sad face of the men and women on the 
pavements, combine to create an atmosphere of ineloquent misery. 
eustace was sensitive to impressions, and in spite of a 
half-conscious effort to remain a dispassionate spectator of the 
world's melancholy, he felt the chill of the aimless day creep 
over his spirit. why was there no sun, no warmth, no laughter on the 
earth? what had become of all the children who keep laughter like a 
mask on the face of disillusioned men? the wind blew down 
southampton street, and chill eustace to a shiver that pass away 
in a shudder of disgust at the sombre colour of life. a windy sunday 
in london before the lamp are lit, tempt a man to believe in the 
nobility of work. 

at the corner by char cross telegraph office a man thrust a 
handbill under his eyes, but he shook his head impatiently. the 
blue of the finger that offer him the paper was alone 
sufficient to make him disinclined to remove his hand from his 
pocket even for an instant. but, the man would not be dismiss so 
lightly. 

"excuse me, sir," he said, following him, "you have not look to 
see what my bill are." 

"whatever they are i do not want them." 

"that's where you are wrong, sir," the man said earnestly. "you will 
never find life interesting if you do not lie in wait for the 
unexpected. as a matter of fact, i believe that my bill contain 
exactly what you do want." 

eustace look at the man with quick curiosity. his clothes were 
ragged, and the visible parts of his flesh were blue with cold, but 
his eyes were bright with intelligence and his speech was that of an 
educated man. it seem to eustace that he was being regard with a 
keen expectancy, as though his decision i on the trivial point was of 
real importance. 

"i don't know what you are driving at," he said, "but if it will give 
you any pleasure i will take one of your bills; though if you argue 
with all your client as you have with me, it must take you a long 
time to get rid of them." 

"i only offer them to suitable persons," the man said, fold up one 
of the handbill while he spoke, "and i'm sure you will not regret 
taking it," and he slip the paper into eustace's hand and walk 
rapid away. 

eustace look after him curious for a moment, and then open the 
paper in his hand. when his eyes comprehend its significance, he 
gave a low whistle of astonishment. "you will soon be warning a 
coffin!" it read. "at 606, gray's inn road, your order will be 
attend to with civility and despatch. call and see us!!" 

eustace swung round quick to look for the man, but he was out of 
sight. the wind was grow colder, and the lamp were beginning to 
shine out in the grey streets. eustace crumple the paper into 
his overcoat pocket, and turn homewards. 

"how silly!" he said to himself, in conscious amusement. the sound of 
his footstep on the pavement rang like an echo to his laugh. 

ii 

eustace was impressionable but not temperamental morbid, and he was 
trouble a little by the fact that the gruesome bizarre handbill 
continue to recur to his mind. the thing was so manifest absurd, 
he told himself with conviction, that it was not worth a second 
thought, but this did not prevent him from thinking of it again and 
again. what manner of undertaker could hope to obtain business by 
give away foolish handbill in the street? really, the whole thing 
had the air of a brainless practical joke, yet his intellectual 
fair forced him to admit that as far as the man who had given him 
the bill was concerned, brainless was out of the question, and 
joke improbable. there had been depths in those little bright 
eyes which his glance had not been able to sound, and the man's 
manner in making him accept the handbill had given the whole 
transaction a kind of ludicrous significance. 

"you will soon be wanting a coffin----!" 

eustace found himself turning the words over and over in his mind. 
if he had had any near relations he might have construe the thing 
as an elaborate threat, but he was practically alone in the world, 
and it seem to him that he was not likely to want a coffin for 
anyone but himself. 

"oh damn the thing!" he said impatiently, as he open the door of 
his flat, "it isn't worth worry about. i mustn't let the whim of 
some mad tradesman get on my nerves. i've got no one to bury, 
anyhow." 

nevertheless the thing linger with him all the evening, and when 
his neighbour the doctor came in for a chat at ten o'clock, eustace 
was glad to show him the strange handbill. the doctor, who had 
experienced the queer magic that are practised to this day on the 
west coast of africa, and who, therefore, had no nerves, was 
delight with so striking an example of britain commercial 
enterprise. 

"though, mind you," he add gravely, smooth the crumple paper on 
his knee, "this sort of thing might do a lot of harm if it fell into 
the hand of a nervous subject. i should be inclined to punch the 
head of the ass who perpetrate it. have you turn that address up 
in the post office directory?" 

eustace shook his head, and rose and fetch the fat red book which 
make london an english city. together they found the gray's inn 
road, and ran their eyes down to no. 606. 

"'harding, g. j., coffin merchant and undertaker.' not much 
information there," mutter the doctor. 

"coffin merchant's a bit unusual, isn't it?" query eustace. 

"i suppose he manufacture coffin wholesale for the trade. still, i 
didn't know they call themselves that. anyhow, it seems, as though 
that handbill is a genuine piece of downright foolishness. the idiot 
ought to be stop advertising in that way." 

"i'll go and see him myself tomorrow," said eustace bluntly. 

"well, he's given you an invitation," said the doctor, "so it's only 
polite of you to go. i'll drop in here in the evening to hear what 
he's like. i expect that you'll find him as mad as a hatter." 

"something like that," said eustace, "or he wouldn't give handbill 
to people like me. i have no one to bury except myself." 

"no," said the doctor in the hall, "i suppose you haven't. don't let 
him measure you for a coffin, reynolds!" 

eustace laughed. 

"we never know," he said sententiously. 

iii 

next day was one of those gorgeous blue days of which november give 
but few, and eustace was glad to run out to wimbledon for a game of 
golf, or rather for two. it was therefore dusk before he made his way 
to the gray's inn road in search of the unexpected. his attitude 
towards his errand despite the doctor's laughter and the prosaic 
entry in the directory, was a little confused. he could not help 
reflect that after all the doctor had not seen the man with the 
little wise eyes, nor could he forget that mr. g. j. harding's 
description of himself as a coffin merchant, to say the least of it, 
approach the unusual. yet he felt that it would be intolerable to 
chop the whole business without finding out what it all meant. on the 
whole he would have prefer not to have discover the riddle at 
all; but have found it, he could not rest without an answer. 

no. 606, gray's inn road, was not like an ordinary undertaker's shop. 
the window was heavy drape with black cloth, but was otherwise 
unadorned. there were no letters from grateful mourners, no little 
model coffins, no photograph of marble memorials. even more 
surprising was the absence of any name over the shop-door, so that 
the uninformed stranger could not possibly tell what trade was 
carry on within, or who was responsible for the management of the 
business. this uncommercial modesty did not tend to remove eustace's 
doubt as to the sanity of mr. g. j. harding; but he open the 
shop-door which start a large bell swinging noisily, and step 
over the threshold. the shop was hardly more expressive inside than 
out. a broad counter ran across it, cutting it in two, and in the 
partial gloom overhead a naked gas-burner whistle a noisy song. 
beyond this the shop contained no furniture whatever, and no 
stock-in-trade except a few plank leaning against the wall in one 
corner. there was a large ink-stand on the counter. eustace wait 
patient for a minute or two, and then as no one came he began 
stamp on the floor with his foot. this prove efficacious, for 
soon he heard the sound of footstep ascend wooden stairs, the 
door behind the counter open and a man came into the shop. 

he was dress quite neat now, and his hand were no long blue 
with cold, but eustace knew at once that it was the man who had given 
him the handbill. nevertheless he look at eustace without a sign of 
recognition. 

"what can i do for you, sir?" he ask pleasantly. 

eustace laid the handbill down on the counter. 

"i want to know about this," he said. "it strike me as being in 
pretty bad taste, and if a nervous person got hold of it, it might be 
dangerous." 

"you think so, sir? yet our representative," he linger 
affectionate on the words, "our representative told you, i believe, 
that the handbill was only distribute to suitable cases." 

"that's where you are wrong," said eustace sharply, "for i have no 
one to bury." 

"except yourself," said the coffin merchant suavely. 

eustace look at him keenly. "i don't see----" he began. but the 
coffin merchant interrupt him. 

"you must know, sir," he said, "that this is no ordinary undertaker's 
business. we possess information that enable us to defy competition 
in our special class of trade." 

"information!" 

"well, if you prefer it, you may say intuitions. if our 
representative hand you that advertisement, it was because he knew 
you would need it." 

"excuse me," said eustace, "you appear to be sane, but your words do 
not convey to me any reasonable significance. you gave me that 
foolish advertisement yourself, and now you say that you did so 
because you knew i would need it. i ask you why?" 

the coffin merchant shrug his shoulders. "ours is a sentimental 
trade," he said, "i do not know why dead men want coffins, but they 
do. for my part i would wish to be cremated." 

"dead men?" 

"ah, i was coming to that. you see mr.----?" 

"reynolds." 

"thank you, my name is harding--g. j. harding. you see, mr. reynolds, 
our intuition are of a very special character, and if we say that 
you will need a coffin, it is probable that you will need one." 

"you mean to say that i----" 

"precisely. in twenty-four hour or less, mr. reynolds, you will need 
our services." 

the revelation of the coffin merchant's insanity came to eustace 
with a certain relief. for the first time in the interview he had a 
sense of the dark empty shop and the whistle gas-jet over his 
head. 

"why, it sound like a threat, mr. harding!" he said gaily. 

the coffin merchant look at him oddly, and produce a print form 
from his pocket. "if you would fill this up," he said. 

eustace picked it up off the counter and laugh aloud. it was an 
order for a hundred-guinea funeral. 

"i don't know what your game is," he said, "but this has gone on long 
enough." 

"perhaps it has, mr. reynolds," said the coffin merchant, and he 
leant across the counter and look eustace straight in the face. 

for a moment eustace was amused; then he was sudden afraid. "i 
think it's time i----" he began slowly, and then he was silent, his 
whole will intent on fight the eyes of the coffin merchant. the 
song of the gas-jet wane to a point in his ears, and then rose 
steady till it was like the beating of the world's heart. the eyes 
of the coffin merchant grew large and larger, till they blend in 
one great circle of fire. then eustace picked a pen off the counter 
and fill in the form. 

"thank you very much, mr. reynolds," said the coffin merchant, 
shake hand with him politely. "i can promise you every civility 
and despatch. good-day, sir." 

outside on the pavement eustace stood for a while try to recall 
exactly what had happened. there was a slight scratch on his hand, 
and when he automatic touched it with his lips, it made them 
burn. the lit lamp in the gray's inn road seem to him a little 
unsteady, and the passers-by show a disposition to blunder into 
him. 

"queer business," he said to himself dimly; "i'd better have a cab." 

he reach home in a dream. 

it was nearly ten o'clock before the doctor remember his promise, 
and went upstairs to eustace's flat. the outer door was half-open so 
that he thought he was expected, and he switch on the light in the 
little hall, and shut the door behind him with the simplicity of 
habit. but when he swung round from the door he gave a cry of 
astonishment. eustace was lie asleep in a chair before him with 
his face flushed and droop on his shoulder, and his breath 
hiss noisy through his part lips. the doctor look at him 
quizzically, "if i did not know you, my young friend," he remarked, 
"i should say that you were as drunk as a lord." 

and he went up to eustace and shook him by the shoulder; but eustace 
did not wake. 

"queer!" the doctor muttered, sniff at eustace's lips; "he hasn't 
been drinking." 




the soul of a policeman 

i 

outside, above the uneasy din of the traffic, the sky was glorious 
with the far peace of a fine summer evening. through the upper pane 
of the station window police-constable bennett, who felt that his 
senses at the moment were abnormal keen, recognise with a sink 
heart such red and yellow as bedeck the best patchwork quilt at 
home. by contrast the lights of the superintendent's office were 
subdued, so that within the wall of the police-station sound seem 
of greater importance. somewhere a drunkard, deprived of his boots, 
was drum his criticism of authority on the wall of his cell. 
from the next room, where the men off duty were amuse themselves, 
there came a steady click of billiard-balls and dominoes, broken 
now and again by gruff burst of laughter. and at his very elbow the 
superintendent was speak in that suave voice that remind bennett 
of grey velvet. 

"you see, bennett, how matter stand. i have nothing at all against 
your conduct. you are steady and punctual, and i have no doubt that 
you are try to do your duty. but it's very unfortunate that as far 
as result go you have nothing to show for your efforts. during the 
last three week you have not brought in a charge of any description, 
and during the same period i find that your colleague on the beat 
have been exceptional busy. i repeat that i do not accuse you of 
neglect your duty, but these things tell with the magistrate and 
convey a general suggestion of slackness." 

bennett look down at his bright polish boots. his finger were 
sandy and there was soft felt beneath his feet. 

"i have been afraid of this for some time, sir," he said, "very much 
afraid." 

the superintendent look at him questioningly. 

"you have nothing to say?" he said. 

"i have always try to do my duty, sir." 

"i know, i know. but you must see that a certain number of charges, 
if not of convictions, is the mark of a smart officer." 

"surely you would not have me arrest innocent persons?" 

"that is a most improper observation," said the superintendent 
severely. "i will say no more to you now. but i hope you will take 
what i have said as a warning. you must bustle along, bennett, bustle 
along." 

outside in the street, police-constable bennett was free to reflect 
on his unpleasant interview. the superintendent was ambitious and 
therefore pompous; he, himself, was unambitious and therefore modest. 
left to himself he might have been content to triumph in the 
reflection that he had fail to say a number of foolish things, but 
the welfare of his wife and children bound him, tiresome enough for 
a dreamer, tight to the practical. it was clear that if he did not 
forthwith produce sign of his efficiency as a promoter of the peace 
that welfare would be imperilled. yet he did not condemn the chance 
that had made him a policeman or even the mischance that brought no 
guilty person to his hands. rather he look with a gentle curiosity 
into the face of the people who pass him, and wonder why he 
could not detect trace of the generally assume wicked of the 
neighbourhood. these unkempt men and women were thief and even 
murderers, it appeared; but to him they shone as happy youth and 
maidens, joyous victim of love's tyranny. 

as he drew near the street in which he live this sense of universal 
love quicken in his blood and stir him strangely. it did not 
escape his eyes that to the general his uniform was an unfriend 
thing. men and women pause in their animate chatter till he had 
passed, and even the children falter in their games to watch him 
with doubtful eyes. and yet his heart was warm for them; he knew that 
he wish them well. 

nevertheless, when he saw his house shining in a row of similar 
houses, he realise that their attitude was wise than his. if he was 
to be a success as a breadwinner he must wage a stern war against 
these happy, lovable people. it was easy, he had been long enough in 
the force to know how easy, to get cases. an intolerant manner, a 
little provocative harshness, and the thing was done. yet with all 
his heart he admire the poor for their resentful independence of 
spirit. to him this had always been the supreme quality of the 
english character; how could he make use of it to fill english gaols? 

he open the door of his house, with a sigh on his lips. there came 
forth the merry shouting of his children. 

ii 

above the telephone wire the stars dip at anchor in the cloudless 
sky. down below, in one of the dark, empty streets, police-constable 
bennett turn the handle of door and test the fastening of 
windows, with a complete scepticism as to the value of his labours. 
gradually, he was coming to see that he was not one of the few who 
are born to rule--to control--their simple neighbours, ambitious only 
for breath. where, if he had possessed this mission, he would have 
been eager to punish, he now felt no more than a sympathy that 
charged him with some responsibility for the sin of others. he 
share the uneasy conviction of the multitude that human justice, as 
interpret by the inspired minority, is more than a little unjust. 
the very unpopular with which his uniform endow him seem to 
him to express a severe criticism of the system of which he was an 
unwill supporter. he wish these people to regard him as a kind 
of official friend, to advise and settle differences; yet, shrewd 
than he, they considered him as an enemy, who live on their mistake 
and the collapse of their social relationships. 

there remain his duty to his wife and children, and this render 
the problem infinite perplexing. 

why should he punish other because of his love for his children; or, 
again, why should his children suffer for his scruples? yet it was 
clear that, unless fortune permit him to accomplish some notable 
yet honourable arrest, he would either have to cheat and tyrannise 
with his colleague or leave the force. and what employment is 
available for a discharge policeman? 

as he went systematic from house to house the consideration of 
these things mar the normal progress of his dreams. conscious as 
he was of the stars and the great width of heaven that made the 
world so small, he nevertheless felt that his love for his family and 
the wide love that determined his honour were somehow intimate 
connected with this great of the universe rather than with the 
world of little street and little motives, and so were not lightly 
to be put aside. yet, how can one measure one love against another 
when all are true? 

when the door of gurneys', the moneylenders, open to his touch, 
and drew him abrupt from his speculations, his first emotion was a 
quick irritation that chance should interfere with his thoughts. but 
when his lantern show him that the lock had been tamper with, 
his annoyance change to a thrill of hopeful excitement. what if 
this were the way out? what if fate had grant him compromise, the 
opportunity of pit his official virtue against official crime, 
those shadowy forces in the existence of which he did not believe, 
but which lay on his life like clouds? 

he was not a physical coward, and it seem quite simple to him to 
creep quiet through the open door into the silent office without 
wait for possible reinforcements. he knew that the safe, which 
would be the, natural goal of the presume burglars, was in mr. 
gurney's private office beyond, and while he stood listen intent 
he seem to hear dim sound coming from the direction of that room. 
for a moment he paused, frown slightly as a man do when he is 
try to catalogue an impression. when he achieve perception, it 
came oddly mingle with recollection of the little tragedy of his 
children at home. for some one was crying like a child in the little 
room where mr. gurney brow-beat recalcitrant borrowers. dangerous 
burglar do not weep, and bennett hesitate no longer, but step 
past the open flap of the counter, and threw open the door of the 
inner office. 

the electric light had been switch on, and at the table there sat a 
slight young man with his face bury in his hands, crying bitterly. 
behind him the safe stood open and empty, and the grate was fill 
with smoulder ember of burnt paper. bennett went up to the 
young man and placed his hand on his shoulder. but the young man wept 
on and did not move. 

try as he might bennett could not help relaxing the grip of outrage 
law, and pat the young man's shoulder soothing as it rose and 
fell. he had no fit weapon of roughness and oppression with which to 
oppose this child-like grief; he could only fight tear with tears. 

"come," he said gently, "you must pull yourself together." 

at the sound of his voice the young man gave a great sob and then was 
silent, shiver a little. 

"that's better," said bennett encouragingly, "much better." 

"i have burnt everything," the young man said suddenly, "and now the 
place is empty. i was nearly sick just now." 

bennett look at him sympathetically, as one dreamer may look at 
another, who is sad with action dream too often for scatheless 
accomplishment. "i'm afraid you'll get into serious trouble," he 
said. 

"i know," reply the young man, "but that blackguard gurney--" his 
voice rose to a shrill scream and choke him for a moment. then 
he went on quiet "but it's all over now. finished! done with!" 

"i suppose you owe him money?" 

the young man nodded. "he lives on fool like me. but he threaten 
to tell my father, and now i've just about ruin him. pah! swine!" 

"this won't be much better for your father," said bennett gravely. 

"no, it's worse; but perhaps it will help some of the others. he kept 
on threaten and i couldn't wait any longer. can't you see?" 

over the young man's shoulder the stars beck and nod to bennett 
through the blindless window. 

"i see," he said; "i see." 

"so now you can take me." 

bennett look doubtful at the outstretched wrists. "you are only a 
fool," he said, "a dream fool like me, and they will give you 
years for this. i don't see why they should give a man years for 
being a fool." 

the young man look up, taken with a sudden hope. "you will let me 
go?" he said, in astonishment. "i know i was an ass just now. i 
suppose i was a bit shaken. but you will let me go?" 

"i wish to god i had never seen you!" said bennett simply. "you have 
your father, and i have a wife and three little children. who shall 
judge between us?" 

"my father is an old man." 

"and my children are little. you had better go before i make up my 
mind." 

without another word the young man crept out of the room, and bennett 
follow him slow into the street. this gallant criminal whose 
capture would have been honourable, had dwindle to a hysterical 
foolish boy; and aid by his own strange impulse this boy had ruin 
him. the burglary had taken place on his beat; there would be an 
inquiry; it did not need that to secure his expulsion from the force. 
once in the street he look up hopefully to the heavens; but now the 
stars seem unspeakable remote, though as he pass along his beat 
his wife and his three little children were walking by his side. 

iii 

bennett had develop mental without realise the logical result 
of his development until it smote him with calamity. of his betrayal 
of trust as a guardian of property he thought nothing; of the 
possibility of poverty for his family he thought a great deal--all 
the more that his dreamer's mind was little accustomed to gripping 
the practical. it was strange, he thought, that his final declaration 
of war against his position should have been a little lacking in 
dignity. he had not taken the decisive step through any deep 
compassion of utter poverty brave borne. his had been no more than 
trivial pity of a young man's folly; and this was a frail thing on 
which to make so great a sacrifice. yet he regret nothing. his 
task of moral guardian of men and women had become impossible to him, 
and soon or later he must have given it up. and there was also his 
family. "i must come to some decision," he said to himself firmly. 

and then the great scream fell upon his ear and echo through his 
brain for ever and ever. it came from the house before which he was 
standing, and he expect the whole street to wake aghast with the 
horror of it. but there follow a silence that seem to emphasise 
the ugly of the sound. far away an engine scream as if in 
mock imitation; and that was all. bennett had count up to a 
hundred and seventy before the door of the house opened, and a man 
came out on to the steps. 

"oh, constable," he said coolly, "come inside, will you? i have 
something to show you." 

bennett mount the steps doubtfully. 

"there was a scream," he said. 

the man look at him quickly. "so you heard it," he said. "it was 
not pretty." 

"no, it was not," reply bennett. 

the man led him down the dim passage into the back sitting-room. the 
body of a man lay on the sofa; it was curl like a dry leaf. 

"that is my brother," said the man, with a little emphatic nod; "i 
have kill him. he was my enemy." 

bennett stare dul at the body, without believe it to be really 
there. 

"dead!" he said mechanically. 

"and anything i say will be use against me in evidence! as if you 
could compress my hatred into one little lie notebook." 

"i don't care a damn about your hatred," said bennett, with heat. "an 
hour ago, perhaps, i might have arrest you; now i only find you 
uninteresting." 

the man gave a long, low whistle of surprise. 

"a philosopher in uniform," he said, "god! sir, you have my 
sympathy." 

"and you have my pity. you have stolen your idea from cheap 
melodrama, and you make tragedy ridiculous. were i a policeman, i 
would lock you up with pleasure. were i a man, i should thrash you 
joyfully. as it is i can only share your infamy. i too, i suppose, am 
a murderer." 

"you are in a low, nervous state," said the man; "and you are do 
me some injustice. it is true that i am a poor murderer; but it 
appear to me that you are a worse policeman." 

"i shall wear the uniform no more from tonight." 

"i think you are wise, and i shall mar my philosophy with no more 
murders. if, indeed, i have kill him; for i assure you that beyond 
administer the poison to his wretched body i have done nothing. 
perhaps he is not dead. can you hear his heart beating?" 

"i can hear the spoon of my children beating on their empty 
platters!" 

"is it like that with you? poor devil! oh, poor, poor devil! 
philosopher should have no wives, no children, no homes, and no 
hearts." 

bennett turn from the man with unspeakable loathing. 

"i hate you and such as you!" he cry weakly. "you justify the 
existence of the police. you make me despise myself because i realise 
that your crime are no less mine than yours. i do not ask you to 
defend the dead of that thing lie there. i shall stir no finger 
to have you hanged, for the thought of suicide repel me, and i 
cannot separate your blood and mine. we are common children of a 
noble mother, and for our mother's sake i say farewell." 

and without wait for the man's answer he pass from the house to 
the street. 

iv 

haggard and with rebellious limbs, police-constable bennett stagger 
into the superintendent's office in the early morning. 

"i have paid careful attention to your advice," he said to the 
superintendent, "and i have pass across the city in search of 
crime. in its place i have found but folly--such folly as you have, 
such folly as i have myself--the common heritage of our blood. it 
seem that in some way i have bound myself to bring criminal to 
justice. i have pass across the city, and i have found no man 
worse than myself. do what you will with me." 

the superintendent clear his throat. 

"there have been too many complaint concerning the conduct of the 
police," he said; "it is time that an example was made. you will be 
charged with being drunk and disorderly while on duty." 

"i have a wife and three little children," said bennett softly--"and 
three pretty little children." and he cover his tired face with his 
hands. 




the conjurer 

certainly the audience was restive. in the first place it felt that 
it had been defrauded, seeing that cissie bradford, whose smile 
face adorn the bill outside, had, fail to appear, and secondly, 
it considered that the deputy for that famous lady was more than 
inadequate. to the little man who sweated in the glare of the 
limelight and juggle desperate with glass balls in a vain effort 
to steady his nerve it was apparent that his turn was a failure. and 
as he work he could have cry with disappointment, for his was a 
trial performance, and a year's engagement in the hennings' group of 
music-halls would have reward success. yet his tricks, things that 
he had done with the utmost ease a thousand times, had been a 
succession of blunders, rather mirth-provoking than mystify to 
the audience. presently one of the glass balls fell crashing on the 
stage, and amidst the jeer of the gallery he turn to his wife, 
who serve as his assistant. 

"i've lost my chance," he said, with a sob; "i can't do it!" 

"never mind, dear," she whispered. "there's a nice steak and onion 
at home for supper." 

"it's no use," he said despairingly. "i'll try the disappear trick 
and then get off. i'm done here." he turn back to the audience. 

"ladies and gentlemen," he said to the mockers in a waver voice, 
"i will now present to you the conclude item of my entertainment. i 
will cause this lady to disappear under your very eyes, without the 
aid of any mechanical contrivance or artificial device." this was the 
merest showman's patter, for, as a matter of fact, it was not a very 
wonderful illusion. but as he led his wife forward to present her to 
the audience the conjurer was wonder whether the mishap that had 
ruin his chance would meet him even here. if something should go 
wrong--he felt his wife's hand tremble in his, and he pressed it 
tight to reassure her. he must make an effort, an effort of will, 
and then no mistake would happen. for a second the lights dance 
before his eyes, then he pull himself together. if an earthquake 
should disturb the curtains and show mol creep ignominious 
away behind he would still meet his fate like a man. he turn round 
to conduct his wife to the little alcove from which she should 
vanish. she was not on the stage! 

for a minute he did not guess the great of the disaster. then he 
realise that the theatre was intense quiet, and that he would have 
to explain that the last item of his programme was even more of a 
fiasco than the rest. owe to a sudden indisposition--his skin 
tingle at the thought of the hooting. his tongue rasp upon 
crack lip as he brace himself and bowed to the audience. 

then came the applause. again and again it broke out from all over 
the house, while the curtain rose and fell, and the conjurer stood on 
the stage, mute, uncomprehending. what had happened? at first he had 
thought they were mock him, but it was impossible to misjudge the 
nature of the applause. besides, the stage-manager was allow him 
call after call, as if he were a star. when at length the curtain 
remain down, and the orchestra struck up the opening bar of the 
next song, he stagger off into the wings as if he were drunk. there 
he met mr. james hen himself. 

"you'll do," said the great man; "that last trick was neat. you ought 
to polish up the other though. i suppose you don't want to tell me 
how you did it? well, well, come in the morning and we'll fix up a 
contract." 

and so, without have said a word, the conjurer found himself 
hustle off by the vaudeville napoleon. mr. hen had something 
more to say to his manager. 

"bit rum," he said. "did you see it?" 

"queerest thing we've struck." 

"how was it done do you think?" 

"can't imagine. there one minute on his arm, gone the next, no trap, 
or curtain, or anything." 

"money in it, eh?" 

"biggest hit of the century, i should think." 

"i'll go and fix up a contract and get him to sign it tonight. get 
on with it." and mr. james hen flee to his office. 

meanwhile the conjurer was wandering in the wings with the droop 
heart of a lost child. what had happened? why was he a success, and 
why did people stare so oddly, and what had become of his wife? when 
he ask them the stage hand laughed, and said they had not seen 
her. why should they laugh? he want her to explain things, and hear 
their good luck. but she was not in her dressing-room, she was not 
anywhere. for a moment he felt like crying. 

then, for the second time that night, he pull himself together. 
after all, there was no reason to be upset. he ought to feel very 
pleased about the contract, however it had happened. it seem that 
his wife had left the stage in some queer way without being seen. 
probably to increase the mystery she had gone straight home in her 
stage dress, and had succeed in dodge the stage-door keeper. it 
was all very strange; but, of course, there must be some simple 
explanation like that. he would take a cab home and find her there 
already. there was a steak and onion for supper. 

as he drove along in the cab he became convinced that this theory was 
right. mol had always been clever, and this time she had certainly 
succeed in surprising everybody. at the door of his house he gave 
the cabman a shilling for himself with a light heart. he could afford 
it now. he ran up the steps cheerful and open the door. the 
passage was quite dark, and he wonder why his wife hadn't lit the 
gas. 

"molly!" he cried, "molly!" 

the small, weary-eyed servant came out of the kitchen on a savoury 
wind of onions. 

"hasn't missus come home with you, sir?" she said. 

the conjurer thrust his hand against the wall to steady himself, and 
the pattern of the wall-paper seem to burn his finger-tips. 

"not here!" he gasp at the frightened girl. "then where is she? 
where is she?" 

"i don't know, sir," she began stuttering; but the conjurer turn 
quick and ran out of the house. of course, his wife must be at the 
theatre. it was absurd ever to have supposed that she could leave the 
theatre in her stage dress unnoticed; and now she was probably 
worry because he had not wait for her. how foolish he had been. 

it was a quarter of an hour before he found a cab, and the theatre 
was dark and empty when he got back to it. he knock at the stage 
door, and the night watchman open it. 

"my wife?" he cried. "there's no one here now, sir," the man answer 
respectfully, for he knew that a new star had risen that night. 

the conjurer leant against the doorpost faintly. 

"take me up to the dressing-rooms," he said. "i want to see whether 
she has been, there while i was away." 

the watchman led the way along the dark passages. "i shouldn't worry 
if i were you, sir," he said. "she can't have gone far." he did not 
know anything about it, but he want to be sympathetic. 

"god knows," the conjurer muttered, "i can't understand this at all." 

in the dressing-room molly's clothes still lay neat fold as she 
had left them when they went on the stage that night, and when he saw 
them his last hope left the conjurer, and a strange thought came into 
his mind. 

"i should like to go down on the stage," he said, "and see if there 
is anything to tell me of her." 

the night watchman look at the conjurer as if he thought he was 
mad, but he follow him down to the stage in silence. when he was 
there the conjurer lean forward suddenly, and his face was fill 
with a wistful eagerness. 

"molly!" he called, "molly!" 

but the empty theatre gave him nothing but echo in reply. 




the poet's allegory 

i 

the boy came into the town at six o'clock in the morning, but the 
baker at the corner of the first street was up, as is the way of 
bakers, and when he saw the boy passing, he hail him with a jolly 
shout. 

"hullo, boy! what are you after?" 

"i'm go about my business," the boy said pertly. 

"and what might that be, young fellow?" 

"i might be a good tinker, and worship god pan, or i might grind 
scissors as sharp as the nose of bakers. but, as a matter of fact, 
i'm a piper, not a rat-catcher, you understand, but just a simple 
singe of sad songs, and a mad singe of merry ones." 

"oh," said the baker dully, for he had hope the boy was in search of 
work. "then i suppose you have a message." 

"i sing songs," the boy said emphatically. "i don't run errand 
for anyone save it be for the fairies." 

"well, then, you have come to tell us that we are bad, that our lives 
are corrupt and our home sordid. nowadays there's money in that if 
you can do it well." 

"your wit get up too early in the morning for me, baker," said the 
boy. "i tell you i sing songs." 

"aye, i know, but there's something in them, i hope. perhaps you 
bring news. they're not so popular as the other sort, but still, as 
long as it's bad news--" 

"is it the flour that has change his brains to dough, or the heat of 
the oven that has made them like dead grass?" 

"but you must have some news----?" 

"news! it's a fine morning of summer, and i saw a kingfisher across 
the watermeadow coming along. oh, and there's a cuckoo back in the 
fir plantation, singing with a may voice. it must have been asleep 
all these months." 

"but, my dear boy, these things happen every day. are there no 
battle or earthquake or famine in the world? has no man 
murder his wife or rob his neighbour? is no one oppress by 
tyrant or lie to by their officers." 

the boy shrug his shoulders. 

"i hope not," he said. "but if it were so, and i knew, i should not 
tell you. i don't want to make you unhappy." 

"but of what use are you then, if it be not to rouse in us the 
discontent that is alone divine? would you have me go fat and happy, 
listen to your babble of kingfisher and cuckoos, while my 
brother and sister in the world are starving?" 

the boy was silent for a moment. 

"i give my song to the poor for nothing," he said slowly. "certainly 
they are not much use to empty bellies, but they are all i have to 
give. and i take it, since you speak so feelingly, that you, too, do 
your best. and these others, these people who must be remind hourly 
to throw their crust out of window for the poor--would you have me 
sing to them? they must be told that life is evil, and i find it 
good; that men and women are wretched, and i find them happy; that 
food and cleanliness, order and knowledge are the essence of 
content while i only ask for love. would you have me lie to cheat 
mean folk out of their scraps?" 

the baker scratch his head in astonishment. 

"certainly you are very mad," he said. "but you won't get much money 
in this town with that sort of talk. you had better come in and have 
breakfast with me." 

"but why do you ask me?" said the boy, in surprise. 

"well, you have a decent, honest sort of face, although your tongue 
is disordered." 

"i had rather it had been because you like my songs," said the boy, 
and he went in to breakfast with the baker. 

ii 

over his breakfast the boy talk wise on art, as is the wont of 
young singers, and afterwards he went on his way down the street. 

"it's a great pity," said the baker; "he seem a decent young chap." 

"he has nice eyes," said the baker's wife. 

as the boy pass down the street he frown a little. 

"what is the matter with them?" he wondered. "they're pleasant people 
enough, and yet they did not want to hear my songs." 

presently he came to the tailor's shop, and as the tailor had sharper 
eyes than the baker, he saw the pipe in the boy's pocket. 

"hullo, piper!" he called. "my leg are stiff. come and sing us a 
song!" 

the boy look up and saw the tailor sitting cross-legged in the open 
window of his shop. 

"what sort of song would you like?" he asked. 

"oh! the latest," reply the tailor. "we don't want any old song 
here." so the boy sung his new song of the kingfisher in the 
water-meadow and the cuckoo who had overslept itself. 

"and what do you call that?" ask the tailor angrily, when the boy 
had finished. 

"it's my new song, but i don't think it's one of my best." but in his 
heart the boy believe it was, because he had only just made it. 

"i should hope it's your worst," the tailor said rudely. "what sort 
of stuff is that to make a man happy?" 

"to make a man happy!" echo the boy, his heart sink within him. 

"if you have no news to give me, why should i pay for your songs! i 
want to hear about my neighbours, about their lives, and their wives 
and their sins. there's the fat baker up the street--they say he 
cheat the poor with light bread. make me a song of that, and i'll 
give you some breakfast. or there's the magistrate at the top of the 
hill who made the girl drown herself last week. that's a poetic 
subject." 

"what's all this!" said the boy disdainfully. "can't you make dirt 
enough for yourself!" 

"you with your stuff about birds," shout the tailor; "you're a rank 
impostor! that's what you are!" 

"they say that you are the ninth part of a man, but i find that they 
have gross exaggerated," cry the boy, in retort; but he had 
a heavy heart as he made off along the street. 

by noon he had interview the butcher, the cobbler, the milkman, and 
the maker of candlesticks, but they treat him no better than the 
tailor had done, and as he was feeling tired he went and sat down 
under a tree. 

"i begin to think that the baker is the best of the lot of them," he 
said to himself ruefully, as he roll his empty wallet between his 
fingers. 

then, as the folly of singe provide them in some measure with a 
philosophy, he fell asleep. 

iii 

when he woke it was late in the afternoon, and the children, fresh 
from school, had come out to play in the dusk. far and near, across 
the town-square, the boy could hear their merry voices, but he felt 
sad, for his stomach had forgotten the baker's breakfast, and he did 
not see where he was likely to get any supper. so he pull out his 
pipe, and made a mournful song to himself of the dance gnat 
and the bitter odour of the bonfire in the townsfolk's gardens. and 
the children drew near to hear him sing, for they thought his song 
was pretty, until their father drove them home, saying, "that stuff 
has no educational value." 

"why haven't you a message?" they ask the boy. 

"i come to tell you that the grass is green beneath your feet and 
that the sky is blue over your heads." 

"oh i but we know all that," they answered. 

"do you! do you!" scream the boy. "do you think you could stop 
over your absurd labour if you knew how blue the sky is? you would 
be out singing on the hill with me!" 

"then who would do our work?" they said, mock him. 

"then who would want it done?" he retorted; but it's ill argue on 
an empty stomach. 

but when they had tired of telling him what a fool he was, and gone 
away, the tailor's little daughter crept out of the shadow and 
pat him on the shoulder. 

"i say, boy!" she whispered. "i've brought you some supper. father 
doesn't know." the boy blessed her and ate his supper while she 
watch him like his mother and when he had done she kiss him on 
the lips. 

"there, boy!" she said. 

"you have nice golden hair," the boy said. 

"see! it shine in the dusk. it strike me it's the only gold i shall 
get in this town." 

"still it's nice, don't you think?" the girl whisper in his ear. 
she had her arms round his neck. 

"i love it," the boy said joyfully; "and you like my songs, don't 
you?" 

"oh, yes, i like them very much, but i like you better." 

the boy put her off roughly. 

"you're as bad as the rest of them," he said indignantly. "i tell you 
my song are everything, i am nothing." 

"but it was you who ate my supper, boy," said the girl. 

the boy kiss her remorsefully. "but i wish you had like me for my 
songs," he sighed. "you are better than any silly old songs!" 

"as bad as the rest of them," the boy said lazily, "but somehow 
pleasant." 

the shadow flock to their evening meeting in the square, and 
overhead the stars shone out in a sky that was certainly exceedingly 
blue. 

iv 

next morning they arrest the boy as a rogue and a vagabond, and in 
the afternoon they brought him before the magistrate. 

"and what have you to say for yourself!" said the magistrate to the 
boy, after the second policeman, like a faithful echo, had finished 
reading his notes. 

"well," said the boy, "i may be a rogue and a vagabond. indeed, i 
think that i probably am; but i would claim the license that has 
always been allow to singers." 

"oh!" said the magistrate. "so you are one of those, are you! and 
what is your message!" 

"i think if i could sing you a song or two i could explain myself 
better," said the boy. 

"well," reply the magistrate doubtfully, "you can try if you like, 
but i warn you that i wrote song myself when i was a boy, so that i 
know something about it." 

"oh, i'm glad of that," said the boy, and he sang his famous song of 
the grass that is so green, and when he had finished the magistrate 
frowned. 

"i knew that before," he said. 

so then the boy sang his wonderful song of the sky that is so blue. 
and when he had finished the magistrate scowled. "and what are we to 
learn from that!" he said. 

so then the boy lost his temper and sang some naughty doggerel he 
had made up in his cell that morning. he abuse the town and 
townsmen, but especially the townsmen. he damn their morals, their 
customs, and their institutions. he said that they had ugly faces, 
raucous voices, and that their body were unclean. he said they 
were thief and liar and murderers, that they had no ear for music 
and no sense of humour. oh, he was bitter! 

"good god!" said the magistrate, "that's what i call real improve 
poetry. why didn't you sing that first? there might have been a 
miscarry of justice." 

then the baker, the tailor, the butcher, the cobbler, the milkman, 
and the maker of candlestick rose in court and said-- 

"ah, but we all knew there was something in him." 

so the magistrate gave the boy a certificate that show that he was 
a real singer, and the tradesmen gave him a purse of gold, but the 
tailor's little daughter gave him one of her golden ringlets. "you 
won't forget, boy, will you?" she said. 

"oh, no," said the boy; "but i wish you had like my songs." 

presently, when he had come a little way out of the town, he put his 
hand in his wallet and drew out the magistrate's certificate and tore 
it in two; and then he took out the gold pieces and threw them into 
the ditch, and they were not half as bright as the buttercups. but 
when he came to the ringlet he smile at it and put it back. 

"yet she was as bad as the rest of them," he thought with a sigh. 

and he went across the world with his songs. 




and who shall say----? 

it was a dull november day, and the window were heavy 
curtained, so that the room was very dark. in front of the fire was a 
large arm-chair, which shut whatever light there might be from the 
two children, a boy of eleven and a girl about two years younger, who 
sat on the floor at the back of the room. the boy was the better 
looking, but the girl had the better face. they were both gaze at 
the arm-chair with the utmost excitement. 

"it's all right. he's asleep," said the boy. 

"oh, do be careful! you'll wake him," whisper the girl. 

"are you afraid?" 

"no, why should i be afraid of my father, stupid?" 

"i tell you he's not father any more. he's a murderer," the boy said 
hotly. "he told me, i tell you. he said, `i have kill your 
mother, ray,' and i went and looked, and mother was all red. i simply 
shouted, and she wouldn't answer. that means she's dead. his hand was 
all red, too." 

"was it paint?" 

"no, of course it wasn't paint. it was blood. and then he came down 
here and went to sleep." 

"poor father, so tired." 

"he's not poor father, he's not father at all; he's a murderer, and 
it is very wicked of you to call him father," said the boy. 

"father," mutter the girl rebelliously. 

"you know the sixth commandment say `thou shalt do no murder,' and 
he has done murder; so he'll go to hell. and you'll go to hell too if 
you call him father. it's all in the bible." 

the boy end vaguely, but the little girl was quite overcome by the 
thought of her badness. 

"oh, i am wicked!" she cried. "and i do so want to go to heaven." 

she had a stout and materialist belief in it as a place of sheet 
angel and harps, where it was easy to be good. 

"you must do as i tell you, then," he said. "because i know. i've 
learnt all about it at school." 

"and you never told me," said she reproachfully. 

"ah, there's lot of things i know," he replied, nod his head. 

"what must we do?" said the girl meekly. "shall i go and ask 
mother?" 

the boy was sick at her obstinacy. 

"mother's dead, i tell you; that means she can't hear anything. it's 
no use talk to her; but i know. you must stop here, and if father 
wake you run out of the house and call `police!' and i will go now 
and tell a policeman now." 

"and what happen then?" she asked, with round eyes at her brother's 
wisdom. 

"oh, they come and take him away to prison. and then they put a rope 
round his neck and hang him like haman, and he go to hell." 

"wha-at! do they kill him?" 

"because he's a murderer. they always do." 

"oh, don't let's tell them! don't let's tell them!" she 
screamed. 

"shut up!" said the boy, "or he'll wake up. we must tell them, or we 
go to hell--both of us." 

but his sister did not collapse at this awful threat, as he expected, 
though the tear were rolling down her face. "don't let's tell them," 
she sobbed. 

"you're a horrid girl, and you'll go to hell," said the boy, in 
disgust. but the silence was only broken by her sobbing. "i tell you 
he kill mother dead. you didn't cry a bit for mother; i did." 

"oh, let's ask mother! let's ask mother! i know she won't want father 
to go to hell. let's ask mother!" 

"mother's dead, and can't hear, you stupid," said the boy. "i keep on 
telling you. come up and look." 

they were both a little awed in mother's room. it was so quiet, and 
mother look so funny. and first the girl shouted, and then the boy, 
and then they shout both together, but nothing happened. the echo 
made them frightened. 

"perhaps she's asleep," the girl said; so her brother pinched one of 
mother's hands--the white one, not the red one--but nothing 
happened, so mother was dead. 

"has she gone to hell?" whisper the girl. 

"no! she's gone to heaven, because she's good. only wicked people go 
to hell. and now i must go and tell the policeman. don't you tell 
father where i've gone if he wake up, or he'll run away before the 
policeman comes." 

"why?" 

"so as not to go to hell," said the boy, with certainty; and they 
went downstairs together, the little mind of the girl being much 
perturb because she was so wicked. what would mother say tomorrow 
if she had done wrong? 

the boy put on his sailor hat in the hall. "you must go in there and 
watch," he said, nod in the direction of the sitting-room. "i 
shall run all the way." 

the door banged, and she heard his steps down the path, and then 
everything was quiet. 

she tiptoe into the room, and sat down on the floor, and look at 
the back of the chair in utter distress. she could see her father's 
elbow project on one side, but nothing more. for an instant 
she hope that he wasn't there--hoped that he had gone--but then, 
terrified, she knew that this was a piece of extreme wickedness. 

so she lay on the rough carpet, sob hopelessly, and seeing real 
and vicious devil of her brother's imagine in all the corner of 
the room. 

presently, in her misery, she remember a packet of acid-drops that 
lay in her pocket, and drew them forth in a sticky mass, which part 
from its paper with regret. so she choke and suck her sweets at 
the same time, and found them salt and tasteless. 

ray was gone a long time, and she was a wicked girl who would go to 
hell if she didn't do what he told her. those were her prevailing 
ideas. 

and presently there came a third. ray had said that if her father 
woke up he would run away, and not go to hell at all. now if she woke 
him up--. 

she knew this was dreadfully naughty; but her mind clung to the idea 
obstinately. you see, father had always been so fond of mother, and 
he would not like to be in a different place. mother wouldn't 
like it either. she was always so sorry when father did not come home 
or anything. and hell is a dreadful place, full of things. she half 
convinced herself, and start up, but then there came an awful 
thought. 

if she did this she would go to hell for ever and ever, and all the 
other would be in heaven. 

she hung there in suspense, suck her sweet and puzzle it over 
with knit brows. 

how can one be good? 

she swung round and look in the dark corner by the piano; but the 
devil was not there. 

and then she ran across the room to her father, and shake his arm, 
shouted, tremulously-- 

"wake up, father! wake up! the police are coming!" 

and when the police came ten minutes later, accompany by a very 
proud and virtuous little boy, they heard a small shrill voice 
crying, despairingly-- 

"the police, father! the police!" 

but father would not wake. 




the biography of a superman 

"o limèd soul that struggle to be free 
art more engaged!" 

charles stephen dale, the subject of my study, was a dramatist 
and, indeed, something of a celebrity in the early years of the 
twentieth century. that he should be already completely forgotten is 
by no means astonish in an age that elect its great men with a 
charming indecision of touch. the general prejudice against the 
grant of freehold has spread to the desire lands of fame; and 
where our profligate ancestor were willing to call a man great in 
perpetuity, we, with more shrewdness, prefer to name him a genius for 
seven years. we know that before that period may have expire fate 
will have grant us a sea-serpent with yet more coils, with a 
yet more bewilder arrangement of marine and sunset tints, and the 
conclusion of previous lease will enable us to grant him undisputed 
possession of parnassus. if our ancestor were more generous they 
were certainly less discriminate; and it cannot be doubt that many 
of them went to their grave under the impression that it is possible 
for there to be more than one great man at a time! we have alter 
all that. 

for two years dale was a great man, or rather the great man, and it 
is probable that if he had not die he would have held his position 
for a long period. when his death was announced, although the 
notice of his life and work were of a flatter length, the 
leaderwriter were not unnatural aggrieved that he should have 
resigned his post before the popular interest in his personality was 
exhausted. the censor might do his best by prohibit the 
performance of all the play that the dead man had left behind him; 
but, as the author neglect to express his view in their columns, 
and the common sense of their reader forbade the publication of 
interview with him, the journal could draw but a poor 
satisfaction from condemn or uphold the official action. dale's 
regrettable absence reduce what might have been an agreeable clash 
of personalities to an arid discussion on art. the consequence was 
obvious. the end of the week saw the elevation of james macintosh, 
the great scotch comedian, to the vacant post, and dale was 
completely forgotten. that this oblivion is merit in terms of his 
work i am not prepared to admit; that it is merit in terms of his 
personality i indignant wish to deny. whatever dale may have been 
as an artist, he was, perhaps in spite of himself, a man, and a man, 
moreover, possessed of many striking and unusual trait of character. 
it is to the man dale that i offer this tribute. 

sprung from an old yorkshire family, charles stephen dale was yet 
sufficient of a cockney to justify both his friends and his enemy 
in credit him with the celtic temperament. nevertheless, he was 
essentially a modern, insomuch that his contempt for the writings of 
dead men surpass his dislike of living authors. to these two 
central influence we may trace most of the peculiarity that 
render him notorious and ultimately great. thus, while his celtic 
æstheticism permit him to eat nothing but raw meat, because he 
mistrust alike "the reek product of the manure-heap and the 
barbaric finger of cooks," it was surely his modernity that made him 
an agnostic, because bishop sat in the house of lords. small men 
might dislike vegetable and bishop without allow it to affect 
their conduct; but dale was careful to observe that every slightest 
conviction should have its place in the formation of his character. 
conversely, he was nothing without a reason. 

these may seem small things to which to trace the motive forces of a 
man's life; but if we add to them a third, found where the truth 
about a man not infrequent lies, in the rag-bag of his enemies, our 
material will be nearly complete. "dale hate his 
fellow-human- beings," wrote some anonymous scribbler, and, even 
express thus baldly, the statement is not wholly false. but he 
hate them because of their imperfections, and it would be true to 
say that his love of humanity amount to a positive hatred of 
individuals, and, _pace_ the critics, the love was no less sincere 
than the hatred. he had drawn from the mental confusion of the dark 
germany philosopher an image of the perfect man--an image differ 
only in inessential from the idol worship by the imperialist as 
"efficiency." he did not find--it was hardly likely that he would 
find--that his contemporary fulfill this perfect conception, and 
he therefore felt it necessary to condemn them for the possession of 
those weaknesses, or as some would prefer to say, qualities, of which 
the sum is human nature. 

i now approach a quality, or rather the lack of a quality, that is in 
itself of so debatable a character, that were it not of the utmost 
importance in considering the life of charles stephen dale i should 
prefer not to mention it. i refer to his complete lack of a sense of 
humour, the consciousness of which deficiency went so far to detract 
from his importance as an artist and a man. the difficulty which i 
mention above lie in the fact that, while every one has a clear 
conception of what they mean by the phrase, no one has yet 
succeed in define it satisfactorily. here i would venture to 
suggest that it is a kind of magnificent sense of proportion, a 
sense that relate the infinite great of the universe to the 
finite small of man, and draw the inevitable conclusion as to 
the importance of our joy and sorrow and labours. i am aware that 
this definition err on the side of vagueness; but possibly it may be 
found to include the truth. obviously, the nature of those who 
possess this sense will tend to be static rather than dynamic, and it 
is therefore against the limit impose by this sense that 
intellectual anarchists, among whom i would number dale, and poets, 
primarily rebel. but--and it is this rather than his undoubted 
intellectual gift or his dogmatic definition of good and evil that 
definitely separate dale from the normal men--there can be no doubt 
that he felt his lack of a sense of humour bitterly. in every word he 
ever said, in every line he ever wrote, i detect a painful strive 
after this mysterious sense, that enable his neighbours, fool as he 
undoubted thought them, to laugh and weep and follow the faith of 
their heart without conscious realisation of their own 
existence and the problem it induced. by dint of study and strenuous 
observation he achieved, as any man may achieve, a considerable 
degree of wit, though to the last his ignorance of the audience whom 
he serve and despised, prevent him from judge the effect of his 
sally without experiment. but try as he might the fine jewel lay 
far beyond his reach. strong men fight themselves when they can find 
no fitter adversary; but in all the history of literature there is no 
stranger spectacle than this lifelong contest between dale, the 
intellectual anarch and pioneer of supermen, and dale, the poor 
lonely devil who wonder what made people happy. 

i have said that the struggle was lifelong, but it must be add that 
it was always unequal. the knowledge that in his secret heart he 
desire this quality, the imperfect of imperfections, only serve 
to make dale's attack on the complacency of his contemporary more 
bitter. he ridicule their achievements, their ambitions, and their 
love with a fury that awaken in them a mild curiosity, but by no 
means affected their comfort. moreover, the very vehemence with 
which he demand their contempt deprived him of much of his force as 
a critic, for they just wonder why a man should waste his 
lifetime in attack them if they were indeed so worthless. 
actually, they felt, dale was a great deal more engaged with his 
audience than many of the imaginative writer whom he affected to 
despise for their sycophancy. and, especially towards the end of his 
life when his powers perhaps were weakening, the device which he 
use to arouse the irritation of his contemporary became more and 
more childish artificial, less and less effective. he was like one 
of those actor who feel that they cannot hold the attention of their 
audience unless they are always do something, though nothing is 
more monotonous than mannered vivacity. 

dale, then, was a man who was very anxious to be modern, but at the 
same time had not wholly succeed in conquer his æesthetic sense. 
he had constitute himself high priest of the most puritanical and 
remote of all creeds, yet there was that in his blood that rebel 
ceaseless against the intellectual limit he had voluntary 
accepted. the result in terms of art was chaos. possessed of an 
intellect of great analytic and destructive force, he was almost 
entire lacking in imagination, and he was therefore unable to raise 
his work to a plane in which the mutual combative elements of his 
nature might have been reconciled. his light moments of envy, anger, 
and vanity pass into the crucible to come forth unchanged. he 
lack the magic wand, and his work never took wings above his 
conception. it is in vain to seek in any of his play or novels, 
tract or prefaces, for the product of inspiration, the divine gift 
that enable one man to write with the common pen of humanity. he 
could only employ his curious perfect technique in reproduce the 
wayward flash of a mind incapable of consecutive thought. he never 
attempted--and this is a hard saying--to produce any work beautiful 
in itself; while the confusion of his mind, and the vanity that never 
allow him to ignore the effect his work might produce on his 
audience, prevent him from give clear expression to his creed. 
his work will appeal rather to the student of men than to the 
student of art, and, wanton incoherent though it often is, must be 
held to constitute a remarkable human document. 

it is strange to reflect that among his contemporary admirer dale 
was credit with an intellect of unusual clarity, for the 
examination of any of his play impress one with the number and 
mutual destructive of his motive for artistic expression. a 
noted debater, he made frequent use of the device of attack the 
weakness of the other man's speech, rather than the weakness of 
the other man's argument. his prose was good, though at its best 
so impersonal that it recall the manner of an exceptional 
well-written leading article. at its worst it was mar by 
numerous vulgarity and error of taste, not always, it is to be 
feared, intentional. his attitude on this point was typical of his 
strange blind to the necessity of a pure artistic ideal. he 
committed these extravagances, he would say, in order to irritate 
his audience into a condition of mental alertness. as a matter of 
fact, he generally made his reader more sorry than angry, and he 
did not realise that even if he had been successful it was but a 
poor reward for the wanton spoil of much good work. he 
proclaim himself to be above criticism, but he was only too 
often beneath it. revolting against the dignity, not infrequent 
pompous, of his fellow-men of letters, he play the part of clown 
with more enthusiasm than skill. it is intellectual arrogance in a 
clever man to believe that he can play the fool with success 
merely because he wish it. 

there is no need for me to enter into detail with regard to dale's 
personal appearance; the caricaturist did him rather more than 
justice, the photographer rather less. in his younger days he 
suggest a gingerbread man that had been left too long in the sun; 
towards the end he affected a cultured and elaborate rugged that 
made him look like a duke or a market gardener. like most clever men, 
he had good eyes. 

nor is it my purpose to add more than a word to the publish 
account of his death. there is something strange pitiful in that 
last desperate effort to achieve humour. we have all read the account 
of his own death that he dictate from the sick-bed--cold, 
epigrammatic, and, alas! characteristic lacking in taste. and 
once more it was his fate to make us rather sorry than angry. 

in the third scene of the second act of "henry v.," a play written 
by an author whom dale pretended to despise, dame quick describe 
the death of falstaff in words that are too well known to need 
quotation. it was thus and no otherwise that dale died. it is thus 
that every man dies. 




blue blood 

he sat in the middle of the great café with his head support 
on his hands, miserable even to bitterness. inward he cursed the 
ancestor who had left him little but a great name and a small and 
ridiculous body. he thought of his father, whose expensive 
eccentricity had amuse his fellow-countrymen at the cost of his 
fortune; his mother, for whom death had been a blessing; his 
grandparent and his uncles, in whom no man had found any good. but 
most of all he cursed himself, for whose folly even heredity might 
not wholly account. he recall the school where he had made no 
friends, the university where he had taken no degree. since he had 
left oxford, his aimless, hopeless life, profligate, but 
dishonourable, perhaps, only by accident, had deprived even his title 
of any social value, and one by one his very acquaintance had 
left him to the society of broken men and the women who are anything 
but light. and these, and here perhaps the root of his bitter 
lay, even these recognise him only as a victim for their mockery, a 
thing more poor than themselves, whereon they could satisfy the anger 
of their torture souls. and his last misery lay in this: that he 
himself could find no day in his life to admire, no one past dream to 
cherish, no inmost corner of his heart to love. the lowest tramp, the 
least-heeded waif of the night, might have some ultimate pride, but 
he himself had nothing, nothing whatever. he was a dream-pauper, an 
emotional bankrupt. 

with a choke sob he drain his brandy and told the waiter to bring 
him another. there had been a period in his life when he had been 
able to find some measure of sentimental satisfaction in the stupor 
of drunkenness. in those days, through the veil of illusion which 
alcohol had flung across his brain, he had been able to regard the 
contempt of the men as the intimacy of friendship, the scorn of the 
women as the laughter of light love. but now drink gave him 
nothing but the mordant insight of morbidity, which cut through his 
rotten soul like cheese. yet night after night he came to this place, 
to be torture afresh by the ridicule of the sordid frequenters, and 
by the careless music of the orchestra which told him of a flowerless 
spring and of a morning which held for him no hope. for his last 
emotion rest in this self-inflicted pain; he could only breathe 
freely under the lash of his own contempt. 

idle he let his dull eyes stray about the room, from table to table, 
from face to face. many there he knew by sight, from none could he 
hope for sympathy or even companionship. in his bitter he envy 
the courage of the coward who were brave enough to seek oblivion or 
punishment in death. drop his eyes to his soft, unlove hands, 
he marvel that anything so useless should throb with life, and yet 
he realise that he was afraid of physical pain, terrify at the 
thought of death. there were dim ancestor of his whose valour had 
thrill the song of minstrel and made his name lovely in the 
glowing folly of battles. but now he knew that he was a coward, and 
even in the knowledge he could find no comfort. it is not given to 
every man to hate himself gladly. 

the music and the laughter beat on his sullen brain with a mock 
insistence, and he tremble with impotent anger at the apparent 
happiness of humanity. why should these people be merry when he was 
miserable, what right had the orchestra to play a chorus of triumph 
over the sting emblem of his defeat? he drank brandy after 
brandy, vain seek to dull the nausea of disgust which had 
stricken his worn nerves; but the adulterate spirit merely madden 
his brain with the vision of new depths of horror, while his body 
lay below, a mean, detest thing. had he known how to pray he 
would have beg that something might snap. but no man may win to 
faith by means of hatred alone, and his heart was cold as the marble 
table against which he leant. there was no more hope in the 
world. . . . 

when he came out of the café, the air of the night was so pure 
and cool on his face, and the lights of the square were so tender to 
his eyes, that for a moment his harsh mood was softened. and in that 
moment he seem to see among the crowd that flock by a beautiful 
face, a face touched with pearls, and the inner leaves of pink 
rosebuds. he leant forward eagerly. "christine!" he cried, 
"christine!" 

then the illusion passed, and, smitten by the anger of the pitiless 
stars, he saw that he was look upon a mere woman, a woman of the 
earth. he flee from her smile with a shudder. 

as he went it seem to him that the sway house buffet him 
about as a child might play with a ball. sometimes they threw him 
against men, who cursed him and bruise his soft body with their 
fists. sometimes they trip him up and hurl him upon the stone 
of the pavement. still he held on, till the embankment broke before 
him with the sudden peace of space, and he leant against the 
parapet, pant and sick with pain, but free from the tyranny of 
the houses. 

beneath him the river roll towards the sea, reticent but 
more alive, it seemed, than the deep painful thing which fate had 
attach to his brain. he picture himself tangle in the dark 
perplexity of its waters, he fancy them fall upon his face like 
a girl's hair, till they darken his eyes and choke the mouth 
which, even now, could not breathe fast enough to satisfy him. the 
thought displease him, and he turn away from the place that held 
peace for other men but not for him. from the shadow of one of the 
seat a woman's voice reach him, beg peevish for money. 

"i have none," he said automatically. then he remember and flung 
coins, all the money he had, into her lap. "i give it to you because 
i hate you!" he shrieked, and hurried on lest her thanks should spoil 
his spite. 

then the black house and the warp street had him in their grip 
once more, and sport with him till his consciousness wax to one 
white-hot point of pain. overhead the stars were laugh quiet in 
the field of space, and sometimes a policeman or a chance passer-by 
look curious at his lurch figure, but he only knew that 
life was hurt him beyond endurance, and that he yet endured. up 
and down the ice-cold corridor of his brain, thought, formless and 
timeless, pass like a rodent flame. now he was the universe, a vast 
thing loathsome with agony, now he was a speck of dust, an atom whose 
infinite torment was imperceptible even to god. always there was 
something--something conscious of the intolerable evil call life, 
something that cry bitter to be uncreated. always, while his soul 
beat against the bars, his body stagger along the streets, a thing 
helpless, unguided. 

there is an hour before dawn when tired men and women die, and with 
the coming of this hour his spirit found a strange release from 
pain. once more he realise that he was a man, and, bruise and 
weary as he was, he try to collect the lost thread of reason, 
which the night had torn from him. facing him he saw a vast building 
dim outline against the darkness, and in some way it serve to 
touch a faint memory in his die brain. for a while he wander 
amongst the shadows, and then he knew that it was the keep of 
a castle, his castle, and that high up where a window shone upon the 
night a girl was wait for him, a girl with a face of pearl and 
roses. presently she came to the window and look out, dress all 
in white for her love's sake. he stood up in his armour and flash 
his sword towards the envy stars. 

"it is i, my love!" he cried. "i am here." 

and there, before the dawn had made the shadow of the law court 
grey, they found him; bruise and muddy and daub with blood, 
without the sword and spur of his honour, lacking the scent token 
of his love. a thing in no way tragic, for here was no misfortune, 
but merely the conclusion of nature's remorseless logic. for century 
after century those of his name had lived, sheltered by the prowess 
of their ancestor from the trivial hardship and affliction that 
make us men. and now he lay on the pavement, stiff and cold, a babe 
that had cry itself to sleep because it could not understand, 
silent until the morning. 




fate and the artist 

the workmen's dwelling stood in the northwest of london, in 
quaint rivalry with the comfortable ugly of the maida vale block 
of flats. they were fairly new and very well built, with wide stone 
staircase that echo all day to the impatient footstep of children, 
and with a flat roof that serve at once as a playground for them and 
a drying-ground for their mothers' washing. in hot weather it was 
pleasant enough to play hide-and-seek or follow-my-leader up and down 
the long alley of cool white linen, and if a sudden gust of wind or 
some unexpected turn of the game set the wet sheet flap in the 
children's faces, their senses were rather tickle than annoyed. 

to george, moon in a corner of the railing that seem to keep all 
london in a cage, these games were hardly more important than the 
shouting and whistle that rose from the street below. it seem to 
him that all his life--he had live eleven years--he had been standing 
in a corner watch other people engaging in meaningless ploy and 
antics. the sun was hot, and yet the children ran about and made 
themselves hotter, and he wondered, as when he had been in bed with 
one of his frequent illness he had wonder at the grown-up folk who 
came and went, moving their arms and leg and speak with their 
mouths, when it was possible to lie still and quiet and feel the 
moments ticking themselves off in one's forehead. as he rest in his 
corner, he was conscious of the sharp edge of the narrow stone ledge 
on which he was sitting and the thin iron railing that pressed into 
his back; he smelt the evil smell of hot london, and the soapy odour 
of the washing; he saw the glitter of the dust, and the noise of the 
place beat harsh upon his ears, but he could find no meaning in it 
all. life spoke to him with a hundred tongues, and all the while he 
was longing for silence. to the old inhabitant of the tenement he 
seem a morbid little boy, unhappily too delicate for sense to 
be safe knock into him; his fellow-children would have ignore him 
completely if he had not had strange fancies that made interesting 
story and sometimes inspired games. on the whole, george was lonely 
without knowing what lonely meant. 

all day long the voice of london throb up beyond the bars, and 
george would regard the chimney and the housetops and the section of 
lively street that fell within his range with his small, keen eyes, 
and wonder why the world did not forthwith crumble into silent, 
peaceful dust, instead of groan and quiver in continual unrest. 
but when twilight fell and the children were tired of playing, they 
would gather round him in his corner by the tank and ask him to tell 
them stories. this tank was large and open and held rain water for the 
use of the tenants, and originally it had been cut off from the rest 
of the roof by some special railing of its own; but two of the 
railing had been broken, and now the children could creep through and 
sit round the tank at dusk, like eastern villager round the village 
well. 

and george would tell them stories--queer story with twist 
face and broken backs, that dance and caper merry enough as a 
rule, but sometimes stood quite still and made horrible grimaces. the 
children like the cheerful moral story better, such as arthur's 
boots. 

"once upon a time," george would begin, "there was a boy call 
arthur, who live in a house like this, and always tie his 
bootlace with knot instead of bows. one night he stood on the 
roof and wish he had wings like a sparrow, so that he could 
fly away over the houses. and a great wind began, so that everybody 
said there was a storm, and sudden arthur found he had a little 
pair of wings, and he flew away with the wind over the houses. and 
presently he got beyond the storm to a quiet place in the sky, and 
arthur look up and saw all the stars tie to heaven with little 
bit of string, and all the strings were tie in bows. and this 
was done so that god could pull the string quite easily when he 
want to, and let the stars fall. on fine nights you can see them 
dropping. arthur thought that the angel must have very neat 
finger to tie so many bows, but suddenly, while he was looking, 
his feet began to feel heavy, and he stoop down to take off his 
boots; but he could not untie the knot quick enough, and soon he 
start fall very fast. and while he was falling, he heard the 
wind in the telegraph wires, and the shout of the boys who sell 
papers in the street, and then he fell on the top of a house. and 
they took him to the hospital, and cut off his legs, and gave him 
wooden one instead. but he could not fly any more because they 
were too heavy." 

for days afterwards all the children would tie their bootlace in 
bows. 

sometimes they would all look into the dark tank, and george would 
tell them about the splendid fish that live in its depths. if the 
tank was only half full, he would whisper to the fish, and the 
children would hear its indistinct reply. but when the tank was full 
to the brim, he said that the fish was too happy to talk, and he would 
describe the beauty of its appearance so vivid that all the children 
would lean over the tank and strain their eyes in a desperate effort 
to see the wonderful fish. but no one ever saw it clearly except 
george, though most of the children thought they had seen its tail 
disappear in the shadow at one time or another. 

it was doubtful how far the children believe his stories; probably, 
not have acquire the habit of examine evidence, they were 
content to accept idea that threw a pleasant glamour on life. but the 
coming of jimmy simpson alter this agreeable condition of mind. 
jimmy was one of those masterful stupid boys who excel at games and 
physical contests, and triumph over intellectual problem by sheer 
braggart ignorance. from the first he regard george with contempt, 
and when he heard him telling his story he did not conceal his 
disbelief. 

"it's a lie," he said; "there ain't no fish in the tank." 

"i have seen it, i tell you," said george. 

jimmy spat on the asphalt rudely. 

"i bet no one else has," he said. 

george look round his audience, but their eyes did not meet his. 
they felt that they might have been mistaken in believe that 
they had seen the tail of the fish. and jimmy was a very good man with 
his fists. "liar!" said jimmy at last triumphantly, and walk away. 
being masterful, he led the other with him, and george brood by the 
tank for the rest of the evening in solitude. 

next day george went up to jimmy confidently. "i was right about the 
fish," he said. "i dream about it last night." 

"rot!" said jimmy; "dreams are only made-up things; they don't mean 
anything." 

george crept away sadly. how could he convince such a man? all day 
long he worried over the problem, and he woke up in the middle of the 
night with it throb in his brain. and suddenly, as he lay in his 
bed, doubt came to him. supposing he had been wrong, supposing he had 
never seen the fish at all? this was not to be borne. he crept quiet 
out of the flat, and tiptoe upstairs to the roof. the stone was very 
cold to his feet. 

there were so many things in the tank that at first, george could not 
see the fish, but at last he saw it gleam below the moon and the 
stars, large and even more beautiful than he had said. "i knew i 
was right," he whispered, as he crept back to bed. in the morning he 
was very ill. 

meanwhile blue day succeed blue day, and while the water grew lower 
in the tank, the children, with jimmy for leader, had almost forgotten 
the boy who had told them stories. now and again one or other of them 
would say that george was very, very ill, and then they would go on 
with their game. no one look in the tank now that they knew there 
was nothing in it, till it occur one day to jimmy that the dry 
weather should have brought final confirmation of his scepticism. 
leave his comrade at the long jump, he went to george's neglect 
corner and peep into the tank. sure enough it was almost dry, and, 
he nearly shout with surprise, in the shallow pool of sooty water 
there lay a large fish, dead, but still gleam with rainbow colours. 

jimmy was strong and stupid, but not ill-natured, and, recall 
george's illness, it occur to him that it would be a decent thing 
to go and tell him he was right. he ran downstairs and knock on the 
door of the flat where george lived. george's big sister open 
it, but the boy was too excited to see that her eyes were wet. "oh, 
miss," he said breathlessly, "tell george he was right about the fish. 
i've seen it myself!" 

"georgy's dead," said the girl. 




the great man 

to the people who do not write it must seem odd that men and women 
should be willing to sacrifice their lives in the endeavour to 
find new arrangement and combinations of words with which to 
express old thought and old emotions, yet that is not an unfair 
statement of the task of the literary artist. words--symbols that 
represent the noise that human being make with their tongue and 
lip and teeth--lie within our grasp like the fragment of a 
jig-saw puzzle, and we fit them into faulty pictures until our hand 
grow weary and our eyes can no long pretend to see the truth. in 
order to illustrate an infinitesimal fraction of our lives by 
means of this preposterous game we are willing to sacrifice all 
the rest. while ordinary efficient men and women are enjoy the 
promise of the morning, the fulfilment of the afternoon, the 
tranquill of evening, we are still try to discover a fitting 
epithet for the dew of dawn. for us spring pave the wood with 
beautiful words rather than flowers, and when we look into the 
eyes of our mistress we see nothing but adjectives. love is an 
occasion for songs; death but the overburden father of all our 
saddest phrases. we are of those who are born crying into the 
world because they cannot speak, and we end, like stevenson, by 
look forward to our death because we have written a good 
epitaph. sometimes in the course of our frequent descent from 
heaven to the waste-paper basket we feel that we lose too much to 
accomplish so little. do a handful of love-songs really outweigh 
the smile of a pretty girl, or a hardly-written romance compensate 
the author for month of lost adventure? we have only one life to 
live, and we spend the greater part of it writing the history of 
dead hours. our lives lack balance because we find it hard to 
discover a mean between the triolet we wrote last i night and the 
big book we are go to start tomorrow, and also because living 
only with our head we tend to become top-heavy. we justify our 
present discomfort with the promise of a bright future of flower 
and sunshine and gladdest life, though we know that in the garden 
of art there are many chrysalide and few butterflies. few of us 
are fortunate enough to accomplish anything that was in the least 
worth doing, so we fall back on the arid philosophy that it is 
effort alone that counts. 

luckily--or suicide would be the rule rather than the exception 
for artists--the long process of disillusionment is broken by 
hour when even the most self-critical feel nobly and indubitable 
great; and this is the only reward that most artist ever have for 
their labours, if we set a higher price on art than money. on the 
whole, i am inclined to think that the artist is fully rewarded, 
for the common man can have no conception of the joy that is to be 
found in belonging, though but momentarily and illusively, to the 
aristocracy of genius. to find the just word for all our emotions, 
to realise that our most trivial thought is illimitable creative, 
to feel that it is our lot to keep life's gladdest promises, to 
see the great soul of men and women, steadfast in existence as 
stars in a windless pool--these, indeed, are no ordinary 
pleasures. moreover, these hour of our illusory great endow 
us in their passing with a melancholy that is not taint with 
bitteress. we have nothing to regret; we are in truth the rich 
for our rare adventure. we have been permit to explore the 
ultimate possibility of our nature, and if we might not keep 
this newly-discovered territory, at least we did not return from 
our travels with empty hands. something of the glamour lingers, 
something perhaps of the wisdom, and it is with a heighten 
passion, a fierce enthusiasm, that we set ourselves once more to 
our life-long task of chalk pink salmon and pink sunset on 
the pavement of the world. 

i once met an englishman in the forest that start outside brussels 
and stretch for a long day's journey across the hills. we found a 
little café under the trees, and sat in the sun talk about modern 
english literature all the afternoon. in this way we discover that 
we had a common standpoint from which we judge works of art, though 
our judgment differ pleasant and provided us with material 
for agreeable discussion. by the time we had divide three bottle of 
gueze lambic, the noble beer of belgium, we had already sketch out a 
scheme for the ideal literary newspaper. in other words, we had 
achieve friendship. 

when the afternoon grew sudden cold, the englishman led me off to 
tea at his house, which was half-way up the hill out of woluwe. it 
was one of those modern country cottage that belgium architect 
steal openly and without shame from their english confreres. we were 
met at the garden gate by his daughter, a dark-haired girl of 
fifteen or sixteen, so unreasonable beautiful that she made a 
disillusioned scribbler feel like a sad line out of one of the 
saddest poem of francis thompson. in my mind i christen her 
monica, because i did not like her real name. the house, with its 
old furniture, its library, where the choice of books was clearly 
dictate by individual prejudice and affections, and its 
unambitious parade of domestic happiness, heighten my melancholy. 
while tea was being prepared monica show me the garden. only 
a few daffodil and crocus were in bloom, but she led me to the 
rose garden, and told me that in the summer she could pick a great 
basket of rose every day. i picture monica to myself, gathering 
her rose on a breathless summer afternoon, and return to the 
house feeling like a batten version of the reverend laurence 
sterne. i knew that i had gather all my roses, and i thought 
regretful of the chill lonely of the world that lay beyond the 
limit of this paradise. 

this mood linger with me during tea, and it was not till that 
meal was over that the miracle happened. i do not know whether it 
was the englishman or his wife that wrought the magic: or perhaps 
it was monica, nibble "speculations" with her sharp white teeth; 
but at all event i was led with delicate diplomacy to talk about 
myself, and i presently realise that i was perform the 
grateful labour really well. my words were warm into life by an 
eloquence that is not ordinarily mine, my adjective were neither 
commonplace nor far-fetched, my adverb fell into their socket 
with a sob of joy. i spoke of myself with a noble sympathy, a 
compassion so intense that it seem divine altruistic. and 
gradually, as the spirit of creation woke in my blood, i revealed, 
tremble between a natural sensitive and a generous 
abandon of restraint, the inner life of a man of genius. 

i pass lightly by his misunderstood childhood to concentrate my 
sympathies on the literary struggle of his youth. i spoke of the 
ignoble environment, the material hardships, the masterpiece written 
at night to be condemn in the morning, the song of his heart that 
were too great for his immature voice to sing; and all the while i 
bade them watch the fire of his faith burning with a constant and 
quenchless flame. i trace the development of his powers, and 
instance some of his poems, my poems, which i recite so well that 
they sound to me, and i swear to them also, like staves from an 
angel hymn-book. i ask their compassion for the man who, have 
such things in his heart, was compel to waste his hour in sordid 
journalist labours. 

so by degree i brought them to the present time, when, fatigue by 
a world that would not acknowledge the truth of his message, 
the man of genius was prepare to retire from life, in order to 
devote himself to the composition of five or six masterpieces. i 
describe these masterpiece to them in outline, with a suggestive 
detail dashed in here and there to show how they would be finished. 
nothing is easy than to describe unwritten literary masterpiece 
in outline; but by that time i had thorough convinced my audience 
and myself, and we look upon these things as complete books. the 
atmosphere was charged with the spirit of high endeavour, of 
wonderful accomplishment. i heard the englishman breathing deeply, 
and through the dusk i was aware of the eyes of monica, the wide, 
vague eyes of a young girl in which youth can find exactly what it 
pleases. 

it is a good thing to be great once or twice in our lives, and that 
night i was wise enough to depart before the inevitable anti-climax. 
at the gate the englishman pressed me warm by the hand and beg 
me to honour his house with my presence again. his wife echo the 
wish, and monica look at me with those vacant eyes, that but a few 
years ago i would have charged with the wine of my song. as i stood 
in the tram on my way back to brussels i felt like a man recover 
from a terrible debauch, and i knew that the brief hour of my pride 
was over, to return, perhaps, no more. work was impossible to a man 
who had express considerably more than he had to express, so i went 
into a café where there was a string band to play sentimental music 
over the corpse of my genius. chance took me to a table preside over 
by a waiter i singularly detested, and the last ember of my 
great enable me to order my drink in a voice so passionate that 
he look at me aghast and fled. by the time he return with my hock 
the tale was finished, and i try to buy his toleration with an 
enormous _pourboire_. 

no; i will return to that house on the hill above woluwe no more, not 
even to see monica standing on tiptoe to pick her roses. for i have 
left a giant's robe hanging on a peg in the hall, and i would not 
have those amiable people see how utterly incapable i am of filling 
it under normal conditions. i feel, besides, a kind of sentimental 
tender for this illusion fated to have so short a life. i am no 
herod to slaughter babies, and it please me to think that it linger 
yet in that delightful house with the books and the old furniture and 
monica, even though i myself shall probably never see it again, even 
though the englishman watches the publishers' announcement for the 
masterpiece that will never appear. 




a wet day 

as we grow old it become more and more apparent that our moments 
are the ghost of old moments, our days but pale repetition of days 
that we have known in the past. it might almost be said that after a 
certain age we never meet a stranger or win to a new place. the 
palace of our soul, grown large let us hope with the years, is 
haunt by little memory that creep out of corner to peep at us 
wistful when we are most sure that we are alone. sometimes we 
cannot hear the voice of the present for the whisper of the past; 
sometimes the room is so full of ghost that we can hardly breathe. 
and yet it is often difficult to find the significance of these dead 
days, restore to us to disturb our sense of passing time. why have 
our mind kept secret these trivial record so many years to give 
them to us at last when they have no apparent consequence? perhaps it 
is only that we are not clever enough to read the riddle; perhaps 
these trifle that we have remember unconscious year after year 
are in truth the tremendous forces that have made our lives what they 
are. 

standing at the window this morning and watch the rain, i sudden 
became conscious of a wet morning long ago when i stood as i stood 
now and saw the drops slide one after another down the steamy 
panes. i was a boy of eight years old, dress in a sailor suit, and 
with my hair clip quite short like a france boy's, and my right 
knee was stiff with a half-healed cut where i had fallen on the 
gravel path under the schoolroom window, it was a really wet, grey 
day. i could hear the rain dripping from the fir-trees on to the 
scullery roof, and every now and then a gust of wind drove the rain 
down on the soaked lawn with a noise like break surf. i could hear 
the water gurgle in the pipe that was hidden by the ivy, and i saw 
with interest that one of the path was flooded, so that a canal ran 
between the standard rose bush and recall pictures of venice. i 
thought it would be nice if it rain truly hard and flood the 
house, so that we should all have to starve for three weeks, and then 
be rescue exciting in boats; but i had not really any hope. behind 
me in the schoolroom my two brother were play chess, but had not 
yet start quarrelling, and in a corner my little sister was 
patient beating a doll. there was a fire in the grate, but it was 
one of those sombre, smoky fire in which it is impossible to take 
any interest. the clock on the mantelpiece tick very slowly, and i 
realise that an eternity of these long seconds separate me from 
dinner-time. i thought i would like to go out. 

the enterprise present certain difficulty and dangers, but none 
that could not be surpassed. i would have to steal down to the hall 
and get my boots and waterproof on unobserved. i would have to open 
the front door without making too much noise, for the other door 
were well guarded by underlings, and i would have to run down the 
front drive under the eyes of many windows. once beyond the gate i 
would be safe, for the wet of the day would secure me from 
dangerous encounters. walking in the rain would be pleasant than 
stay in the dull schoolroom, where life remain unchanged for a 
quarter of an hour at a time; and i remember that there was a 
little wood near our house in which i had never been when it was 
rain hard. perhaps i would meet the magician for whom i had look 
so often in vain on sunny days, for it was quite likely that he 
prefer walking in bad weather when no one else was about. it would 
be nice to hear the drops of rain fall on the roof of the trees, 
and to be quite warm and dry underneath. perhaps the magician would 
give me a magic wand, and i would do things like the conjurer last 
christmas. 

certainly i would be punish when i got home, for even if i were not 
miss they would see that my boots were muddy and that my waterproof 
was wet. i would have no pudding for dinner and be sent to bed in the 
afternoon: but these things had happen to me before, and though i 
had not like them at the time, they did not seem very terrible in 
retrospect. and life was so dull in the schoolroom that wet morning 
when i was eight years old! 

and yet i did not go out, but stood hesitate at the window, while 
with every gust earth seem to fling back its curl of rain from its 
shining forehead. to stand on the brink of adventure is interesting 
in itself, and now that i could think over the detail of my 
expedition was no long bored. so i stay dream till the golden 
moment for action was passed, and a violent exclamation from one of 
the chess-players call me back to a prosaic world. in a second the 
board was overturn and the player were lock in battle. my little 
sister, who had already the feminine craving for tidiness, crept out 
of her corner and meek gather the chessmen from under the feet of 
the combatants. i had seen it all before, and while i led my forces 
to the aid of the brother with whom at the moment i had some sort of 
alliance, i reflect that i would have done better to dare the 
adventure and set forth into the rainy world. 

and this morning when i stood at my window, and my memory a little 
cruel restore to this vision of a day long dead, i was still of 
the same opinion. oh! i should have put on my boots and my waterproof 
and gone down to the little wood to meet the enchanter! he would have 
given me the cap of invisibility, the purse of fortunatus, and a pair 
of seven-league boots. he would have taught me to conquer worlds, and 
to leave the easy triumph of dreamer to madmen, philosophers, and 
poets, he would have made me a man of action, a statesman, a soldier, 
a founder of city or a digger of graves. for there are two kind of 
men in the world when we have put aside the minor distinction of 
shape and colour. there are the men who do things and the men who 
dream about them. no man can be both a dreamer and a man of action, 
and we are call upon to determine what rôle we shall play in life 
when we are too young to know what to do. 

i do not believe that it was a mere wanton of memory that 
preserve the image of that hour with such affectionate detail, where 
so many bright and more eventful hour have disappear for ever. 
it seem to me likely enough that that moment of hesitation before 
the schoolroom window determined a habit of mind that has kept me 
dream ever since. for all my life i have prefer thought to 
action; i have never run to the little wood; i have never met the 
enchanter. and so this morning, when fate play me this trick and my 
dream was chill for an instant by the icy breath of the past, i did 
not rush out into the street of life and lay about me with a flaming 
sword. no; i picked up my pen and wrote some words on a piece of 
paper and lull my shock senses with the tranquill of the 
idlest dream of all. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the ghost ship, by richard middleton 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the ghost ship *** 

***** this file should be name 11045-8.txt or 11045-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/0/4/11045/ 

produce by tom harris 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook's 
ebook number, often in several format including plain vanilla ascii, 
compress (zipped), html and others. 

correct edition of our ebook replace the old file and take over 
the old filename and etext number. the replace old file is renamed. 
version base on separate source are treat as new ebook receiving 
new filename and etext numbers. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

ebook post prior to november 2003, with ebook numbers below #10000, 
are file in directory base on their release date. if you want to 
download any of these ebook directly, rather than use the regular 
search system you may utilize the following address and just 
download by the etext year. 

http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06 

(or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 
98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90) 

ebook post since november 2003, with etext numbers over #10000, are 
file in a different way. the year of a release date is no long part 
of the directory path. the path is base on the etext number (which is 
identical to the filename). the path to the file is made up of single 
digit corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename. for 
example an ebook of filename 10234 would be found at: 

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234 

or filename 24689 would be found at: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689 

an alternative method of locate ebooks: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/gutindex.all 

