the project gutenberg ebook of uncanny tales, by various 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: uncanny tale 

author: various 

editor: c. arthur pearson 

release date: september 13, 2008 [ebook #26606] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook uncanny tale *** 




produce by david clarke, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 









uncanny tale 


london 
c. arthur pearson, limited 
henrietta street, w.c. 
1916 




contents 


page 

i. the unknown quantity 7 

ii. the armless man 19 

iii. the tomtom clue 33 

iv. the case of sir alister moeran 43 

v. the kiss 63 

vi. the goth 73 

vii. the last ascent 88 

viii. the terror by night 97 

ix. the tragedy at the "loup noir" 113 




uncanny story 




i 

the unknown quantity 


professor william james maynard was in a singularly happy and contented 
mood as he stroll down the high street after a long and satisfactory 
interview with the solicitor to his late cousin, whose sole heir he was. 

it was exactly a month by the calendar since he had murder this 
cousin, and everything had gone most satisfactory since. the fortune 
was prove quite as large as he had expected, and not even an inquest 
had been held upon the dead man. the coroner had decided that it was not 
necessary, and the professor had agree with him. 

at the funeral the professor had been the principal mourner, and the 
local paper had comment sympathetic on his evident emotion. this 
had been quite genuine, for the professor had been fond of his relative, 
who had always been very good to him. but still, when an old man remains 
obstinate healthy, when his doctor can say with confidence that he is 
good for another twenty years at least, and when he stand between you 
and a large fortune which you need, and of which you can make much 
better use in the cause of science and the pursuit of knowledge, what 
alternative is there? it become necessary to take steps. therefore, the 
professor had taken steps. 

look back to-day on that day a month ago, and the critical preceding 
week, the professor felt that the steps he had taken had been as 
judicious as successful. he had set himself to solve a problem in higher 
mathematics. he had found it easy to solve than many he was oblige to 
grapple with in the course of his studies. 

a policeman salute as the professor passed, and he acknowledge it with 
the charming old world courtesy that made him so popular a figure in the 
town. across the way was the doctor who had certify the cause of 
death. the professor, passing benevolent on, was glad he had now 
enough money to carry out his projects. he would be able to publish at 
once his great work on "the secondary variation of the differential 
calculus," that hitherto had languish in manuscript. it would make a 
sensation, he thought; there was more than one generally accept theory 
he had challenge or contradict in it. and he would put in hand at 
once his great, his long project work, "a history of the higher 
mathematics." it would take twenty years to complete, it would cost 
twenty thousand pound or more, and it would breathe into mathematics 
the new, vivid life that bergson's works have breathe into 
metaphysics. 

the professor thought very kindly of the dead cousin, whose money would 
provide for this great work. he wish greatly the dead man could know 
to what high use his fortune was designed. 

coming towards him he saw the wife of the vicar of his parish. the 
professor was a regular church-goer. the vicar's wife saw him, too, and 
beamed. she and her husband were more than a little proud of have so 
well known a man in their congregation. she held out her hand and the 
professor was about to take it when she drew it back with a startle 
movement. 

"oh, i beg your pardon!" she exclaimed, distressed, as she saw him raise 
his eyebrows. "there is blood on it." 

her eyes were fixed on his right hand, which he was still holding out. 
in fact, on the palm a small drop of blood show distinct against the 
firm, pink flesh. surprised, the professor took out his handkerchief and 
wipe it away. he notice that the vicar's wife was wearing white kid 
gloves. 

"oh, i beg your pardon!" she said again. "it--it startle me somehow. i 
thought you must have cut yourself. i hope it's not much?" 

"some scratch, i suppose," he said. "it's nothing." 

the vicar's wife, still slightly discomposed, launch out into some 
parochial matter she had wish to mention to him. they chat a few 
moments and then parted. the professor took an opportunity to look at 
his hand. he could detect no sign of any cut or abrasion, the skin 
seem whole everywhere. he look at his handkerchief. there was still 
visible on it the stain where he had wipe his hand, and this stain 
seem certainly blood. 

"odd!" he mutter as he put the handkerchief back in his pocket. "very 
odd!" 

his thought turn again to his project "a history of the higher 
mathematics," and he forgot all about the incident till, as it happen 
that day month, the first of the month by the calendar, when he was 
sitting in his study with an eminent colleague to whom he was explain 
his great scheme. 

"if you are able to carry it out," the colleague said slowly, "your book 
will mark an epoch in human thought. but the cost will be tremendous." 

"i estimate it at twenty thousand pounds," answer the professor 
calmly. "i am fully prepared to spend twice as much. you know i have 
recently inherit forty thousand pound from a relative?" 

the eminent colleague nod and look very impressed. 

"it is magnificent," he said warmly, "magnificent." he added: "you've 
cut yourself, do you know?" 

"cut myself?" the professor echoed, surprised. 

"yes," answer the eminent colleague, "there is blood upon your 
hand--your right hand." 

in fact a spot of blood, slightly large than that which had appear 
before, show plainly upon the professor's right hand. he wipe it away 
with his handkerchief, and went on talk eagerly, for he was deep 
interested. he did not think of the matter again till just as he was 
get into bed, when he notice a red stain upon his handkerchief. he 
frown and examine his hand carefully. there was no sign of any wound 
or cut from which the blood could have come, and he frown again. 

"very odd!" he muttered. 

a calendar hanging on the wall remind him that it was the first of the 
month. 

the days passed, the incident fade from his memory, and four week 
later he came down one morning to breakfast in an unusually good temper. 
there was a certain theory he had work on the night before he meant to 
write to a friend about. it seem to him his demonstration had been 
really brilliant, and then, also, he was already plan out with great 
success the detail of the scheme for his great work. 

he was making an excellent breakfast, for his appetite was always good, 
and, need some more cream, he rang the bell. the maid appeared, he 
show her the empty jug, and as she took it she drop it with a 
sudden cry, smashing it to pieces on the floor. very pale, she stammer 
out: 

"beg pardon, sir, your hand--there is blood upon your hand." 

in fact, on the professor's right hand there show a drop of blood, 
perceptible large this time than before. the professor stare at it 
stupidly. he was sure it had not been there a moment before, and he 
notice by the heading of the newspaper at the side of his plate that 
this was the first of the month. 

with a hasty movement of his napkin he wipe the drop of blood away. the 
maid, still apologising, began to pick up the pieces of the jug she had 
broken; but the professor had no further appetite for his breakfast. he 
silence her with a gesture, and, leave a piece of toast half-eaten on 
his plate, he got up and went into his study. 

all this was trivial, absurd even. yet somehow it disturbed him. he got 
out a magnify glass and examine his hand under it. there was nothing 
to account for the presence of the drop of blood he and the maid had 
seen. it occur to him that he might have cut himself in shaving; but 
when he look in the mirror he could find no trace of even the 
slightest wound. 

he decided that, though he had not been aware of it, his nerves must be 
a little out of order. that was disconcerting. he had not taken his 
nerves into consideration for the simple reason that he had never known 
that he possessed any. he made up his mind to treat himself to a holiday 
in switzerland. one or two difficult ascent might brace him up a bit. 

three days later he was in switzerland, and a few days later again he 
was on the summit of a minor but still difficult peak. it had been an 
exhilarating climb, and he had enjoy it. he said something laughing 
to the head guide to the effect that climb was good sport and a fine 
test for the nerves. the head guide agreed, and add polite that if 
the nerves of monsieur the professor had shown sign of failing on the 
lower glacier, for example, they might all have been in difficulties. 
the professor thrill with pleasure at the head guide's imply praise. 
he was glad to know on such good authority that his nerves were all 
right, and the incident that had driven him there began to fade in his 
memory. 

nevertheless, he found himself watch the calendar with a certain 
interest, and when he woke on the morning of the first day of the next 
month he glance quick at his right hand. there was nothing there. 

he dress and spent, as he had planned, a quiet day, busy with his 
correspondence. his spirits rose as the day passed. he was still 
watchful, but more confident; and, after dinner, though he had meant to 
go straight to his room, he agree to join in a suggest game of 
bridge. they were cutting for partner when one of the ladies who was to 
take part in the game drop with a little cry the card she had just 
lifted. 

"oh, there is blood upon your hand," she cried, "on your right hand, 
professor!" 

upon the professor's right hand there show now a drop of blood, large 
still then those other three had been. yet the very moment before it had 
not been there. the professor put down his cards without a word, and 
left the room, go straight upstairs. 

the drop of blood was still standing on his hand. he soaked it up 
careful with some cotton-wool he had, and was not surprise to find 
beneath no sign or trace of any cut or wound. the cotton-wool he made up 
careful into a parcel and address it to an analytic chemist he 
knew, inclose with it a short note. 

he rang the bell, sent the parcel to the post, and then he got out pen 
and paper and set himself to solve this problem, as in his life he had 
solve so many others. 

only this time it seem somehow as though the data were insufficient. 

idle his pen trace upon the paper in front of him a large _x_, the sign 
of the unknown quantity. 

but how, in this case, to find out what was the unknown quantity? his 
hand, his firm and steady hand, shook so that he could no long hold 
his pen. he rang the bell again and ordered a stiff whisky-and-soda. he 
was a man of almost ascetic habits, but to-night he felt that he need 
some stimulant. 

neither did he sleep very well. 

the next day he return to england. almost at once he went to see his 
friend, the analytic chemist, to whom he had sent the parcel from 
switzerland. 

"mammalian blood," pronounced the chemist, "probably human--rather a 
curious thing about it, too." 

"what's that?" ask the professor. 

"why," his friend answered, "i was able to identify the distinctive 
bacillus----" he name the rare bacillus of an unusual and obscure 
disease. and this disease was that from which the professor's cousin had 
died. 

the professor was a man interested in all phenomena. in other 
circumstances he would have observe keen that which now occurred, 
when the hair of his head underwent a curious involuntary stiffening and 
bristle process that in popular but sufficient accurate terms, might 
be describe as "standing on end." but at the moment he was in no state 
for scientific observations. 

he got out of the house somehow. he said he did not feel well, and his 
friend, the chemist, agree that his holiday in switzerland did not seem 
to have done him much good. 

the professor went straight home and shut himself up in his study. it 
was a fine room, range all round with books. on the shelves nearest to 
his hand stood volumes on mathematics, the theory of mathematics, the 
study of mathematics, pure mathematics, applied mathematics. but there 
was not any one of these books that told him anything about such a thing 
as this. though, it is true, there were many reference in them, here 
and there, to _x_, the unknown quantity. 

the professor took his pen and wrote a large _x_ upon the sheet of paper 
in front of him. 

"an unknown quantity!" he muttered. "an unknown--quantity!" 

the days pass peacefully. nothing was out of the ordinary except that 
the professor develop an odd trick of continual glancing at his 
right hand. he wash it a good deal, too. but the first of the month 
was not yet. 

on the last day of the month he told his housekeeper that he was feeling 
a little unwell. she was not surprised, for she had thought him look 
ill for some time past. he told her he would probably spend the next day 
in bed for a thorough rest, and she agree that that would be a very 
good idea. when he was in his own room and had undressed, he bandage 
his right hand with care, tie it up careful and thorough with 
three or four of his large linen handkerchiefs. 

"whatever comes, shall now show," he said to himself. 

he stay in bed accordingly the next day. his housekeeper was a little 
uneasy about him. he ate nothing and his eyes were strange bright and 
feverish. she overheard him once mutter something to himself about 
"the unknown quantity," and that made her think that he had been working 
too hard. 

she decided he must see the doctor. the professor refuse peremptorily. 
he declared he would be quite well again in the morning. the 
housekeeper, an old servant, agreed, but sent for the doctor all the 
same; and when he had come the professor felt he could not refuse to see 
him without appear peculiar. and he did not wish to appear peculiar. 
so he saw the doctor, but declared there was nothing much the matter, he 
merely felt a little unwell and out of sort and tired. 

"you have hurt your hand?" the doctor asked, notice how it was 
bandaged. 

"i cut it slightly--a trifle," the professor answered. 

"yes," the doctor answered, "i see there is blood on it." 

"what?" the professor stammered. 

"there is blood upon your hand," the doctor repeated. 

the professor looked. in fact, a deep, wide stain show crimson upon 
the bandage in which he had swathe his hand. yet he knew that the 
moment before the linen had been fair and white and clean. 

"it is nothing," he said quickly, hiding his hand beneath the bed 
clothes. 

the doctor, a little puzzled, took his leave, but had not gone ten 
yard when the housekeeper flew scream after him. it seem she had 
heard a fall, and when she had gone into the professor's bedroom she had 
found him lie there dead upon the hearthrug. there was a razor in his 
hand, and there was a ghastly gash across his throat. 

the doctor went back at a run, but there was nothing he or any man could 
do. one thing he noticed, with curiosity, was that the bandage had been 
torn away from the dead man's hand and that oddly enough there seem to 
be on the hand no sign of any cut or wound. there was a large solitary 
drop of blood on the palm, at the root of the thumb; but, of course, 
that was no great wonder, for the wound the dead man had dealt himself 
had bled freely. 

apparently death had not been quite instantaneous, for with a last 
effort the professor seem to have trace an _x_ upon the floor in his 
own blood with his forefinger. the doctor mention this at the 
inquest--the coroner had decided at once that in this case an inquest 
was certainly necessary--and he suggest that it show the professor 
had work too hard and was suffering from overwork which had disturbed 
his mental balance. 

the coroner took the same view, and in his short address to the jury 
adduce the incident as proof of a passing mental disturbance. 

"very probably," said the coroner, "there was some problem that had 
worried him, and that he was still endeavour to work out. as you are 
aware, gentlemen, the sign _x_ is use to symbolise the unknown 
quantity." 

an appropriate verdict was accordingly returned, and the professor was 
duly inter in the same family vault as that in which so short a time 
previous his cousin had been laid to rest. 




ii 

the armless man 


i first met bob master in the hotel at a place call fourteen streams, 
not very far from kimberley. 

i had for some month been try to find gold or diamond by digging 
hole in the veldt. but since this has little or nothing to do with the 
story, i pass by my mining adventure and come back to the hotel. i came 
to it very readily that afternoon, for i was very thirsty. 

a tall man standing at the bar turn his head as i enter and said 
"good-day" to me. i return the compliment, but took no particular 
notice of him at first. 

sudden i heard the man say to the barman: 

"i'm ready for another drink." 

that surprise me, because his glass was still three-quarters full. but 
i was still more startle by the action of the barman who lift up the 
glass and held it whilst the man drank. 

then i saw the reason. the man had no arms. 

you know the easy way in which englishmen chum together anywhere out of 
england, whilst in their native country nothing save a formal 
introduction will make them acquainted? i made some remark to master 
which led to another from him, and in five minutes' time we were 
chat on all sort of topics. 

i learnt that masters, bound for england, had come in to fourteen 
stream to catch the train from kimberley, and, have a few hour to 
wait, had stroll up to the collection of tin hut calling itself a 
town. 

i was go down to kimberley too, so of course we went together, and 
were quite old friends by the time we reach that city. 

we had a wash and something to eat, and then we walk round to the 
post-office. i use to have my letters address there, _poste 
restante_, and call in for them when i happen to be in kimberley. 

i found several letters, one of which alter the whole course of my 
life. this was from messrs. harvey, filson, and harvey, solicitors, 
lincoln's inn fields. it informed me that the sudden death of my cousin 
had so affected my uncle's health that he had follow his only son 
within the month. the senior branch of the family being thus extinct the 
whole of the entail estate had devolve on me. 

the first thing i did was to send off two cablegram to say that i was 
coming home by the first available boat, one to the solicitors, the 
other to nance milward. 

master and i arrange to come home together and eventually reach cape 
town. there we had considerable trouble at the shipping office. it was 
just about the time of year when people who live in africa to make 
money, come over to england to spend it, and in consequence the boat 
were very crowded. master demand a cabin to himself, a luxury which 
was not to be had, though there was one that he and i could share. he 
made a tremendous fuss about do this, and i thought it very strange, 
because i had assist him in many ways which his mutilation render 
necessary. however, he had to give way in the end, and we embark on 
the castle liner. 

on the voyage he told me how he had lost his arms. it seem that he had 
been sent up country on some government job or other, and had had the 
ill-fortune to be capture by the natives. they treat him quite well 
at first, but gave him to understand that he must not try to escape. i 
suppose that to most men such a warning would be a direct incite to 
make the attempt. master made it and failed. they cut off his right arm 
as a punishment. he wait until the wound was heal and try again. 
again he failed. this time they cut off his other arm. 

"good lord," i cried. "what devils!" 

"weren't they!" he said. "and yet, you know, they were quite 
good-tempered chaps when you didn't cross them. i wasn't go to be 
beaten by a lot of naked nigger though, and i made a third attempt. 

"i succeed all right that time, though, of course, it was much more 
difficult. i really don't know at all how i manage to worry through. 
you see, i could only eat plant and leaves and such fruit as i came 
across; but i'd learnt as much as i could of the local botany in the 
intervals." 

"was it worth while?" i asked. "i think the first failure and its result 
would have satisfy me." 

"yes," he said slowly, "it was worth while. you see, my wife was wait 
for me at home, and i want to see her again very badly--you don't 
know how badly." 

"i think i can imagine," i said. "because there is a girl wait for me 
too at home." 

"i saw her before she died," he continued. 

"died?" i said. 

"yes," he answered. "she was die when i reach home at last, but i 
was with her at the end. that was something, wasn't it?" 

i do hate people to tell me this sort of thing. not because i do not 
feel sorry for them; on the contrary, i feel so sorry that i absolutely 
fail to find words to express my sympathy. i tried, however, to show it 
in other ways, by the attention i paid him and by anticipate his 
every wish. 

yet there were many things that were astonish about his actions, 
things that i wonder now i did not realise must have been impossible for 
him to do for himself, and that yet were done. but he was so 
surprising dexterous with his lips, and feet too, when he was in his 
cabin that i suppose i put them down to that. 

i remember waking up one night and look out of my bunk to see him 
standing on the floor. the cabin was only faint lit by a moonbeam 
which found its way through the porthole. i could not see clearly, but i 
fancy that he walk to the door and open it, and closed it behind 
him. he did it all very quickly, as quick as i could have done it. as 
i say, i was very sleepy, but the sight of the door opening and shut 
like that woke me thoroughly. sitting up i shout at him. 

he heard me and open the door again, easily, too, much more easily 
than he seem to be able to shut it when he saw me look at him. 

"hullo! awake, old chap?" he said. "what is it?" 

"er--nothing," i said. "or rather i suppose i was only half awake; but 
you seem to open that door so easily that it quite startle me." 

"one do not always like to let other see the shift to which one has 
to resort," was all the answer he gave me. 

but i worried over it. the thing bother me, because he had made no 
attempt to explain. 

that was not the only thing i noticed. 

two or three days later we were sitting together on deck. i had offer 
to read to him. i notice that he got up out of his chair. sudden i 
saw the chair move. it gave me a great shock, for the chair twist 
apparently of its own volition, so that when he sat down again the 
sunlight was at his back and not in his eyes, as i knew it had been 
previously. but i reasoned with myself and manage to satisfy myself 
that he must have turn the chair round with his foot. it was just 
possible that he could have done so, for it had one of those light 
wicker-work seats. 

we had a lovely voyage for three-quarters of the way, and the sea was as 
calm as any duck-pond. but that was all alter when we pass cape 
finisterre. i have done a lot of knock about on the ocean one way and 
another, but i never saw the bay of biscay deserve its reputation 
better. 

i'd much rather see what is go on than be coop up below, and after 
lunch i told bob i was go up on deck. 

"i'll only stay there for a bit," i said. "you make yourself comfortable 
down here." 

i fill his pipe, put it in his mouth, and gave him a match; then i 
left him. 

i made my way up and down the deck for a time, clutch hold of 
everything handy, and rather enjoy it, though the wave drench me to 
the skin. 

presently i saw master come out of the companion-way and make his way 
very skilful towards me. of course it was fearful dangerous for him. 

i stagger towards him, and, putt my lip to his ear, shout to him 
to go below at once. 

"oh, i shall be all right!" he said, and laughed. 

"you'll be drowned--drowned," i screamed. "there was a wave just now 
that--well, if i hadn't been able to cling on with both hand like grim 
death, i should have gone overboard. go below." 

he laugh again and shook his head. 

and then what i dread happened. a vast mountain of green water lift 
up its bulk and fell upon us in a ravening cataract. i clutch at 
masters, but try to save him and myself handicap me badly. the 
strength of that mass of water was terrible. it seem to snatch at 
everything with giant hands, and drag all with it. it toss a hen-coop 
high, and carry it through the rails. 

i felt the grip of my right hand loosen, and the next instant was 
carried, still clutch master with my left, towards that gap in the 
bulwark. 

i manage to seize the end of the broken rail. it held us for a moment, 
then gave, and for a moment i hung sheer over the vessel's side. 

in that instant i felt finger tighten on my arm, tighten till they bit 
into the flesh, and i was pull back into safety. 

together we stagger back, and got below somehow. i was tremble like 
a leaf, and the sweat drip from me. i almost scream aloud. 

it was not that i was frightened of death. i've seen too much of that in 
many parts of the earth to dread it greatly. it was the thought of those 
finger tighten on me where no finger were. 

master did not speak a word, nor did i, until we found ourselves in the 
cabin. 

i tore the wet clothes off me and turn my arm to the mirror. i knew i 
could not have been mistaken when i felt them. 

there on the upper arm, above the line of sunburn that one get from 
working with sleeve roll up, there on the white skin show _the red 
mark of four slender finger and a thumb_! i sat down sudden at sight 
of them, and pull open a drawer, found a flask of neat brandy, and 
gulp it down, empty it in one gulp. 

then i turn to him and pointed to the marks. 

"in god's name, how came these here?" i said. "what--what happen up 
there on deck?" 

he look at me very gravely. 

"i save you," he said, "or rather i didn't, for i could not. but _she_ 
did." 

"what do you mean?" i stammered. 

"let me get these clothes off," he said, "and some dry one on; and i'll 
tell you." 

words fail to describe my feelings as i watch the clothes come off him 
and dry one go on just as if hand were arrange them. 

i sat and shuddered. i try to close my eyes, but the weird, unnatural 
sight drew them as a lodestone. 

"i'm sorry that you should have had this shock," he said. "i know what 
it must have been like, though it was not so bad for me when they seem 
to come, for they came gradual as time went on." 

"what came gradually?" i asked. 

"why, these arms! they're what i'm telling you about. you ask me to 
tell you, i thought?" 

"did i?" i said. "i don't know what i'm saying or asking. i think i'm 
go mad, quite mad." 

"no," he said, "you're as sane as i am, only when you come across 
something strange, unique for that matter, you are naturally terrified. 
well, it was like this. i told you about my adventure with the nigger 
up country. that was quite true. they cut off both my arms--you can see 
the stump for that matter. and i told you that i came home to find my 
wife dying. her heart had always been weak, i'd known that, and it had 
gradual grown more feeble. there must have been, indeed there was, a 
strange sort of telepathy between us. she had had fearful attack of 
heart failure on both occasion when the nigger had mutilate me, i 
learnt on compare notes. 

"but i had known too, somehow, that i must escape at all costs. it was 
the knowledge that made me try again after each failure. i should have 
gone on try to escape as long as i had lived, or rather as long as 
she had lived. i knelt beside her bed and she put out her arms and laid 
them round my neck. 

"'so you have come back to me before i go,' she said. 'i knew you must, 
because i call you so. but you have been long in coming, almost too 
long. but i knew i had to see you again before i died.' 

"i broke down then. i was sorely tried. no arms even to put round her! 

"'darling, stay with me for a little, only for a little while!' i 
sobbed. 

"she shook her head feebly. 'it is no use, my dear,' she said, 'i must 
go.' 

"'i'll come with you,' i said, 'i'll not live without you.' 

"she shook her head again. 

"'you must be brave, bob. i shall be watch you afterwards just as 
much as if i still live on earth. if only i could give you my arms! a 
poor, weak woman's arms, but better than none, dear.' 

"she die some week later. i spent all the time at her bedside, i 
hardly left her. her arms were round me when she died. shall i ever feel 
them round me again? i wonder! you see, they are mine now. 

"they came to me gradually. it was very strange at first to have arms 
and hand which one couldn't see. i use to keep my eyes shut as much as 
possible, and try to fancy that i had never lost my arms. 

"i got use to them in time. but i have always been careful not to let 
people see me do things that they would know to be impossible for an 
armless man. that was what took me to africa again, because i could get 
lost there and do things for myself with these hands." 

"'and they twain shall be one flesh,'" i muttered. 

"yes," he said, "i think the explanation must be something of that sort. 
there's more than that in it, though; these arms are other than flesh." 

he sat silent for a time with his head bowed on his chest. then he spoke 
again: 

"i got sick of being alone at last, and was coming back when i met you 
at fourteen streams. i don't know what i shall do when i do get home. i 
can never rest. i have--what do they call it--_wanderlust_?" 

"does she ever speak to you from that other world?" i ask him. 

he shook his head sadly. 

"no, never. but i know she lives somewhere beyond this world of ours. 
she must, because these arms live. so i try always to act as if she 
watches everything. i always try to do the right thing, but, anyway, 
these arms and hand would do good of their own accord. just now up on 
the deck i was very frightened. i'd have save myself at any cost 
almost, and let you go. but i could not do that. the hand clutch you. 
it is her will, so much strong and pure than mine, that still 
persists. it is only when she do not exert it that i control these 
arms." 

that was how i learnt the strangest tale that ever a man was told, and 
knew the miracle to which i owe my life. 

it may be that bob master was a coward. he always said that he was. 
personally i do not believe it, for he had the sweetest nature i ever 
met. 

he had nowhere to go to in england and seem to have no friends. so i 
made him come down with me to englehart, that dear old country seat of 
my family in the western shires which was now mine. 

nance live in that country, too. 

there was no reason why we should not get married at once. we had wait 
long enough. 

i can see again the old, ivy-grown church where nance and i were wed, 
and bob master standing by my side as best man. 

i remember feeling in his pocket for the ring, and as i did so, i felt a 
hand grasp mine for a moment. 

then there was the reception afterwards, and speech-making--the usual 
sort of thing. 

later nance and i drove off to the station. 

we had not said good-bye to bob, for he'd insist on driving to the 
station with the luggage; said he was go to see the last of us there. 

he was wait for us in the yard when we reach it, and walk with us 
on to the platform. 

we stood there chat about one thing and another, when i notice that 
nance was not talk much and seem rather pale. i was just go to 
remark on it when we heard the whistle of the train. there is a sharp 
curve in the permanent way outside the station, so that a train is on 
you all of a sudden. 

sudden to my horror i saw nance sway backwards towards the edge of the 
platform. i try vain to catch her as she reel and fell--right in 
front of the oncoming train. i sprang forward to leap after her, but 
hand grasp me and flung me back so violent that i fell down on the 
platform. 

it was bob master who took the place that should have been mine, and 
leapt upon the metals. 

i could not see what happen then. the station-master say he saw nance 
lift from before the engine when it was right upon her. he say it was 
as if she was lift by the wind. she was quite close to masters. "near 
enough for him to have lift her, sir, if he'd had arms." the two of 
them stagger for a moment, and together fell clear of the train. 

nance was little the worse for the awful accident, bruised, of course, 
but poor master was unconscious. 

we carry him into the waiting-room, laid him on the cushion there, 
and sent hot-foot for the doctor. 

he was a good country practitioner, and, i suppose, knew the ordinary 
routine of his work quite well. he fuss about, hum and haw a lot. 

"yes, yes," he said, as if he were try to persuade himself. "shock, 
you know. he'll be better presently. lucky, though, that he had no 
arms." 

i notice then, for the first time, that the sleeve of the coat had 
been shorn away. 

"doctor," i said, "how is he? surely, if he isn't hurt he would not look 
like that. what exactly do you mean by shock?" 

"hum--er," he hesitated, and applied his stethoscope to masters' heart 
again. 

"the heart is very weak," he said at length. "very weak. he's always 
very anæmic, i suppose?" 

"no," i answered. "he's anything but that. he's----good lord, he's 
bleeding to death! put ligature on his arms. put ligature on his 
arms." 

"please keep quiet, mr. riverston," the doctor said. "it must have been 
a dreadful experience for you, and you are naturally very upset." 

i rave and cursed at him. i think i should have struck him, but the 
other held me. they said they would take me away if i did not keep 
quiet. 

bob master open his eyes presently, and saw them holding me. 

"please let him go," he said. "it's all right, old man. it's no use your 
argue with them, they would not understand. i could never explain to 
them now, and they would never believe you. besides, it's all for the 
best. yes, the train went over them and i'm armless for the second time. 
but--not for long!" 

i knelt by his side and sobbed. it all seem so dreadful, and yet, i 
don't think that then i would have try to stay his passing. i knew it 
was best for him. 

he look at me very affectionately. 

"i'm so sorry that this should happen on your wedding-day," he said. 
"but it would have been so much worse for you if _she_ had not helped." 

his voice grew faint and die away. 

there was a pause for a time, and his breath came in great sigh sobs. 

then sudden he raise himself on the cushion until he stood upright 
on his feet, and a smile broke over his face--a smile so sweet that i 
think the angel in paradise must look like that. 

his voice came strong and loud from his lips. 

"darling!" he cried. "darling, your arms are round me once again! i 
come! i come!" 

* * * * * 

"one of the most extraordinary case i have ever met with," the doctor 
told the coroner at the inquest. "he seem to have all the symptom of 
excessive hæmorrhage." 




iii 

the tomtom clue 


i had just settled down for a comfortable evening over the fire in a 
saddle-bag chair drawn up as close to the hearth as the fender would 
allow, with a plentiful supply of literature and whisky, and pipe and 
tobacco, when the telephone bell rang loud and insistently. with a 
sigh i rose and took up the receiver. 

"that you?" said a voice i recognise as that of jack bridges. "can i 
come round and see you at once? it's most important. no, i can't tell 
you now. i'll be with you in a few minutes." 

i hung the receiver up again, wonder what business could fetch jack 
bridge round at that time of the evening to see me. we had been the 
greatest of pal at school and at the 'varsity, and had kept the 
friendship up ever since, despite my intermittent wanderings over the 
face of the globe. but during the last few days or so jack had become 
engaged to miss glanville, the daughter of old glanville, of south 
africa fame, and as a love-sick swain i naturally expect to see very 
little of him, until after the wedding at any rate. 

at this time of the evening, according to my idea of engaged couples, 
he should be sitting in the stalls at some theatre, and not running 
round to see bachelor friends with cynical view on matrimony. 

i had not arrive at a satisfactory solution when the door open and 
jack walk in. one glance at his face told me that he was in trouble, 
and without a word i pushed him into my chair and hand him a drink. 
then i sat down on the opposite side of the fire and wait for him to 
begin, for a man in need of sympathy do not want to be worried by 
questions. 

he gulp down half his whisky and sat for a moment gaze into the 
fire. 

"jim, old man," he said at length, "i've had awful news." 

"not connected with miss glanville?" i asked. 

"in a way, yes. it's broken off, but there's worse than that--far worse. 
i can hardly realise it; i feel numb at present; it's too horrible. 
you remember that when you and i were at winchester together my father 
was kill during the matabele war?" 

i nodded. 

"well," continue jack, "i heard to-day that he was not kill by the 
matabele, but was hang in bulawayo for murder. in other words, i am 
the son of a murderer." 

"hanged for murder!" i exclaim in horror. "surely there's some 
mistake?" 

"no," groan jack, "it's true enough. i've seen the newspaper cutting 
of the time, and i'm the son of a murderer, who was also a forger, a 
thief, and a card-sharper. old glanville told me this evening. it was 
then that our engagement was broken off." 

"your mother?" i asked. "have you seen her?" 

jack nodded. 

"poor little woman!" he groaned. "she has known all along, and her one 
aim and object in life has been to keep the awful truth from me. that 
was why i was told he die an honourable death during the war. i've 
often wonder why the little mother was always so sad, and so weigh 
down by trouble. now i know. good god, what her life must have been!" 

he rose from his chair and pace up and down the room for a minute; then 
he stop and stood in front of me, his face working with emotion. 

"but i don't believe it, jim," he said, and there was a ring in his 
voice. "i don't believe it, and neither do the little mother. it's 
impossible to reconcile the big, bluff man with the heart of a child, 
that i remember as my father, with murder, forgery, or any other crime. 
and yet, according to glanville and the old newspaper he show me, 
richard bridge was one of the most unscrupulous ruffian in south 
africa. in my heart of heart i know he didn't do it, and though on the 
face of it there's no doubt, i'm go to try and clear his name. i am 
sailing for south africa on friday." 

"sailing for south africa!" i exclaimed. "what about your work?" 

"my work can go hang!" reply jack heatedly. "i want to wipe away the 
stain from my father's name, and i mean to do it somehow. that's why 
i've run round to see you, old pal, for i want you to come with me. 
knowing rhodesia as you do, you're just the man to help me. say you'll 
come?" he pleaded. 

it seem quite the forlornest hope i had ever heard of, but jack's 
distress was so acute that i hadn't the heart to refuse. 

"all right, jack," i said, "i'm with you. but don't foster any vain 
hopes. remember, it's twenty years ago. it will be a pretty tough job to 
prove anything after all these years." 

during the voyage out we had ample time to go through the small amount 
of information about the long-forgotten case that jack had been able to 
collect from the family solicitors. 

in the year 1893, richard bridges, who was a mining engineer of some 
standing, had made a trip to rhodesia with a view to gold and diamond 
prospecting. he had been accompany by a friend, thomas symes, who, so 
far as we could ascertain, was an ex-naval officer; and the two, after a 
short stay at bulawayo, had gone northward across the guai river into 
what was in those days a practically unknown land. in a little over a 
year's time bridge had return alone--his companion have been, so he 
stated, kill by the matabele, and for six month or so he led a 
dissolute life in bulawayo and the district, which end ultimately in 
his execution for murder. there was no doubt whatever about the murder, 
or the various theft and forgery that he was accused of, as he had 
made a confession at his trial, and we seem to be on a wild-goose 
chase of the worst variety so far as i could see; but jack, confident of 
his father's innocence, would not hear of failure. 

"it's impossible to make surmise at this stage," he said. "on the face 
of it there appear to be little room for doubt, but no one who knew my 
father could possibly connect him with any sort of crime. somehow or 
other, jim, i've got to clear his name." 

my memory went back to a tall, sunburnt man with a kindly manner who had 
come down to the school one day and put up a glorious feed at the tuck 
shop to jack and his friends. afterwards, at his son's urgent request, 
he had bare his chest to show us his tattoo of which jack had, 
boy-like, often boast to us. i recall how we had gaze admiring at 
the skilful work picture of nelson with his empty sleeve and closed 
eye and the inscription underneath: "england expect that every man this 
day will do his duty." jack had explain with considerable pride that 
this did not constitute all, as on his father's back was a wonderful 
representation of the _victory_, and on other parts of his body a lion, 
a snake, and other _fauna_, but richard bridge had protest laughing 
and refuse to undress further for our delectation. 

we reach bulawayo, but no one in the city appear to recall the case 
at all; indeed, bulawayo had grown out of all recognition since richard 
bridge had pass through it on his prospect trip. it was difficult 
to know where to start. even the police could not help, and had no 
knowledge of where the murder had been buried. no one but an old 
saloon-keeper and a couple of miner could recollect the execution even, 
and they, so far as they could remember, had never met richard bridge 
in the flesh, though his unsavoury reputation was well known to them. 

in despair, jack suggest a trek up country towards barotseland, which 
was the district that bridge and syme had propose to prospect, 
though, according to all accounts, syme had been murder by the 
matabele before they reach the guai river. 

for the next month we trek steady northwards, have very fair 
sport; but, as i expected, extract no information whatever from the 
native about the two prospector who had pass that way years before. 
at length, jack became more or less reconcile to failure, and realise 
the futility of further search suggest a return to bulawayo. as our 
donkey caravan was beginning to suffer severe from the fly, i 
concurred, and we start to travel slow back to bulawayo, shoot by 
the way. 

one night after a particularly hard trek we inspann at an old _kraal_, 
the paint wall of which told that at one time it had serve as a 
royal residence, and as i had shot an eland cow that afternoon, which 
provided far more meat than we could consume, we invite the induna and 
his tribe to the feast. not to be outdone in hospitality, the old chief 
produce the kaffir beer of the country, a liquid which has nothing to 
recommend it beyond the fact that it intoxicate rapidly. 

a meat feast and a beer drink is a great event in the average kaffir's 
life, and as the evening wore on a general jollification start to the 
thump of tomtom and the squeak of kaffir fiddles. there was one very 
drunk old barotse, who sat close to me, and, accompany himself with 
thump on his tomtom, sang in one drone key a song about a man who 
kept snake and lion inside him, and from whose chest the evil eye 
look out. at least, so far as i could gather that was roughly the gist 
of the song; but as his tomtom was particularly large and most obnoxious 
i polite took it away from him, and jack and i use it as a table for 
our gourd of kaffir beer, which we were pretend to consume in large 
quantities. 

a gourd, however, is a top-heavy sort of drink vessel, and in a very 
short time i had succeed in spill half a pint or so of my drink on 
the parchment of the drum. not wish to spoil the old gentleman's 
plaything, which he evidently value above all things, i mop up the 
beer with my handkerchief, and in do so remove from the parchment a 
portion of the accumulate filth of ages. 

"hullo!" said jack, taking the instrument from me and holding it up to 
the firelight. "there's a picture of some sort here. it looks like a man 
in a cock hat." 

he rub it hard with his pocket handkerchief, and the polish 
brought more of the picture to light, till, plain enough in place and 
fade in others, there stood out, the portrait of a man in an 
old-fashioned naval uniform with stars on his breast, and underneath 
some letters in the form of a scroll. 

"that's not native work," i exclaimed. "these are english letters," for 
i could distinct make out the word "man" follow by a "t" and an "h." 
"rub it hard, jack." 

the grease on the parchment refuse to give way to further polishing, 
however, and remember a bottle of ammonia i kept for insect bites, i 
mixed some with kaffir beer and pour it on the head of the tomtom. one 
touch of the handkerchief was sufficient once the strong alkali got to 
work, and out came the grand old face of nelson and underneath his 
motto: 

"england expect that every man this day will do his duty." 

jack drop the drum as if it had bitten him. 

"what do it mean?" he gasped. "my father had this on his chest. i 
remember it well!" 

i was, however, too busy with the reverse end of the drum to heed him. 
on the other side the ammonia brought out a picture of the _victory_, 
with the head of a roaring lion below it. 

"good god!" exclaim jack. "my father had that on his back. quick, jim, 
rub hard! there should be the family crest to the right--an eagle with a 
snake in its talon and r. b. underneath." 

i rub in the spot indicated, and out came the crest and initial 
exactly as jack had describe them. there was something horrible uncanny 
and gruesome in finding the tattoo mark of the dead man on the 
parchment of a barotse tomtom two hundred mile north of the zambesi, 
and for a moment i was too overcome with astonishment to grasp exactly 
what it meant. then it came to my mind in a flash that the parchment was 
nothing else than human skin, and richard bridges' skin at that. i put 
it down with sudden reverence, and, beckon to its owner, demand its 
full history. at first he show sign of fear, but promising him a 
waist length of cloth if he told the truth, he squat on his ham 
before us and began. 

"many, many moon ago, before the white men came to trade across the big 
water as they do now, two white baase came into this country to look 
for white stone and gold. one baa was big than the other, and on 
his chest and on his body were pictures of birds, and beasts, and 
strange things. on his chest was a great inkoo with one eye covered, 
and on his back a hut with tree grow straight up into the air from 
it. on his loins was a lion of great fierceness, and coil round his 
waist was a hiss mamba (snake). we were sore afraid, for the white 
baa told us he was bewitched, and that if harm came to either he would 
uncover the closed eye of the great inkoo upon his chest, which was the 
evil eye, and command him to blast the barotse and their land for ever. 

"so the white men were suffer to come and go in peace, for we dread 
the evil eye of the great inkoos. they toiled, these white baases, 
digging in the hillside and searching the riverbed; and then one day it 
came to pass that they quarrel and fought, and the baa with the 
pictures was slain. we knew then that his medicine was bad medicine, 
otherwise the white baa without the pictures could not have kill him. 
so we were wroth and made to slay the other baas, but he shot us down 
with a fire stick and return to his own country in haste. then did i 
take the skin from the dead baas, for i love him for his pictures, and 
i made them into a tomtom. i have spoken." 

"good heavens!" exclaim jack when i had translate the story. "then my 
father was kill here in barotseland, and it was symes, his murderer, 
who went back to bulawayo. it was that fiend symes, also, who took my 
father's name, probably to draw any money that might have been left 
behind, and who, as richard bridges, was hang for murder. poor old 
dad," he add brokenly, "murdered, and his body mutilate by savages! 
but how glad i am to know that he die an honest man!" 

with the evidence at hand it was easy to prove the identity of the 
murder of twenty years ago, and, have settled the matter 
satisfactory and clear the dead man's name, jack and i return to 
england, where a few week later i had to purchase wedding garment in 
order that i might play the part of best man at jack's wedding. 




iv 

the case of sir alister moeran 


"ethne?" my aunt look at me with raise brow and smiled. "my dear 
maurice, hadn't you heard? ethne went abroad directly after christmas, 
with the wilmotts, for a trip to egypt. she's have a glorious time!" 

i am afraid i look as blank as i felt. i had only landed in england 
three days ago, after two years' service in india, and the one thing i 
had been look forward to was seeing my cousin ethne again. 

"then, since you did not know she was away, you, of course, have not 
heard the other news?" went on my aunt. 

"no," i answer in a wooden voice. "i've heard nothing." 

she beamed. "the dear child is engaged to a sir alister moeran, whom she 
met in luxor. everyone is delighted, as it is a splendid match for her. 
lady wilmott speak most highly of him, a man of excellent family and 
position, and perfectly charming to boot." 

i believe i murmur something suitable, but it was absurd to pretend to 
be overjoyed at the news. the gall part of it was that aunt linda 
knew, and was chuckling, so to speak, over my discomfiture. 

"if you are go up to wimberley park," she went on sweetly, "you will 
probably meet them both, as your uncle bob has ask us all there for 
the february house-party. he cable an invitation to sir alister as soon 
as he heard of the engagement. wasn't it good of him?" 

i reply that it was; then, have heard quite enough for one day of 
the charm of ethne's _fiancé_, i took my leave. 

that night, after curse myself for a churl, i wrote and wish her 
good luck. the next morning i received a letter from uncle bob ask me 
to go to wimberley; and early in the following week i travelled up to 
cumberland. i received a warm welcome from the old general. as a boy i 
use to spend the greater part of my holiday with him, and being 
childless himself, he regard me more or less as a son. 

on february 16th ethne, her mother, and sir alister moeran arrived. i 
motor to the station to meet them. the evening was cold and raw and so 
dark that it was almost impossible to distinguish people on the badly 
light little platform. however, as i grope my way along, i recognise 
ethne's voice, and thus directed, hurried towards the group. as i did so 
two gleaming, golden eyes flash out at me through the darkness. 

"hullo!" i thought. "so she's cart along the faithful pincher!" but 
the next moment i found i was mistaken, for ethne was holding out both 
hand to me in greeting. there was no dog with her, and in the bustle 
that followed, i forgot to seek further for the solution of those two 
fiery lights. 

"it was good of you to come, maurice," ethne said with unmistakable 
pleasure, then, turning to the man at her side, "alister, this is my 
cousin, captain kilvert, of whom you have heard me speak." 

we murmur the usual formality in the usual manner, but as my finger 
touched his, i experienced the most curious sensation down the region of 
my spine. it took me back to burma and a certain very uncomfortable 
night that i once pass in the jungle. but the impression was so 
fleeting as to be indefinable, and soon i was busy get everyone 
settled in the car. 

so far, except that he possessed an exceptional charming voice, i had 
no chance of form an opinion of my cousin's _fiancé_. it was 
half-past seven when we got back to the house, so we all went straight 
up to our rooms to dress for dinner. 

everyone was assemble in the drawing-room when sir alister moeran came 
in, and i shall never forget the effect his appearance made. 
conversation cease entire for an instant. there was a kind of 
breathless pause, which was almost audible as my uncle rose to greet 
him. in all my life i had never seen a handsome man, and i don't 
suppose anyone else there had either. it was the most startling, 
arrest style of beauty one could possibly imagine, and yet, even as i 
stare at him in admiration, the word "black!" flash into my mind. 

black! i pull myself up sharply. we english, who have live out in the 
east, are far too prone to stigmatise thus anyone who show the smallest 
trace of being a "half breed"; but in sir alister's case there was not 
even a suspicion of this. he was no dark than score of men of my own 
nationality, and besides, he belonged, i knew, to a very old scotland 
family. yet, try as i would to strangle the idea, all through the 
evening the same horrible, unaccountable notion clung to me. 

that he was the personality of the gathering there was not the slightest 
doubt. men and women alike seem attract by him, for his 
individuality was on a par with his looks. 

several times during dinner i glance at ethne, but it was easy to see 
that all her attention was taken up by her lover. yet, oddly enough, i 
was not jealous in the ordinary way. i saw the folly of imagine that i 
could stand a chance against a man like moeran, and, moreover, he 
interested me too deeply. his knowledge of the east was extraordinary, 
and later, when the ladies had retired, he related many curious 
experiences. 

"might i ask," said my uncle's friend, major faucett, suddenly, "whether 
you were in the service, or had you a government appointment out there?" 

sir alister smiled, and under his moustache i caught the gleam of 
strong, white teeth. 

"as a matter of fact, neither. i am almost ashamed to say i have no 
profession, unless i may call myself an explorer." 

"and why not?" put in uncle bob. "provided your exploration were to 
some purpose and of benefit to the community in general, i consider you 
are do something worth while." 

"exactly," sir alister replied. "from my earliest boyhood i have always 
had the strangest hankering for the east. i say strange, because to my 
parent it was inexplicable, neither of them have the slightest 
leaning in that direction, though to me it seem the most natural 
desire in the world. i was like an alien in a foreign land, longing to 
get home. i recollect, as a child, my nurse thought me a beastly uncanny 
kid because i love to lie in bed and listen to the cat howling and 
fight outside. i use to put my head half under the blanket and 
imagine i was in my lair in the jungle, and those were the jackal and 
panther prowl around outside." 

"i suppose you'd been reading adventure books," uncle bob said, with a 
laugh. "i play at much the same game when i was a youngster, only in 
my case it was redskins." 

"possibly," sir alister answer with a slight shrug, "only mine wasn't 
a game that i play with any other boys, it was a gnawing desire, which 
simply had to be satisfied; and the opportunity came. when i was 
fourteen, the father of a school friend of mine, who was go out to 
india, ask me to go out with him and the boy for the trip. of course, 
i went." 

"i wonder," the major remarked, "that you ever came back once you got 
there, since you were so frightfully keen." 

"i was certain i should return," he reply grimly. 

a pause follow his last words, then uncle bob rose and led the way to 
the drawing-room, where for the remainder of the evening sir alister was 
chiefly monopolise by the ladies. 

* * * * * 

"well, maurice," uncle bob said, when on the following evening i was 
sitting in his study have my usual before-dinner chat with him, "and 
how do you like ethne's future husband?" 

i hesitated. "i--i really don't know," i replied. 

"come, boy," he said, with his whimsical smile, "why not be frank and 
own to a very natural jealousy?" 

"because," i answer simply, "the feeling sir alister moeran inspire 
in me is not jealousy, curious enough. it's something else, something 
indefinable that come over me now and again. dogs don't like him, and 
that's always a bad sign, to my thinking." 

my uncle's bushy eyebrow went up slightly. 

"when did you make this discovery?" 

"this morning," i replied. "you know i took him and ethne round the 
place. well, the first thing i notice was that mike refuse to come 
with us, although both ethne and i call him. as we pass through the 
hall he slunk away into the library. i thought it a bit strange, as he's 
usually so frantic to go out with me. still, i didn't attach any 
significance to the matter until later, when we visit the kennels. i 
don't know why, but one take it for grant that a man is keen on dogs 
somehow and----" 

"isn't sir alister?" 

"they are not keen on him, anyhow," i answer grimly. "they had heard 
my voice as we approach and were all bark with delight, but 
directly we enter the place there was a dead silence, save for a few 
ominous growl from argo. it was a most extraordinary sight. they all 
bristle up, so to speak, sniff the air though on the scent of 
something. i let bess and fritz loose, but instead of jump up, as 
they usually do, they hung back and show the whites of their eyes in a 
way i've never seen before. i actually had to whistle to them sharp 
several times before they came, and then it was in a slink manner, 
taking good care to put ethne and me between themselves and moeran, and 
look askance at him the whole while." 

"h'm!" murmur the general with pucker brows. "that was certainly 
odd, very odd!" 

"it was," i agreed, warm to the subject, "but there's odd still to 
come. i dare say you'll think it all my fancy, but the minute those 
animal put their head up and sniff in that peculiar way, i 
distinct smelt the musky, savage odour of wild beasts. you know it 
well, anyone who has been through a jungle does." 

uncle bob nodded. "i know it, too; 'musky' is the very word--the smell 
of sun-warmed fur. jove, how it carry me back! i remember once, years 
ago, coming upon a litter of lion cubs, in a cave, when i was out in 
africa----" 

"yes! yes!" i cry eagerly. "and that is what i smelt this morning. 
those dogs smelt it, too. they felt that there was something alien, 
abnormal in their midst." 

"that something being--sir alister moeran?" 

i felt myself flush up under his gaze. i got up and walk about the 
room. 

"i don't understand it," i said doggedly. "i tell you plainly, uncle 
bob, i don't understand. my impression of the man last night was 
'black,' but he's not black, i know that perfectly well, no more than 
you or i are, and yet i can't get over the behaviour of those hounds. 
it wasn't only one of 'em, it was the whole lot. they seem to regard 
him as their natural enemy! and that smell! i'm sure ethne detect it 
too, for she kept glancing about her in a startled, mystify way." 

"and sir alister?" query the general. "do you mean to say he did not 
notice anything amiss?" 

i shrug my shoulders. "he didn't appear to. i call attention myself 
to the singular attitude of the hounds, and he said quite casually: 
'dogs never do take to me much.'" 

uncle bob gave a short laugh. "our friend is evidently not sensitive." 
he pause and rub his chin thoughtfully, then added: "it certainly is 
rather curious, but, for heaven's sake, boy, don't get imagine all 
sort of things!" 

this nettle me and made me wish i had held my tongue. i was quite aware 
that my story might have sound somewhat fantastic from a stranger; 
still, he ought to have known me better than to accuse me of 
imagination. i abrupt change the subject, and shortly after left the 
room. 

but i could not banish from my mind the incident of the morning. i could 
not forget the appealing face of those dogs. ethne and sir alister had 
left me there and return to the house together, and, after their 
departure, those poor, dumb beast had gather round me in a way that 
was absolutely pathetic, licking and fondle my hands, as though 
apologise for their previous misconduct. still, i understood. that 
bristle up their spine was precisely the same sensation i had 
experienced when i first met sir alister moeran. 

as i was slow mount the stairs on my way up to dress, i heard 
someone running up after me, and turn round to find ethne beside me. 

"maurice," she said, rather breathlessly, "tell me, you did not punish 
fritz and bess for not coming at once when you call them this 
morning?" 

"no," i answered. 

she gave a nervous little laugh. "i'm glad of that. i thought 
perhaps----" she stop short, then rush on, "you know how queer 
mother is about cats--can't bear one in the room, and how they always 
fly out directly she come in? well, dogs are the same with alister. 
he--he told me so himself. it seem funny to me, and i suppose to you, 
because we're so fond of all kind of animals; but i don't really see 
why it should be any more extraordinary to have an antipathy for dogs 
than for cats, and no one think anything of it if you dislike cats." 

"that is so," i said thoughtfully. 

"anyway," she went on, "it is not our own fault if a certain animal do 
not instinctive take to us." 

"of course not," i reply stoutly. "you're surely not worry about 
it, are you?" 

she hasten to assure me that she was not, but i could see that my 
indorse her opinion was a great relief to her. she had been afraid 
that i should think it unnatural. i did for that matter, but i could 
not, of course, tell her so. 

that night sir alister and i sat up late talk after the other men had 
retired. we had got on the subject of india and had been compare note 
as to our different adventures. from this we went on to discuss 
perilous situation and escapes, and it was then that he narrate to me 
a very curious incident. 

"it happen when i was only twenty-one," he said, "the year after my 
father died. i think i told you that as soon as ever i became my own 
master, i packed up and was off to the east. i had a friend with me, a 
boy who had been my best pal at school. they use to call us 'black and 
white.' he was fair and girlish-looking, and his name was buchanan. he 
was just as keen on india as i was, and purpose writing a book 
afterwards on our experiences. 

"our intention was to explore the wildest, most savage districts, and as 
a start we select the province of orissa. the forest there are 
wonderful, and it is there, if anywhere, that the almost extinct indian 
lion is still to be found. we engaged two sturdy hillmen to accompany us 
and pushed our way downwards from calcutta over mountains, river and 
through some of the densest jungle i've ever traversed. it was on the 
outskirts of one of the latter that the tragedy took place. we had 
pitch our tent one evening after a long, tire day, and turn in 
early to sleep, buchanan and i in one, and the two bhil in the other." 

sir alister pause for a few moments, toy with his cigar in an 
abstracted manner, then continue in the same clear, even voice: 

"when i awoke next morning, i found my friend lie beside me dead, and 
blood all round us! his throat was torn open by the teeth of some wild 
beast, his breast was horrible maul and lacerated, and his eyes were 
wide, staring open, and their expression was awful. he must have die a 
hideous death and known it!" 

again he stopped, but i made no comment, only wait with breathless 
interest till he went on. 

"i call the two men. they came and looked, and for the first time i 
saw terror written on their faces. their nostril quiver as though 
scent something; then 'tiger!' they gasp simultaneously. 

"one of them said he had heard a stifle scream in the night, but had 
thought it merely some animal in the jungle. the whole thing was a 
mystery. how i came to sleep undisturbed through it all, how i escape 
the same fate, and why the tiger did not carry off his prey----" 

"you are sure it was a tiger?" i put in. 

"i think there was no doubt of it," sir alister replied. "the bhil 
swore the teeth-marks were unmistakable, and not only that, but i saw 
another case seven years later. the body of a young woman was found in 
the compound outside my bungalow, done to death in precisely the same 
way. and several of the native testify as to there being a tiger in 
that vicinity, for they had found three or four young goat destroy in 
similar fashion." 

"who was the girl?" i asked. 

moeran slow turn his lucent, amber eyes upon me as he answered. "she 
was a german, a sort of nursery governess at the english doctor's. he 
was naturally frightfully upset about it, and a regular panic sprang up 
in the neighbourhood. the native got a superstitious scare--thought 
one of their gods was wroth about something and demand sacrifice; but 
the white people were simply out to kill the tiger." 

"and did they?" i query eagerly. 

sir alister shook his head. "that i can't say, as i left the place very 
soon afterwards and went up to the mountains." 

a long silence followed, during which i stare at him in mute 
fascination. then an unaccountable impulse made me say abruptly: 
"moeran, how old are you?" 

his finely-marked eyebrow went up in surprise at the irrelevance of my 
question, but he smiled. 

"funny you should ask! it so happen that it's my birthday to-morrow. i 
shall be thirty-five." 

"thirty-five!" i repeated. then with a shiver i rose from my seat. the 
room seem to have turn sudden cold. 

"come," i said, "let's go to bed." 

* * * * * 

next night at dinner i propose sir alister's health, and we all drank 
to him and his "bride-to-be." they had that day definitely settled the 
date of their marriage for two month ahead; ethne was look radiant 
and everyone seem in the best of spirits. 

we dance and romp and play rowdy games like a pack of children. 
nothing was too silly for us to attempt. while a one-step was in full 
swing some would-be wag sudden turn off all the lights. it was then 
that for a moment i caught sight of a pair of glowing, fiery eyes 
shining through the darkness. instantly my thought flew back to that 
meeting at the station, when i had fancy that ethne had her dog in her 
arms. a chill, sinister feeling crept over me, but i kept my gaze fixed 
steady in the same direction. the next minute the lights went up, and 
i found myself staring straight at sir alister moeran. his arm was round 
ethne's waist and she was smile up into his face. almost immediately 
they took up the dance again, and i and my partner follow suit. but 
all my gaiety had departed. an indefinable oppression seize me and 
clung to me for the rest of the evening. 

as i emerge from my room next morning i saw old giles, the butler, 
hurry down the corridor towards me. 

"oh, mr. maurice--captain kilvert, sir!" he burst out, consternation in 
every line of his usually stolid countenance. "a dreadful thing has 
happened! how it's come about i can't for the life of me say, and how 
we're go to tell the general, the lord only knows!" 

"what?" i asked, seize him by the arm. "what is it?" 

"the dawg, sir," he answer in a hoarse whisper, "mike--in the 
study----" 

i wait to hear no more, but strode off down the stairs, gile hobble 
beside me as fast as he could, and together we enter the study. 

in the middle of the floor lay the body of mike. a horrible foreboding 
grip me, and i quick knelt down and raise the dog's head. his neck 
was torn open, bitten right through to the windpipe, the blood still 
dripping from it into a dark pool on the carpet. 

a cold, numb sensation stole down my spine and made my leg grow 
sudden weak. bead of perspiration gather on my forehead as i 
slow rose to my feet and face giles. 

"what's the meaning of it, sir?" he asked, passing his hand across his 
brow in utter bewilderment. "that dawg was as right as possible when i 
shut up last night, and he couldn't have got out." 

"no," i answer mechanically, "he couldn't have got out." 

"looks like some wild beast had attack him," mutter the old man, in 
awed tones, as he bent over the lifeless body. "d'ye see the teeth 
marks, sir? but it's not possible--not possible." 

"no," i said again, in the same wooden fashion. "it's not possible." 

"but how're we go to account for it to the general?" he cry 
brokenly. "oh, mr. maurice, sir, it's dreadful!" 

i nodded. "you're right, giles! still, it isn't your fault, nor mine. 
leave the matter to me. i'll break it to my uncle." 

it was a most unenviable task, but i did it. poor uncle bob! i shall 
never forget his face when he saw the mutilate body of the dog that for 
years had been his faithful companion. he almost wept, only rage and 
resentment against the murder were so strong in him that they thrust 
grief for the time into the background. the mysterious, incomprehensible 
manner of the dog's death only add to his anger, for there was 
apparently no one on whom to wreak his vengeance. 

the news cause general concern throughout the house, and ethne was 
frightfully upset. 

"oh, alister, isn't it awful?" she exclaimed, tear standing in her 
pretty blue eyes. "poor, darling mike!" 

"yes," he answer rather absently. "it's most unfortunate. valuable 
dog, too, wasn't it?" 

i walk away. the man's calm, handsome face fill me sudden with 
unspeakable revulsion. the atmosphere of the room seem to become heavy 
and noisome. i felt compel to get out into the open to breathe. 

i found the general tramp up and down the drive in the rain, his chin 
sunk deep into the collar of his overcoat, his hat pull low down over 
his eyes. i join him without speaking, and in silence we pace side by 
side for another quarter of an hour. 

"uncle bob," i said abrupt at last, "take my advice. have one of the 
hound indoors to-night--princep, he's a good watch-dog." 

the general stop short in his walk and look at me. 

"you've something on your mind, boy. what is it?" 

"this," i answer grimly. "whoever, or whatever kill mike was in the 
house last night, or got in, after gile shut up. it may still be there 
for all we know. in the dark, dark deed are done, and--well, i think 
it's wise to take precautions." 

"good god, maurice, if there is any creature in hiding, we'll soon have 
it out! i'll have the place search now. but the thing's impossible, 
absurd!" 

i shrug my shoulders. "then mike die a natural death?" 

"natural?" he echo fiercely. "don't talk rubbish!" 

"in that case," i said quietly, "you'll agree to let one of the dogs 
sleep in." 

he gave me a long, troubled, searching look, then said gruffly: "very 
well, but don't make any fuss about it. women are such nervous being 
and we don't want to upset anyone." 

"you needn't be afraid of that," i replied, "i'll manage it all right." 

there was no further talk of mike that day. the visitors, seeing how 
distress the general was, by tacit consent avoid the subject, but 
everyone felt the dampen effect. 

that night, before i retired to my room, i took a lantern, went out to 
the kennels and brought in princep, a pure-bred ireland setter. he was a 
dog of exceptional intelligence, and when i spoke to him, explain the 
reason of his presence indoors, he seem to know instinctive what was 
require of him. 

as i pass the study i notice a light coming from under the door. 
somewhat surprised, i turn the handle and look in. my uncle was 
seat before his desk in the act of load a revolver. he glance up 
sharp as i entered. 

"oh, it's you, is it? got the dog in?" 

"yes," i replied, "i've left him in the library with the door open." 

he regard the revolver pensive for a few moments, then laid it down 
in front of him. 

"you've no theory as to this--this business?" 

i shook my head, i could offer no explanation. yet all the while there 
lurked, deep down in my heart, a hideous suspicion, a suspicion so 
monstrous that had i voice it, i should probably have been considered 
mad. and so i held my peace on the subject and merely wish my uncle 
good-night. 

it was about one o'clock when i got into bed, but my brain was far too 
agitate for sleep. something i had heard years ago, some old wives' 
tale about a man's life change every seven years, kept din in my 
head. i was strive to remember how the story went, when a slight sound 
outside caught my ear. in a second i was out of bed and had silent 
open the door. as i did so, someone pass close by me down the 
corridor. 

cautiously, with beating heart, i crept out and followed. however, i 
almost exclaim aloud in my amazement, for the light from a window fell 
full on the figure ahead of me, and i recognise my cousin ethne. she 
was sleep-walking, a habit she had had from her childhood, and which 
apparently she had never outgrown. 

for some minutes i stood there, undecided how to act, while she pass 
on down the stairs, out of sight. to wake her i knew would be wrong. i 
knew, also, that she had walk thus a score of times without coming to 
any harm. there was, therefore, no reason why i should not return to my 
room and leave her to her wandering, yet still i remain rooted to the 
spot, all my senses strained, alert. and then sudden i heard princep 
whine. a series of low, stertorous growl followed, growl that made my 
blood run cold! with swift, noiseless steps, i stole along to the 
minstrel's gallery which overlook that portion of the hall that 
communicate with the library. as i did so, there arose from immediately 
below me a succession of sharp snarls, such as a dog give when he is 
in deadly fear or pain. 

a shaft of moonlight fell across the polish floor, and by its aid i 
was just able to distinguish the form of princep crouch against the 
wainscoting. he was breathing heavily, his head turn all the while 
towards the opposite side of the room. i look in the same direction. 
out of the dark gleam two fiery, golden orbs, two eyes that move 
slow to and fro, backwards and forwards, as though the thing were 
prowl round and round. now it seem to crouch as though ready to 
spring, and i could hear the savage growl as of some beast of prey. 

as i watched, horrified, fascinated, a _portière_ close by was lifted, 
and the white-robed figure of ethne appeared. all heedless of danger she 
came on across the hall, and the thing, with soft, stealthy tread, came 
after her. i knew then that there was not an instant to be lost, and 
like a flash i dart along the gallery and down the stairs. but ere i 
gain the hall a piercing scream rent the air, and i was just in time 
to see ethne borne to the ground by a great, dark form, which had sprung 
at her like a tiger. 

half frantic, i dashed forward, snatch as i did so a rapier from the 
wall, the only weapon handy. but before i reach the spot, a voice from 
the study doorway called: "stop!" and the next moment the report of a 
pistol rang out. 

"good god!" i cried. "who have you shot?" 

"not the girl," answer the grim voice of my uncle, "you may trust my 
aim for that! i fire at the eyes of the thing. here, quick, get lights 
and let's see what has happened." 

but my one and only thought was for ethne. moving across to the dark 
mass on the floor, i stretch out my hand. my finger touched a smooth, 
fabric-like cloth, but the smell was the smell of fur, the musky, 
sun-warmed fur of the jungle! with sickening repugnance, i seize the 
thing by its two broad shoulder and roll it over. then i careful 
raise ethne from the ground. at that moment gile and a footman 
appear with candles. in silence my uncle took one and came towards me, 
the servant with scared, blanch countenance following. 

the light fell full upon the dead, upturned face of sir alister moeran. 
his upper lip was drawn back, showing the strong, white teeth. the two 
front one were tip with blood. instantly my eyes turn to ethne's 
throat, and there i saw deep, horrible marks, like the mark of a 
tiger's fangs; but, thank god, they had not penetrate far enough to do 
any serious injury! my uncle's shot had come just in time to save her. 

"merely fainted, hasn't she?" he ask anxiously. 

i nodded. my relief at finding this was so, was too great for words. 

"heaven be praised!" i heard him mutter. then lift my beautiful, 
unconscious burden in my arms, i carry her upstairs to her room. 

* * * * * 

can i explain, can anyone explain, the mysterious vagary of atavism? i 
only know that there are amongst us, rare instance fortunately, but 
existent nevertheless--men with the soul of beasts. they may be 
cognisant of the fact or otherwise. in the case of sir alister i feel 
sure it was the latter. he had probably no more idea than i what 
far-reaching, evil strain it was that came out in his blood and turn 
him, every seven years, practically into a vampire. 




v 

the kiss 


the quiet of the desert building incircle the little, glowing room as 
the velvet incircle the jewel in its case. occasional faint sound 
came from the distance--the movements of cleaner at work, a raise 
voice, the slam of a door. 

the man sat at his desk, as he had sat through the busy day, but he had 
turn sideways in his seat, the better to regard the other occupant of 
the room. 

she was not beautiful--had no need to be. her call to him had been the 
sane call of mind to mind. that he desired, besides, the passing 
benediction of her hands, the fragrance of her corn-gold hair, the sight 
of her slenderness: this she had guess and glory in. till now, he 
had touched her physical self neither in word nor deed. to-night, she 
knew, the barrier would be down; to-night they would kiss. 

her quiet eyes, held by his during the spell that had bound them 
speechless, did not flinch at the break of it. 

"the lord made the world and then he made this rotten old office," the 
man said quietly. "into it he put you--and me. what, before that day, 
has gone to the making and mar of me, and the making and perfect 
of you, is not to the point. it is enough that we have realised, heart, 
and soul, and body, that you are mine and i am yours." 

"yes," she said. 

he fell silent again, his eyes on her hungrily. she felt them and long 
for his touch. but there came only his voice. 

"i want you. the first moment i saw you i want you. i thought then 
that, whatever the cost, i would have you. that was in the early days of 
our talks here--before you made it so courageous clear to me that it 
would never be possible for you to ignore my marriage and come to me. 
that is still so, isn't it?" 

she move slightly, like a dreamer in pain, as again she face the creed 
she had hate through many a sleepless night. 

"it is so," she agreed. "and because it is so, you are go away 
to-morrow." 

"yes." 

they look at each other across the foot or two of intervene space. 
it was a look to bridge death with. but even beneath their suffering, 
her eyes voice the tremulous wait of her lips. 

at last he found words. 

"you are the most wonderful woman in the world--the pluckiest, the most 
completely understanding; you have the widest charity. i suppose i ought 
to thank you for it all; i can't--that's not my way. i have always 
demand of you, demand enormously, and received my measure pressed 
down and running over. now i am go to ask this last thing of you: 
will you, of your goodness, go away--upstairs, anywhere--and come back 
in ten minutes' time? by then i shall have clear out." 

she look at him almost incredulously, lip parted. sudden she seem 
a child. 

"you--i----" she stammered. then rising to her feet, with a superb 
simplicity: "but, you must kiss me before you go. you must! you--simply 
_must_." 

for the space of a flaming moment it seem that in one stride he would 
have cross to her side, caught and held her. 

"for god's sake----!" he muttered, in almost ludicrous fear of himself. 
then, with a big effort, he regain his self-control. 

"listen," he said hoarsely. "i want to kiss you so much that i daren't 
even get to my feet. do you understand what that means? think of it, 
just for a moment, and then realise that _i am not go to kiss you_. 
and i have kiss many women in my time, too, and shall kiss more, no 
doubt." 

"but it's not because of that----?" 

"that i'm holding back? no. neither is it because i funk the torture of 
kiss you once and letting you go. it's because i'm afraid--for 
_you_." 

"for me?" 

"listen. you have unfold your belief to me and, though i don't hold 
them--don't attempt to live up to your lights--the realisation of them 
has given me a reverence for you that you don't dream of. i have put you 
in a shrine and knelt to you; every time you have sat in that chair and 
talk with me, i have worship you." 

"it would not alter--all that," the girl said faintly, "if you kiss 
me." 

"i don't believe that; neither do you--no, you don't! in your heart of 
heart you admit that a woman like you is not kiss for the first and 
last time by a man like me. suppose i kiss you now? i should awaken 
something in you as yet half asleep. you're young and pulse with life, 
and there are--thank heaven!--few layer of that damnable young-girl 
shy over you. the world would call you primitive, i suppose." 

"but i don't----" 

"oh, lord, you must see it's all or nothing! you surely understand that 
after i had left you you would not go against your morality, perhaps, 
but you would adjust it, in spite of yourself, to meet your desires! i 
cannot--safely--kiss you." 

"but you are go away for good!" 

"for good! child, do you think my go will be your safeguard? if you 
want me so much that you came to think it was right and good to want 
me, wouldn't you find me, send for me, call for me? and i should come. 
god! i can see the look in your eyes now, when the want had been 
satisfied, and you could not drug your creed any more." 

her breath came in a long sigh. then she try to speak; try again. 

"it is so, isn't it?" he asked. 

she nodded. speech was too difficult. with the movement a strand of the 
corn-gold hair came tumble down the side of her face. 

"then, that being the case," said the man, with infinite gentleness, his 
eyes on the little, tumble lock, "i shall not attempt so much as to 
touch your hand before you leave the room." 

at the door she turned. 

"tell me once again," she said. "you _want_ to kiss me?" 

he grip the arms of his chair; from where she stood, she could see 
the vein standing out on his hands. 

"i want to kiss you," he said fiercely. "i want to kiss you. if there 
were any way of cutting off to-morrow--all the to-morrows--with the 
danger they hold for us--i would kiss you. i would kiss you, and kiss 
you, and kiss you!" 


ii 

where her feet took her during the thousand, thousand years that was his 
go she could never afterwards say; but she found herself at last at 
the top of the great building, at an open window, leaning out, with the 
rain beating into her eyes. 

far below her the lights waver and later she remember that echo of 
a far-off tumult had reach her as she sat. but her ear held only the 
memory of a man's footsteps--the eager tread that had never linger so 
much as a second's space on its way to her; that had often stumble 
slightly on the threshold of her presence; that she had heard and 
welcome in her dreams; that would not come again. 

the raindrop lay like tear upon her face. 

she brush them aside, and, rising, put up her hand to feel the wet 
lie heavy on her hair. the cold of her limb surprise her 
faintly. downstairs she went again, the echo mock every step. 

she closed the door of the room behind her and idle clear a scrap of 
paper from a chair. mechanical her hand went to the litter on his 
desk and she had straighten it all before she realise that there was 
no long any need. to-morrow would bring a voice she did not know; 
would usher a stranger into her room to take her measure from behind a 
barrier of formality. for the rest there would be work, and food, and 
sleep. 

these things would make life--life that had been love. 

she put on her hat and coat. the room seem small somehow and 
shabbier. the shade lights that had invited, now merely irritated; the 
whimsical disorder of books and papers spoke only of an uncompleted 
task. gone was the glamour and the promise and the good comradeship. he 
had taken them all. she face to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow 
empty-handed--in her heart the memory of words that had sear and 
heal in a breath, and the dead dream of a kiss. her throat ache with 
the pain of it. 

and then sudden she heard him coming back! 

she stiffened. for one instant, mind and body, she was rigid with the 
sheer wonder of it. then, as the atmosphere of the room surge back, 
tense with vitality, her mind leapt forward in welcome. he was coming 
back, coming back! the words hammer themselves out to the rhythm of 
the eager tread that never linger so much as a second's space on its 
way to her, that stumble slightly on the threshold of her presence. 

by some queer, reflex twist of memory, her hand brush imaginary 
raindrop from her face and stray uncertain to where the wet had 
lain on her hair. 

the door open and closed behind him. 

"i've come back. i've come back to kiss you. dear--_dear_!" 

her outflung hand checked him in his stride towards her. words came 
stammer to her lips. 

"why--but--this isn't--i don't understand! all you said--it was true, 
surely? it was cruel of you to make me know it was true and then come 
back!" 

"let me kiss you--let me, let me!" he was overwhelming her, ignore her 
resistance. "i must kiss you, i must kiss you." he said it again and 
again. 

"no, no, you shan't--you can't play with me! you said you were afraid 
for me, and you made me afraid, too--of my weakness--of the danger--of 
my longing for you----" 

"let me kiss you! yes, you shall let me; you _shall_ let me." his arms 
held her, his face touched hers. 

"aren't you afraid any more? has a miracle happened--may we kiss in 
spite of to-morrow?" 

inch by inch she was relaxing. all thought was slip away into a 
great white light that held no to-morrows, nor any fear of them, nor of 
herself, nor of anything. the light crept to her feet, rose to her 
heart, her head. through the radiance came his words. 

"yes, a miracle. oh, my dear--my little child! i've come back to kiss 
you, little child." 

"kiss me, then," she said against his lips. 


iii 

hazy she was aware that he had release her; that she had raise her 
head; that against the rough tweed of his shoulder there lay a long, 
corn-gold hair. 

she laugh shaky and her hand went up to remove it; but he caught her 
finger and held them to his face. and with the movement and his look 
there came over her in a wave the shame of her surrender, a shame that 
was yet a glory, a diadem of pride. she turn blind away. 

"please," she heard herself saying, "let me go now. i want to be alone. 
i want to--please don't tell me to-night. to-morrow----" 

she was at the door, grope for the handle. behind her she heard his 
voice; it was very tender. 

"i shall always kneel to you--in your shrine." 

then she was outside, and the chilly passage were cool her burning 
face. she had left him in the room behind her; and she knew he would 
wait there long enough to allow her to leave the building. almost 
immediately, it seemed, she was downstairs in the hall, had reach the 
entrance. 

she confront a group of white-faced, silent men. 

"why, is anything the matter? what has happened? o'dell?" 

the porter stood forward. he clear his throat twice, but for all that, 
his words were barely audible. 

"yes, miss carryll. good-night, miss. you'd best be go on, miss, if 
you'll excuse----" 

behind o'dell stood a policeman; behind him again, a grave-eyed man 
stoop to an unusual task. it arrest her attention like the flash of 
red danger. 

"why is the door of your room being locked, o'dell?" she knew her 
curiosity was indecent, but some powerful premonition was stirring in 
her, and she could not pass on. "has there been an accident? who is in 
there?" 

then, almost under her feet, she saw a dark pool lie sluggish 
against the tiles; near the door another--on the pavement outside 
another--and yet another. she gasped, drew back, felt horrible sick; 
and, as she turned, she caught o'dell's mutter aside to the policeman. 

"young lady's 'is seccereterry--must be the last that seen 'im alive. 
all told, 'tain't more'n 'arf-an-'our since 'e left. 'good-night, 
o'dell,' sez 'e. 'miss carryll's still working--don't lock 'er in,' sez 
'e. would 'ave 'is joke. must 'ave gone round the corner an' slap inter 
the car. wish to god the amberlance----" 

her cry cut into his words as she flung herself forward. her finger 
wrench at the key of the lock door and turn it, in spite of the 
detain hand that seem light as leaves upon her shoulder, and as 
easily shaken off. unhearing, unheeding, she forced her way into the 
glare of electric light flood the little room--beating down on to the 
table and its sheet burden. before she reach it, knowledge had 
drop upon her like a mantle. 

her face was grey as the one from which she drew the merciful coverings, 
but her eyes went fearless to that which she sought. 

against the rough tweed of the shoulder lay a long, corn-gold hair. 




vi 

the goth 


young cargill smile as mrs. lardner finished her account. 

"and do you really think that the fact that the poor chap was drown 
had anything to do with it?" he asked. "why, you admit yourself that he 
was known to have been drink just before he fell out of his boat!" 

"you may say what you like," return his hostess impressively, "but 
since first we came to live at tryn yr wylfa only four people besides 
poor robert have defy the fates, and each of them was drown within 
the year. 

"they were all tourists," she add with something suspicious like 
satisfaction. 

"i am not a superstitious man myself," supplement the major. "but you 
can't get away from the facts, you know, cargill." 

cargill said no more. he perceive that they had live long enough in 
retirement in the little welsh village to have acquire a pride in its 
legend. 

the legend and the mountain are the two attraction of tryn yr 
wylfa--the official guidebook devote an equal amount of space to each. 
it will tell you that the bay, across which the quarry's tramp steamer 
now sail, was once dry land on which stood a village. deep in the water 
the remains of this village can still be seen in clear weather. but 
whosoever dare to look upon them will be drown within the year. a 
local publication give full detail of those who have looked--and 
perished. 

the legend had received an unexpected boom in the drown of roberts, 
which had just occurred. robert was a fisherman who had recently come 
from the south. one calm day in february he had row out into the bay 
in fulfilment of a drunken boast. he was drown three days before 
midsummer. 

after dinner young cargill forgot about it. he forgot almost everything 
except betty lardner. but, oddly enough, as he walk back to the hotel 
it was just betty lardner who made him think again of the legend. he was 
in love, and, being very young, want to do something insane heroic. 
to defy the fates by look on the sunken village was an obvious outlet 
for heroism. 

he must have thought a good deal about it before he fell asleep, for he 
remember his resolution on the following morning. 

after breakfast he saunter along the brief strip of asphalt which the 
villager believe to be a promenade. he was not actually thinking of the 
legend; to be precise, he was thinking of betty lardner, but he was 
sudden remind of it by a boatman pressing him for his custom. 

"yes," he said abruptly. "i will hire your boat if you will row me out 
to the sunken village. i want to look at it." 

the welshman eye him suspiciously, perceive that he was not joking, 
and shook his head. 

"come," persist cargill, "i will make it a sovereign if you care to do 
it." 

"thank you, but indeed, no, sir," reply the welshman. "not if it wass 
a hundred sofereigns!" 

"surely you are not afraid?" 

"it iss not fit," retort the welshman, turning on his heel. 

it was probably this opposition that made young cargill decide that it 
would be really worth while to defy the legend. 

he did not approach the only other boatman. he considered the question 
of swimming. the knowledge that the distance there and back was nearly 
five mile did not render the feat impossible, for he was a champion 
swimmer. 

but he soon thought of a better way. he went back to the hotel and 
sought out bissett. bissett was a fellow member of the middle temple, as 
contented briefless as himself. and bissett possessed a motor-boat. 

bissett was not exactly keen on the prospect. 

"don't you think it is rather a silly thing to do?" he reasoned. "of 
course it's all rot in a way--it must be. but isn't it just as well to 
treat that sort of thing with respect?" 

eventually he agree to take the motor-boat to within a few hundred 
yard of the spot. they would tow a dinghy, in which young cargill could 
finish the journey. 

it took young cargill half-an-hour to find the spot. but he did find it, 
and he did look upon, and actually see, all that remain of the sunken 
village. 

he felt vague ashamed of himself when he return to dry land. he 
notice that several of the villager gave him unfriend glances; and 
he resolve that he would say nothing of the matter to the lardners. 

they were have tea on the lawn when he drop in. he thought that 
mrs. lardner's welcome was a trifle chilly. after tea betty execute a 
quite deliberate manœuvre to avoid have him for a partner at tennis. 
but he ran her to earth later, when they were pick up the balls. 

"how _could_ you?" was all she said. 

"i--i didn't know you knew," he stammer weakly. 

"of course everybody knows! it was all over the village before you 
returned. 

"can't you see what that legend meant to us?" she went on. "it was a 
thing of beauty. and now you have spoilt it. it's like burning down the 
tree of the fairy glen. you--you _goth_!" 

"but suppose i am drown before the year is out--like roberts?" he 
suggest jocularly. 

"then i will forgive you," she said. and to cargill it sound exactly 
as if she meant what she said. 

a few days later he return to town. for six month he thought little 
about the legend. then he was remind of it. 

he had been spend a week-end at brighton. on the return journey he 
had a first-class smoker in the rear of the train to himself. towards 
the end of the hour he doze and dreamt of the day he had look on the 
sunken village. he was awaken when the train made its usual stop on 
the bridge outside victoria. 

it had been a pleasant dream, and he was still try to preserve the 
illusion when his eye fell lazy on the window, and he notice that 
there was a dense fog. 

"bit rough on the legend that i happen to be a londoner!" he mused. 
"it isn't easy to drown a man in town!" 

he stood up with the object of remove his dressing-case from the rack. 
but before he reach it there was the shriek of a whistle, a violent 
shock, and he was hurl heavy into the opposite seat. 

it was not a collision in the newspaper sense of the word. no one was 
hurt. a local train, creep along at four mile an hour, had simply 
miss its signal in the fog and bump the brighton train. 

young cargill, in common with most other passenger put his head out of 
the window. he saw nothing--except the parapet of the bridge. 

"by god!" he muttered. "if that other train had been go a little 
faster----" 

he could just hear the river gurgle beneath him. 

he had got over his fright by the time he reach victoria. 

"just a common-place accident," he assured himself, as he drove in a 
taxi-cab to his chambers. "that's the worst of it! if i happen to be 
drown in the ordinary way they'd swear it was the legend. i suppose, 
for that reason, i had better not take any risks. anyhow, i needn't go 
near the sea until the year is out!" 

the superstitious would doubtless affirm that the fates had sent him one 
warning and, anger at his refusal to accept it, had determined to 
drive home the lesson of his own impotence. for when he arrive at his 
chambers he found a cablegram from paris await him. 

"hullo, this must be from uncle peter!" he exclaimed, as he tore open 
the envelope. 

"_fear uncle dying. come at once.--machell._" 

machell was the elder cargill's secretary, and young cargill was the old 
man's heir. 

it was not until he was in the boat-train that he realise that he was 
about to cross the sea. 

it was a coincidence--an odd coincidence. when the ship toss in an 
unusually rough crossing he was prepared to admit to himself that it was 
an uncanny coincidence. 

he stay a week in paris for his uncle's funeral. when he made the 
return journey the channel was like the proverbial mill pond. but it was 
not until the ship had actually put into dove that he laugh at the 
failure of the fates to take the opportunity to drown him. 

he laughed, to be exact, as he was step down the gangway. at the end 
of the gangway the fold of the rug which he was carry on his arm, 
caught in the railings. he turn sharp to free it and step back, 
cannon into an officer of the dock. it threw him off his balance on 
the edge of the dockside. 

even if the official had not grab him, it is highly probable that he 
could have save himself from fall into the water, because the 
gangway railing was in easy reach; and if you remember that he was a 
champion swimmer, you will agree that it is still more probable that he 
would not have been drowned, even if he had fallen. 

but the incident made its impression. his thought revert to it 
constant during the next few days. then he told himself that his 
attendance at the last rite of his uncle had made him morbid, and was 
more or less successful in dismiss the affair from his mind. 

he had many friends in common with the lardners. early in february he 
was invite for a week's hunting to a house at which betty lardner was 
also a guest. 

she had not forgotten. she did her best to avoid him, and succeed 
remarkably well, in spite of the fact that their hostess, knowing 
something of young cargill's feelings, made several effort to throw 
them together. 

one day at the end of the hunt he came alongside of her and they walk 
their horse home together. when he was sure that they were out of 
earshot he asked: 

"you haven't forgiven me yet?" 

"you know the conditions," she reply banteringly. 

"you leave me no alternative to suicide," he protested. 

"that would be cheating," she said. "you must be drown honestly, or 
it's no good." 

then he made a foolish reply. he thought her humour forced and it 
annoy him. remember that he was exasperated. he had look forward to 
meeting her, and now she was treat him with studied cold over 
what still seem to him a comparatively trifling matter. 

"i am afraid," he said, "that that is hardly likely to occur. the fact 
of my being a townsman instead of a drunken boatman doesn't give your 
legend a fair chance!" 

less than an hour afterwards he was have his bath before dressing for 
dinner. the water was delicious hot, and the room was full of steam. 
as he lay in the bath a drowsy stole over him. enjoy the keen 
physical pleasure of it, he thought what a wholly delightful thing was a 
hot bath after a day's hard hunting. his mind, border on sleep, dwelt 
lazy on hot baths in general. and then with a startle sudden 
came the thought that, before now, men had been drown in their baths! 

with a shock he realise that he had almost fallen asleep. he try to 
rouse himself, but a faint had seize him. that steam--he could not 
breathe! he was certain he was go to faint. 

with a desperate effort of the will he hurl himself out of the bath 
and threw open the window. 

it must have been the bath episode that first arouse the sensation of 
positive fear in cargill. for it was almost a month later when he 
surprise the secretary of that swimming club of which he was the main 
pillar by his refusal to take part in any event for the coming season. 

he was beginning to take precautions. 

late one night, when taxi-cabs were scarce, he found that his quickest 
way to reach home would be by means of one of the tubes. he was in the 
descend lift when he sudden remember that that particular tube 
ran beneath the river. suppose an accident should occur--a leakage! 
after all such a thing was within the bounds of possibility. instantly 
there rose before him the vision of a black torrent roaring through the 
tunnel. 

without wait for the lift to ascend he rush to the staircase, and 
sweat with terror gain the street and bribe a loaf to find him a 
cab. 

he made an effort to take himself seriously in hand after that. more 
than one acquaintance had lately told him that he was look "nervy." 
in the last few week his sane and normal self seem to have shrunk 
within him. but it was still capable of assert itself under 
favourable conditions. it would talk aloud to the rest of him as if to a 
separate individual. 

"look here, old man, this superstitious nonsense is becoming an 
obsession to you," it said one fine april morning. "yes, i mean what i 
say--an obsession! you must pull yourself together or you'll go stark 
mad, and then you'll probably go and throw yourself over the embankment. 
that legend is all bosh! you're in the twentieth century, and you're not 
a drunken fisherman----" 

"hullo, young cargill!" 

the door burst open and stranack, ooze health and sanity, glare at 
him. 

"jove! what a wreck you look!" continue stranack. "you've been 
froust too much. i'm glad i came. the car's outside, and we'll run 
down to kingston, take a skiff and pull up to molesey." 

the river! young cargill felt the blood singing in his ears. 

"i'm afraid i can't manage it. i--i've got an appointment this 
afternoon," he stammered. 

stranack perceive that he was lying, and wondered. for a few minutes 
he gossiped, while young cargill was repeating to himself: 

"you must pull yourself together. it's becoming an obsession. you must 
pull yourself together." 

he was vague conscious that stranack was about to depart. stranack was 
already in the doorway. his chance of killing the obsession was slip 
from him! a special effort and then: 

"stop!" cry cargill. "i--i'll come with you, stranack." 

oddly enough, he felt much better when they were actually on the river. 
he had never been afraid of water, as such. and the familiar scenery, 
together with the wholesome exercise of sculling, act as a tonic to 
his nerves. 

they pull above molesey lock. when they were returning, stranack said: 

"you'll take her through the lock, won't you?" 

it was a needless remark, and if stranack had not made it all might have 
been well. as a fact, it set cargill ask himself why he should not 
take her through the lock. he was admitted to be a much better boatman 
than stranack, and everyone knew that it require a certain amount of 
skill to manage a lock properly. locks were dangerous if you play the 
fool. before now people had been drown in locks. 

the rest was inevitable. he lost his head as the lower gate swung open, 
and broke the rule of the river by push out in front of a launch. the 
launch was already under way, and young cargill try to avoid it 
better, thrust with his boat-hook at the side of the lock. the thrust 
was nervous and ill-calculated, and the next instant the skiff had 
blunder under the bow of the launch. 

it happen very quickly. the skiff was forced, broadside on, against 
the lock gates, and was splinter like firewood. cargill fell 
backwards, struck his head heavy against the gates--and sank. 

he return to consciousness in the lock-keeper's lodge. he had been 
under water a dangerous long time before stranack, who had suffer no 
more than a wetting, had found him. it had been touch and go for his 
life, but artificial respiration had succeeded. 

he soon went to pieces after that. 

from one of the window of his chambers the river was just visible. one 
morning he deliberate pull the blind down. the action was important. 
it signify that he had definitely given up pretend that he had the 
power of shake off the obsession. 

but if he could not shake it off, he could at least keep it temporary 
at bay. he start a guerilla campaign against the obsession with the 
aid of the brandy bottle. he was rarely drunk, and as rarely sober. 

he was sober the day he was compel to call on an aunt who live in 
the still prosperous outskirts of paddington. it was one of his good 
days and, in spite of his sobriety, he had himself in very good control 
when he left his aunt. 

in his search for a cab it became necessary for him to cross the canal. 
on the bridge he pause and, gripping the parapet, made a surprise 
attack upon his enemy. 

some children, play on the tow path, help him considerably. their 
delightful sanity in the presence of the water was worth more to him 
than the brandy. he was positively winning the battle, when one of the 
children fell into the water. 

for an instant he hesitated. then, as on the night of the tube episode, 
panic seize him. the next instant the man who was probably the best 
amateur swim in england, was running with all his might away from the 
canal. 

when he reach his chambers he waited, with the assistance of the 
brandy, until his man brought him the last edition of the evening paper. 
a tiny paragraph on the back sheet told him of the tragedy. 

an hour later his man found him face downwards on the hearthrug and, 
wrong attribute his condition wholly to the brandy, put him to bed. 

he was in bed about three weeks. the doctor, who was also a personal 
friend, was shrewd enough to suspect that the brandy was the effect, 
rather than the cause of the nerve trouble. 

about the first week in june cargill was allow to get up. 

"you've got to go away," said the doctor one morning. "you are probably 
aware that your nerves have gone to pieces. the sea is the place for 
you!" 

the gasp that follow was scarcely audible, and the doctor miss it. 

"you went to tryn yr wylfa about this time last year," continue the 
doctor. "go there again! go for long walk on the mountains, and put up 
at a temperance hotel." 

he went to tryn yr wylfa. 

the train journey of six hour knock him up for another week. by the 
time he was strong enough for the promenade it was the fourteenth of 
june. he notice the date on the hotel calendar, and realise that the 
fates had another ten days in which to drown him. 

he did not call on the lardners. he felt that he couldn't--after the 
canal episode. four of the ten days had pass before betty lardner ran 
across him on the promenade. 

she notice at once the change in him, and was kind than she had ever 
been before. 

"next saturday," he said, "is the anniversary!" 

for answer she smile at him, and he might have smile back if he had 
not remember the canal. 

she met him each morning after that, so that she was with him on the day 
when he made his atonement. 

there had been a violent storm in the early morning. it had driven one 
of the quarry steamer on to the long sand-bank that lie submerge 
between tryn yr wylfa and puffin island. the gale still lasted, and the 
steamer was in momentary danger of becoming a complete wreck. 

there is no lifeboat service at tryn yr wylfa. it was impossible to 
launch an ordinary boat in such a sea. 

colonel denbigh, the owner of the quarry and local magnate, who had been 
superintend what feeble effort had been made to effect a rescue, 
answer gloomy when betty lardner ask him if there were any hope. 

"it's a terrible thing," he jerked. "first time there has been a wreck 
hereabouts. it's hopeless try to launch a boat----" 

"suppose a fellow were to swim out to the wreck with a life-line in 
tow?" 

it was young cargill who spoke. 

the colonel glare at him contemptuously. 

"he would need to be a pretty fine swimmer," he returned. 

"i don't want to blow my own trumpet, but i am considered to be one of 
the best amateur swim in the country," reply cargill calmly. "if 
you will tell your men to get the line ready, i will borrow a bathing 
suit from somewhere." 

they both stare at him in amazement. 

"but you are still an invalid," cry betty lardner. "you----" 

she stop short and regard him with fresh wonder. somehow he no 
long look an invalid. 

mechanical she walk by his side to the little bathing office. 
sudden she clutch his arm. 

"jack," she said, "have you forgotten the--the legend?" 

"betty," he replied, "have you forgotten the crew?" 

while he was undress the attendant ask him some trivial question. 
he did not hear the man. his thought were far away. he was thinking of 
a group of children play on the bank of a canal. 

to the accompaniment of the colonel's protest they fixed a belt on him, 
to which was attach the life-line. 

he walk along the slope wooden projection that is use as a landing 
stage for pleasure skiffs, walk until the water splash over him. 
then he dive into the boil surf. 

thus it was that he earn betty lardner's forgiveness. 




vii 

the last ascent 


the extraordinary rapid with which a successful airman may achieve 
fame was well shown in the case of my friend, radcliffe thorpe. one week 
known merely to a few friends as a clever young engineer, the next his 
name was on the lip of the civilise world. his first success was 
follow by a series of remarkable feats, of which his flight above the 
atlantic, his race with the torpedo-boat-destroyers across the north 
sea, and his sensational display during the military manœuvres on 
salisbury plain, impress his name and personality firm upon the 
fickle mind of the public, and explain the tremendous excitement cause 
by his inexplicable disappearance during the great aviation meeting at 
attercliffe, near london, towards the end of the summer. 

few people, i suppose, have forgotten the facts. for some time 
previous he had been devote himself more especially to ascend to 
as great a height as possible. he held all the record for height, and 
it was known that at attercliffe he meant to endeavour to eclipse his 
own achievements. 

it was a lovely day, not a breath of wind stirring, not a cloud in the 
sky. we saw him start. we saw him fly up and up in great sweeping 
spirals. we saw him climb higher and ever higher into the azure space. 
we watch him, those of us whose eyes could bear the strain, as he 
dwindle to a dot and a speck, till at last he pass beyond sight. 

it was a stirring thing to see a man thus storm, as it were, the wall 
of heaven and probe the very mystery of space. i remember i felt quite 
annoy with someone who was taking a cinematograph record. it seem 
such a sordid, business-like thing to be do at such a moment. 

presently the aeroplane came into sight again and was greet with a 
sudden roar of cheering. 

"he is do a glide down," someone cry excitedly, and though someone 
else declared that a glide from such a height was unthinkable and 
impossible, yet it was soon plain that the first speaker was right. 

down through unimaginable thousand of feet, straight and swift swept 
the machine, making such a sweep as the eagle in its pride would never 
have dared. people held their breath to watch, expect every moment 
some catastrophe. but the machine kept on an even keel, and in a few 
moments i join with the other in a wild rush to the field at a little 
distance where the machine, like a mighty bird, had alight easily and 
safely. 

but when we reach it we doubt our own eyes, our own sanity. there 
was no sign anywhere of radcliffe thorpe! 

no one knew what to say; we look blank at our neighbours, and one 
man got down on his hand and knee and peer under the body of the 
machine as if he suspect radcliffe of hiding there. then the chairman 
of the meeting, lord fallowfield, made a curious discovery. 

"look," he said in a high, shaken voice, "the steer wheel is jammed!" 

it was true. the steer wheel had been careful fasten in one 
position, and the lever control the plane had also been fixed so as 
to hold them at the right angle for a downward glide. that was strange 
enough, but in face of the mystery of radcliffe's disappearance little 
attention was paid it. 

where, then, was its pilot? that was the question that was filling 
everybody's mind. he had vanish as utterly as vanish the mist one 
see rising in the sunshine. 

it was supposed he must have fallen from his seat, but as to how that 
had happened, how it was that no fragment of his body or his clothing 
was ever found, above all, how it was that his aeroplane had returned, 
the engine cut off, the plane secure in correct position, no even 
moderately plausible explanation was ever put forward. 

the loss to aeronautics was felt to be severe. from childhood radcliffe 
had shown that, in addition to this, he had a marked aptitude for 
drawing, usually held at the service of his profession, but now and 
again exercise in produce sketch of his friends. 

among those who knew him private he was fairly popular, though not, 
perhaps, so much so as he deserved; certainly he had a way of talk 
"shop" which was a trifle tire to those who did not figure the world 
as one vast engineering problem, while with women he was apt to be 
brusque and short-mannered. 

my surprise, then, can be imagine when, calling one afternoon on him 
and have to wait a little, i had notice lie on his desk a crayon 
sketch of a woman's face. it was a very lovely face, the features almost 
perfect, and yet there was about it something unearthly and spectral 
that was curious disturbing. 

"smitten at last?" i ask jestingly, and yet aware of a certain odd 
discomfort. 

when, he saw what i was look at he went very pale. 

"who is it?" i asked. 

"oh, just--someone!" he answered. 

he took the sketch from me, look at it, frown and lock it away. as 
he seem unwill to pursue the subject, i went on to talk of the 
business i had come about, and i congratulate him on his flight of the 
day before in which he had broken the record for height. as i was go 
he said: 

"by the way, that sketch--what did you think of it?" 

"why, that you had better be careful," i answered, laughing; "or you'll 
be fall from your high estate of bachelordom." 

he gave so violent a start, his face express so much of apprehension 
and dismay, that i stare at him blankly. recover himself with an 
effort, he stammer out: 

"it's not--i mean--it's an imaginary portrait." 

"then," i said, amaze in my turn, "you've a jolly sight more 
imagination than anyone ever credit you with." 

the incident remain in my mind. as a matter of fact, practical 
radcliffe thorpe, absorb in question of strain and ease, his head 
full of cylinder and wheels and ratchet and the lord know what else, 
would have seem to me the last man on earth to create that haunting, 
strange, unearthly face, human in form, but not in expression. 

it was about this time that radcliffe began to give so much attention to 
the making of very high flights. his favourite time was in the early 
morning, as soon as it was light. then in the chill dawn he would rise 
and soar and wing his flight high and ever higher, up and up, till the 
eye could no long follow his ascent. 

i remember he made one of these strange, solitary flight when i was 
spend the week-end with him at his cottage near the attercliffe 
aviation grounds. 

i had come down from town somewhat late the night before, and i remember 
that just before we went to bed we went out for a few minutes to enjoy 
the beauty of a perfect night. the moon was shining in a clear sky, not 
a sound or a breath disturbed the sublime quietude; in the south one 
wondrous star gleam low on the horizon. neither of us spoke; it was 
enough to drink in the beauty of such rare perfection, and i notice how 
radcliffe kept his eyes fixed upwards on the dark blue vault of space. 

"are you longing to be up there?" i ask him jestingly. 

he start and flushed, and he then went very pale, and to my surprise i 
saw that he was shivering. 

"you are get cold," i said. "we had better go in." 

he nod without answering, and, as we turn to go in, i heard quite 
plainly and distinct a low, strange laugh, a laugh full of a honeyed 
sweet that yet thrill me with great fear. 

"what's that?" i said, stopping short. 

"what?" radcliffe asked. 

"someone laughed," i said, and i stare all round and then upwards. "i 
thought it came from up there," i said in a bewilder way, point 
upwards. 

he gave me an odd look and, without answering, went into the cottage. he 
had said nothing of have plan any flight for the next morning; but 
in the early morning, the chill and grey dawn, i was rouse by the 
drum of his engine. at once i jump up out of bed and ran to the 
window. 

the machine was raise itself lightly and easily from the ground. i 
watch him wing his god-like way up through the still, soft air till he 
was lost to view. then, after a time, i saw him emerge again from those 
immensity of space. he came down in one long majestic sweep, and 
alight in a field a little way away from the house, leave the 
aeroplane for his mechanics to fetch up presently. 

"hullo!" i greet him. "why didn't you tell me you were go up?" 

as i spoke i heard plainly and distinctly, as plainly as ever i heard 
anything in my life, that low, strange laugh, that i had heard before, 
so silvery sweet and yet somehow so horrible. 

"what's that?" i said, stopping short and staring blank upwards, for, 
absurd though it seems, that weird sound seem to come floating down 
from an infinite height above us. 

"not high enough," he mutter like a man in an ecstasy. "not high 
enough yet." 

he walk away from me then without another word. when i enter the 
cottage he was seat at the table sketch a woman's face--the same 
face i had seen in that other sketch of his, spectral, unreal, and 
lovely. 

"what on earth----?" i began. 

"nothing on earth," he answer in a strange voice. then he laugh and 
jump up, and tore his sketch across. 

he seem quite his old self again, chatty and pleasant, and with his 
old passion for talk "shop." he launch into a long explanation of 
some scheme he had in mind for secure automatic balancing. 

i never told anyone about that strange, mock laugh, in fact, i had 
almost forgotten the incident altogether when something brought every 
detail back to my memory. i had a letter from a person who sign 
himself "george barnes." 

barnes, it seemed, was the operator who had taken the pictures of that 
last ascent, and as he understood i had been mr. thorpe's greatest 
friend, he want to see me. certain expression in the letter arouse 
my curiosity. i replied. he ask for an appointment at a time that was 
not very convenient, and finally i arrange to call at his house one 
evening. 

it was one of those smart little six-room villa of which so many have 
been put up in the london suburbs of late. barnes was buy it on the 
instalment system, and i quite won his heart by compliment him on it. 
but for that, i doubt if anything would have come of my visit, for he 
was plainly nervous and ill at ease and very repentant of ever have 
said anything. but after my compliment to the house we got on better. 

"it's on my mind," he said; "i shan't be easy till someone else knows." 

we were in the front room where a good fire was burning--in my honour, i 
guessed, for the apartment had not the air of being much used. on the 
table were some photographs. barnes show them me. they were 
enlargement from those he had taken of poor radcliffe's last ascent. 

"they've been shown all over the world," he said. "millions of people 
have seen them." 

"well?" i said. 

"but there's one no one has seen--no one except me." 

he produce another print and gave it to me. i glance at it. it seem 
much like the others, have been apparently one of the last of the 
series, taken when the aeroplane was at a great height. the only thing 
in which it differ from the other was that it seem a trifle 
blurred. 

"a poor one," i said; "it's misty." 

"look at the mist," he said. 

i did so. slowly, very slowly, i began to see that that misty appearance 
had a shape, a form. even as i look i saw the features of a human 
countenance--and yet not human either, so spectral was it, so unreal and 
strange. i felt the blood run cold in my vein and the hair bristle on 
the scalp of my head, for i recognise beyond all doubt that this face 
on the photograph was the same as that radcliffe had sketched. the 
resemblance was absolute, no one who had seen the one could mistake the 
other. 

"you see it?" barnes muttered, and his face was almost as pale as mine. 

"there's a woman," i stammered, "a woman floating in the air by his 
side. her arms are held out to him." 

"yes," barnes said. "who was she?" 

the print slip from my hand and flutter to the ground. barnes 
picked it up and put it in the fire. was it fancy or, as it flared up, 
and burnt and was consumed, did i really hear a faint laugh floating 
downwards from the upper air? 

"i destroy the negative," barnes said, "and i told my boss something 
had gone wrong with it. no one has seen that photograph but you and me, 
and now no one ever will." 




viii 

the terror by night 


maynard disincumbere himself from his fishing-creel, stab the butt 
of his rod into the turf, and settled down in the heather to fill a 
pipe. all round him stretch the undulate moor, purple in the late 
summer sunlight. to the southward, low down, a faint haze told where the 
sea lay. the stream at his feet sang its queer, croon moor-song as it 
ramble onward, chuckle to meet a bed of pebble somewhere out of 
sight, whisper mysterious to the rushes that fringe its bank of 
peat, deepen to a sudden contralto as it pour over granite boulder 
into a scum-flecked pool below. 

for a long time the man sat smoking. occasional he turn his head to 
watch with keen eyes the fretful movements of a fly hover above the 
water. then a sudden dimple in the smooth surface of the stream arrest 
his attention. a few concentric ripple widened, travelled towards him, 
and were absorb in the current. his lip curve into a little smile 
and he reach for his rod. in the clear water he could see the origin 
of the ripples; a small trout, unconscious of his presence, was wait 
in its hover for the next tit-bit to float downstream. presently it rose 
again. 

"the odds are ten to one in your favour," said the man. "let's see!" 

he drop on one knee and the cast leapt out in feathery coils. once, 
twice it swished; the third time it alight like thistledown on the 
surface. there was a tiny splash, a laugh, and the little greenheart 
rod flick a trout high over his head. it was the merest 
baby--half-an-ounce, perhaps--and it fell from the hook into the herbage 
some yard from the stream. 

"little ass!" said maynard. "that was meant for your big brother." 

he recover his cast and began to look for his victim. without avail he 
search the heather, and as the fateful seconds sped, at last laid down 
his rod and drop on hand and knee to probe among the grass-stems. 

for a while he hunt in vain, then the sunlight show a golden sheen 
among some stones. maynard gave a grunt of relief, but as his hand 
closed round it a tiny flutter pass through the fingerling; it gave a 
final gasp and was still. knitting his brow in almost comical vexation, 
he hasten to restore it to the stream, holding it by the tail and 
strive to impart a life-like wriggle to its limpness. 

"buck up, old thing!" he murmur encouragingly. "oh, buck up! you're 
all right, really you are!" 

but the "old thing" was all wrong. in fact, it was dead. 

standing in the wet shingle, maynard regard the speckle atom as it 
lay in the palm of his hand. 

"a matter of seconds, my son. one instant in all eternity would have 
made just the difference between life and death to you. and the high 
gods deny it you!" 

on the opposite side of the stream, set back about thirty pace from the 
brink, stood a granite boulder. it was as high as a man's chest, roughly 
cubical in shape; but the weather and clinging moss had round its 
edges, and in place segment had crumble away, give foothold to 
clump of fern and starry moor-flowers. on three side the surrounding 
ground rose steeply, form an irregular horseshoe mound that open to 
the west. perhaps it was the queer amphitheatre effect of this 
setting that connected up some whimsical train of thought in maynard's 
brain. 

"it would seem as if the gods had claim you," he mused, still holding 
the corpse. "you shall be a sacrifice--a burnt sacrifice to the god of 
waste places." 

he laugh at the conceit, half-ashamed of his own childishness, and 
crossing the stream by some boulders, he brush away the earth and weed 
from the top of the great stone. then he retrace his steps and gather 
a handful of bleach twig that the winter flood had left stranded 
along the margin of the stream. these he arrange methodical on the 
clear space; on the top of the tiny pyre he placed the troutlet. 

"there!" he said, and smile grave struck a match. a faint column of 
smoke curl up into the still air, and as he spoke the lower rim of the 
setting sun met the edge of the moor. the evening seem sudden to 
become incredible still, even the voice of the stream cease to be a 
sound distinct. a wagtail bob in the shallows flee into the waste. 
overhead the smoke tremble upwards, a faint stain against a cloudless 
sky. the still seem almost acute. it was as if the moor were 
waiting, and holding its breath while it waited. then the twig upon his 
altar crackled, and the pale flame blaze up. the man step back with 
artistic appreciation of the effect. 

"to be really impressive, there ought to be more smoke," he continued. 

round the base of the stone were clump of small flowers. they were 
crimson in colour and had thick, fleshy leaves. hastily, he snatch a 
handful and pile it on the fire. the smoke darken and rose in a thick 
column; there was a curious pungent in the air. 

far off the church-bell in some unseen hamlet struck the hour. the 
distant sound, coming from the world of men and every-day affairs, 
seem to break the spell. an ousel flutter across the stream and 
dabble in a puddle among some stones. rabbit began to show themselves 
and frisk with lengthen shadow in the clear spaces. maynard look at 
his watch, half-mindful of a train to be caught somewhere mile away, 
and then, held by the peace of running water, stretch himself against 
the slope ground. 

the glowing world seem people by tiny folk, living out their timid, 
inscrutable lives around him. a water-rat, passing bright-eyed upon his 
lawful occasion, pause on the border of the stream to consider the 
stranger, and was lost to view. a stagnant pool among some reeds caught 
the reflection of the sunset and change on the instant into raw gold. 

maynard pluck a grass stem and chew it reflectively, staring out 
across the purple moor and lazy watch the western sky turn from 
glory to glory. over his head the smoke of the sacrifice still curl 
and eddy upwards. then a sudden sound sent him on to one elbow--the 
thud of an approach horse's hoofs. 

"moor ponies!" he muttered, and, rising, stood expectant beside his 
smoking altar. 

then he heard the sudden jingle of a bit, and presently a horse and 
rider climb into view against the pure sky. a young girl, breeched, 
booted and spur like a boy, drew rein, and sat look down into the 
hollow. 

for a moment neither spoke; then maynard acknowledge her presence by 
raise his tweed hat. she gave a little nod. 

"i thought it was somebody swaling--burning the heather." she considered 
the ember on the stone, and then her grey eyes travelled back to the 
spare, tweed-clad figure beside it. 

he smile in his slow way--a rather attractive smile. 

"no. i've just conclude some pagan rite in connection with a small 
trout!" he nod grave at the stone. "that was a burnt sacrifice." 
with whimsical serious he told her of the trout's demise and high 
destiny. 

for a moment she look doubtful; but the inflection of breeding in his 
voice, the wholesome, lean face and humorous eyes, reassure her. a 
smile hover about the corner of her mouth. 

"oh, is that it? i wonder ..." 

she gather the reins and turn her horse's head. 

"forgive me if i drag you out of your way," said maynard, never swift 
to conventionality, but touched by the tired shadow in her eyes. the 
faint droop of her mouth, too, betray intense fatigue. "you look 
fagged. i don't want to be a nuisance or bore you, but i wish you'd let 
me offer you a sandwich. i've some milk here, too." 

the girl look round the ragged moor, brood in the twilight, and 
half hesitated. then she forced a wan little smile. 

"i am tired, and hungry, too. have you enough for us both?" 

"lots!" said maynard. to himself he added: "and what's more, my child, 
you'll have a little faint affair in a few minutes, if you don't have 
a feed." 

"come and rest for a minute," he continue aloud. 

he spoke with pleasant, impersonal kindliness, and as he turn to his 
satchel she slip out of the saddle and came towards him, leading her 
horse. 

"drink that," he said, holding out the cup of his flask. she drank with 
a wry little face, and coughed. "i put a little whisky in it," he 
explained. "you need it." 

she thank him and sat down with the bridle link over her arm. the 
colour crept back into her cheeks. maynard produce a packet of 
sandwich and a pasty. 

"i've been moon about the moor all the afternoon and lost myself 
twice," she explain between frank mouthfuls. "i'm hopeless late for 
dinner, and i've still got mile to go." 

"do you know the way now?" he asked. 

"oh, yes! it won't take me long. my family are sensible, too, and don't 
fuss." she look at him, her long-lashed eyes a little serious. "but 
you--how are you go to get home? it's get late to be out on the 
moor afoot." 

maynard laughed. 

"oh, i'm all right, thanks!" he sniff the warm september night. "i 
think i shall sleep here, as a matter of fact. i'm a gipsy by instinct-- 

"'give to me the life i love, 
let the lave go by me, 
give the jolly heaven above----'" 

he broke off, arrest by her unsmile eyes. she was silent a moment. 

"people don't as a rule sleep out--about here." the words came jerkily, 
as if she were force a natural tone into her voice. 

"no?" he was accustomed to being question on his unconventional mode 
of life, and was prepared for the usual expostulations. she look 
abrupt towards him. 

"are you superstitious?" 

he laugh and shook his head. 

"i don't think so. but what has that got to do with it?" 

she hesitated, flush a little. 

"there is a legend--people about here say that the moor here is haunted. 
there is a thing that hunt people to death!" 

he laugh outright, wonder how old she was. seventeen or eighteen, 
perhaps. she had said her people "didn't fuss." that meant she was left 
to herself to pick up all these old wives' tales. 

"really! has anyone been caught?" 

she nodded, unsmiling. 

"yes; old george toms. he was one of dad's tenants, a big purple-faced 
man, who drank a lot and never took much exercise. they found him in a 
ditch with his clothes all torn and cover with mud. he had been run to 
death; there was no wound on his body, but his heart was broken." her 
thought recur to the stone against which they leant, and his quaint 
conceit. "you were rather rash to go offering burnt sacrifice about 
here, don't you think? dad say that stone is the remains of an old 
phœnician altar, too." 

she was smile now, but the serious linger in her eyes. 

"and i have probably invoke some terrible heathen deity--ashtoreth, or 
pugm, or baal! how awful!" he added, with mock gravity. 

the girl rose to her feet. 

"you are laugh at me. the people about here are superstitious, and i 
am a celt, too. i belong here." 

he jump up with a quick protest. 

"no, i'm not laugh at you. please don't think that! but it's a little 
hard to believe in active evil when all around is so beautiful." he 
help her to mount and walk to the top of the mound at her stirrup. 
"tell me, is there any charm or incantation, in case----?" his eyes were 
twinkling, but she shook her fair head soberly. 

"they say iron--cold iron--is the only thing it cannot cross. but i must 
go!" she held out her hand with half-shy friendliness. "thank you for 
your nice to me." her eyes grew sudden wistful. "really, though, i 
don't think i should stay there if i were you. please!" 

he only laughed, however, and she move off, shake her impatient 
horse into a canter. maynard stood look after her till she was 
swallow by the dusk and surrounding moor. then, thoughtfully, he 
retrace his steps to the hollow. 

* * * * * 

a cloud lay across the face of the moon when fear awoke maynard. he 
roll on to one elbow and stare round the hollow, fill with 
inexplicable dread. he was ordinarily a courageous man, and had no 
nerves to speak of; yet, as his eyes follow the line of the ridge 
against the sky, he experienced terror, the elementary, nauseate 
terror of childhood, when the skin tingles, and the heart beat at a 
suffocate gallop. it was very dark, but momentarily his eyes grew 
accustomed to it. he was conscious of a queer, pungent smell, horrible 
animal and corrupt. 

sudden the utter silence broke. he heard a rattle of stones, the 
splash of water about him, realise that it was the brook beneath his 
feet, and that he, maynard, was running for his life. 

neither then nor later did reason assert herself. he ran without 
question or amazement. his brain--the part where human reasoning hold 
normal sway--was dominate by the purely primitive instinct of flight. 
and in that sudden rout of courage and self-respect one conscious 
thought alone remained. whatever it was that was even then at his heels, 
he must not see it. at all costs it must be behind him, and, resist 
the sudden terrify impulse to look over his shoulder, he unbuttoned 
his tweed jacket and disengaged himself from it as he ran. the faint 
haze that had gather round the full moon dispersed, and he saw the 
moor stretch before him, grey and still, glisten with dew. 

he was of frugal and temperate habits, a wiry man at the height of his 
physical powers, with lean flank and a deep chest. 

at oxford they had said he was built to run for his life. he was running 
for it now, and he knew it. 

the ground slope upwards after a while, and he tore up the incline, 
breathing deep and hard; down into a shallow valley, leap gorse 
bushes, crashing through whortle and meadowsweet, stumble over 
peat-cuttings and the workings of forgotten tin-mines. an idiot 
popular tune race through his brain. he found himself try to frame 
the words, but they broke into incoherent prayers, still to the same 
grotesque tune. 

then, as he breast the flank of a boulder-strewn tor, he seem to 
hear snuffle breathing behind him, and, redouble his efforts, 
step into a rabbit hole. he was up and running again in the twinkling 
of an eye, limp from a twist ankle as he ran. 

he sprint over the crest of the hill and thought he heard the sound 
almost abreast of him, away to the right. in the dry bed of a 
watercourse some stone were dislodge and fell with a rattle in the 
still of the night; he bore away to the left. a moment later there 
was something nearly at his left elbow, and he smelt again the nameless, 
fœtid reek. he doubled, and the ghastly truth flash upon him. the 
thing was play with him! he was being hunt for sport--the sport of 
a horror unthinkable. the sweat ran down into his eyes. 

he lost all count of time; his wrist watch was smashed on his wrist. he 
ran through a reel eternity, sob for breath, stumbling, tripping, 
fight a leaden weariness; and ever the same unreasoning terror urge 
him on. the moon and ragged skyline swam about him; the blood drum 
deafening in his ears, and his eyeball felt as if they would burst 
from their sockets. he had nearly bitten his swollen tongue in two 
fall over an unseen peat-cutting, and blood-flecked foam gather on 
his lips. 

god, how he ran! but he was no long among bog and heather. he was 
running--shambling now--along a road. the lope pursuit of that 
nameless, shapeless something sound like an echo in his head. 

he was near a village, but saw nothing save a red mist that swam 
before him like a fog. the road underfoot seem to rise and fall in 
wavelike undulations. still he ran, with sob gasp and limb that 
swerve under his weight; at his elbow hung death unnamable, and the 
fear of it urge him on while every instinct of his exhaust body 
call out to him to fling up his hand and end it. 

out of the mist ahead rose the rough outline of a building by the 
roadside; it was the village smithy, half workshop, half dwelling. the 
road here skirt a patch of grass, and the moonlight, glisten on the 
dew, show the dark circular scar of the turf where, for a generation, 
the smith's peat fire had heated the great iron hoop that tyre the 
wheels of the wains. one of these was even then lie on the ground with 
the turve placed in readiness for fire in the morning, and in the 
throb dark of maynard's consciousness a voice seem to speak 
faintly--the voice of a girl: 

"_there's a thing that hunt people to death. but iron--cold iron--it 
cannot cross._" 

the sweat of death was already on his brow as he reel sideways, 
plunge blind across the uneven tuft of grass. his feet caught in 
some obstruction and he pitch forward into the sanctuary of the huge 
iron tyre--a spasm of cramp twist his limb up under him. 

as he fell a great black rose around him, and with it the bewilder 
clamour of awaken dogs. 

* * * * * 

dr. stanmore came down the flag path from the smith's cottage, 
pull on his gloves. a big car was passing slow up the village 
street, and as it came abreast the smithy the doctor raise his hat. 

the car stopped, and the driver, a fair-haired girl, leant sideways from 
her seat. 

"good-morning, dr. stanmore! what's the matter here? nothing wrong with 
any of matthew's children, is there?" 

the doctor shook his head gravely. 

"no, lady dorothy; they're all at school. this is no one belong to 
the family--a stranger who was taken mysterious ill last night just 
outside the forge, and they brought him in. it's a most queer case, and 
very difficult to diagnose--that is to say, to give a diagnosis in 
keeping with one's professional--er--conscience." 

the girl switch off the engine, and took her hand from the 
brake-lever. something in the doctor's manner arrest her interest. 

"what is the matter with him?" she queried. "what diagnosis have you 
made, professional or otherwise?" 

"shock, lady dorothy; severe exhaustion and shock, heart strained, 
superficial lesions, bruises, scratches, and so forth. mental he is in 
a great state of excitement and terror, lapse into delirium at 
times--that is really the most serious feature. in fact, unless i can 
calm him i am afraid we may have some brain trouble on top of the other 
thing. it's most mysterious!" 

the girl nod gravely, holding her underlip between her white teeth. 

"what do he look like--in appearance, i mean? is he young?" 

the shadow of a smile cross the doctor's eyes. 

"yes, lady dorothy--quite young, and very good-looking. he is a man of 
remarkable athletic build. he is calm now, and i have left matthew's 
wife with him while i slip out to see a couple of other patients." 

lady dorothy rose from her seat and step down out of the car. 

"i think i know your patient," she said. "in fact, i had taken the car 
to look for him, to ask him to lunch with us. do you think i might see 
him for a minute? if it is the person i think it is i may be able to 
help you diagnose his illness." 

together they walk up the path and enter the cottage. the doctor led 
the way upstairs and open a door. a woman sitting by the bed rose and 
drop a curtsey. 

lady dorothy smile a greeting to her and cross over to the bed. 
there, his face grey and drawn with exhaustion, with shadow round his 
closed eyes, lay maynard; one hand lie on the counterpane open and 
closed convulsively, his lip moved. the physician eye the girl 
interrogatively. 

"do you know him?" he asked. 

she nodded, and put her firm, cool hand over the twitch fingers. 

"yes," she said. "and i warn him. tell me, is he very ill?" 

"he require rest, careful nursing, absolute quiet----" 

"all that he can have at the manor," said the girl softly. she met the 
doctor's eyes and look away, a faint colour tinge her cheeks. "will 
you go and telephone to father? i will take him back in the car now if 
he is well enough to be moved." 

"yes, he is well enough to be moved," said the doctor. "it is very kind 
of you, lady dorothy, and i will go and telephone at once. will you stay 
with him for a little while?" 

he left the room, and they heard his feet go down the narrow stairs. the 
cottage door open and closed. 

the two women, the old and the young, peasant and peer's daughter, 
look at each other, and there was in their glance that complete 
understanding which can only exist between women. 

"do 'ee mind old jarge toms, my lady?" 

lady dorothy nodded. 

"i know, i know! and i warn him! they won't believe, these men! they 
think because they are so big and strong that there is nothing that can 
hurt them." 

"'twas th' iron that save un, my lady. 'twas inside one of john's new 
tyre as was lyin' on the ground that us found un. dogs barkin' waken 
us up. but it'd ha' had un, else----" a sound downstairs sent her flying 
to the door. "'tis the kettle, my lady. john's dinner spilin', an' i 
forgettin'." 

she hurried out of the room and closed the door. 

the sound of their voice seem to have rouse the occupant of the bed. 
his eyelid flutter and opened; his eyes rest full on the girl's 
face. for a moment there was no consciousness in their gaze; then a 
whimsical ghost of a smile crept about his mouth. 

"go on," he said in a weak voice. "say it!" 

"say what?" ask lady dorothy. she was sudden aware that her hand was 
still on his, but the twitch finger had closed about hers in a calm, 
firm grasp. 

"say 'i told you so'!" 

she shook her head with a little smile. 

"i told you that cold iron----" 

"cold iron save me." he told her of the iron hoop on the ground outside 
the forge. "you save me last night." 

she disengaged her hand gently. 

"i save you last night--since you say so. but in future----" 

someone was coming up the stairs. maynard met her eyes with a long look. 

"i have no fear," he said. "i have found something better than cold 
iron." 

the door open and the doctor came in. he glance at maynard's face and 
touched his pulse. 

"the case is yours, lady dorothy!" he said with a little bow. 




ix 

the tragedy at the "loup noir" 


the boy at the corner of the table flick the ash of his cigar into the 
fire. 

"spiritualism is all rot!" he declared. 

"i don't know," the host reflect thoughtfully. "one hear queer 
story sometimes." 

"which remind me----" start the bore. 

but before he could proceed any further the little france judge 
ruthless cut him short. 

"bah!" contempt and geniality were mingle in his tone. "who are we, 
poor ignorant worms, that we should dare to say 'is' or 'is not'? your 
shakespeare, he was right! 'there are more things in heaven and earth, 
horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy!'" 

the face of the four englishmen instantly assume that peculiarly 
stolid expression always call forth by the mention of shakespeare. 

"but spiritualism----" start the host. 

again the little france judge broke in: 

"i who you speak, i myself know of an experience, of the most 
remarkable, to this day unexplained save by spiritualism, occultism, 
what you will! you shall hear! the case is one i conduct 
professional some two years ago, though, of course, the event which i 
now tell in their proper sequence, came out only in the trial. i string 
them together for you, yes?" 

the bore, who fierce resent any story except his own, gave vent to 
a discontented grunt; the other three prepared to listen carefully. from 
the drawing-room, whither the ladies had retired after dinner, sound 
the far-away strain of a piano. the little france judge held out his 
glass for a crème de menthe; his eyes were sparkle with suppress 
excitement; he gaze deep into the shining green liquid as if seeing 
therein a moving panorama of pictures, then he began: 

on a dusky autumn evening, a young man, tall, olive-skinned, tramp 
along the road leading from paris to longchamps. he is walking with a 
quick, even swing. now and again a hidden anxiety darken his face. 

sudden he branch off to the left; the path here is steep and muddy. 
he stop in front of a blur circle of yellow light; by this can one 
faint perceive the outline of a building. above the narrow doorway 
hang a creak sign which announce to all it may concern that this is 
the "loup noir," much sought after for its near to the racecourse 
and for its excellent _ménage_. 

"_voilà!_" mutter our friend. 

on entering, he is met by the burly innkeeper, a shrewd enough fellow, 
who has seen something of life before settle down in longchamps. the 
young man glance past him as if seek some other face, then 
recollect himself demand shelter for the night. 

"i greatly fear----" began the innkeeper, then pauses, struck by an 
idea. "holà, gaston! have monsieur and madame from number fourteen yet 
departed?" 

"yes, monsieur; already early this morning; you were at the market, so 
mademoiselle settled the bill." 

"mademoiselle jehane?" the stranger looks up sharply. 

"my niece, monsieur; you have perhaps heard of her, for i see by your 
easel you are an artist. she is supposed to be of a rare beauty; i think 
it myself." jean potin keeps up a running flow of talk as he conduct 
his visitor down the long bare passages, past blister yellow doors. 

"it is a double room i must give you, vacated, as you heard, but this 
very morning. they were go to stay longer, monsieur and madame 
guillaumet, but of a sudden she change her mind. oh, she was of a 
temper!" potin raise expressive eyes heavenwards. "it is ever so when 
may wed with december." 

"he was much old than his wife, then?" query the artist, polite 
feign an interest he is far from feeling. 

"_mais non, parbleu!_ it was she who was the older--by some fifteen 
years; and not a beauty. but rich--he knew what he was about, give his 
smooth cheek for her smooth louis!" 

left alone, lou arnaud proceeds to unpack his knapsack; he linger over 
it as long as possible; the task await him below is no pleasant one. 
finally he descends. the small smoky _salle à manger_ is full of people. 
there is much talk and laughter go on; the clatter of knives and 
forks. at the desk near the door, a young girl is busy with the 
accounts. her very pale gold hair, part and drawn loose back over 
the ears, cast a faint shadow on her pure, white skin. arnaud, as he 
choose a seat, looks at her critically. 

"bah, she is insignificant!" he thinks. "what can have possessed 
claude?" 

sudden she raise her eyes. they meet his in a long, steady gaze. then 
once again the lid are lowered. 

the artist set down his glass with a hand that shakes. he is not 
imaginative, as a rule, but when one see the soul of a mock devil 
look out, dark and compelling, from the face of a madonna, one is 
disconcerted. 

he wonders no more what had possessed claude. on his way to the door a 
few moments later, he pause at her desk. 

"monsieur wish to order breakfast for to-morrow morning?" 

"monsieur wish to speak with you." 

she smile demurely. many have wish to speak with her. arnaud divine 
her thoughts. 

"my name is lou arnaud!" he add meaningly. 

"ah!" she ponder on this for an instant; then: "it is a warm night; if 
you will seat yourself at one of the little table in the courtyard at 
the back of the house, i will try to join you, when these pig have 
finished feeding." she indicate with contempt the noisy eat crowd. 

they sit long at that table, for the man has much to tell of his young 
brother claude; of the ruin she has made of his life; of the little 
green devil that lurk in a glass of absinthe, and clutch their victim, 
and drag him down deeper, ever deeper, into the great, green abyss. 

but she only laughs, this jehane of the wanton eyes. 

"but what do you want from me? i have no need of this claude. he 
weary me--now!" 

arnaud spring to his feet, catching her roughly by the wrist. he love 
his young brother much. his voice is raised, attract the notice of 
two or three group who take coffee at the iron tables. 

"you had need of him once. you never left him in peace till you had 
suck him of all that make life good. if i could----" 

jean potin appear in the doorway. 

"jehane, what are you do out here? you know i do not permit it that 
you speak with the visitors. pardon her, monsieur, she is but a child." 

"a child?" the artist's brow is black as thunder. "she has wreck a 
life, this child you speak of!" 

he stride past the amaze innkeeper, up the narrow flight of stairs, 
and down the passage to his room. 

sitting on the edge of the huge curtain four-poster bed, he ponder on 
the event of the evening. 

but his thought are not all of claude. that girl--that girl with her 
pale face and her pale hair, and eyes the grey of a storm cloud before 
it breaks, she haunt him! her soft murmur voice has stolen into his 
brain; he hear it in the drip, drip of the rain on the sill outside. 

soon heavy feet are heard troop up the stairs; door are heard to 
bang; cheery voice wish each other good-night. then gradual the 
sound die away. they keep early hour at the "loup noir"; it is not yet 
ten o'clock. 

still arnaud remains sitting on the edge of the bed; the dark plush 
canopy overhead repel him, he do not feel inclined for sleep. 
jehane! what a picture she would make! he _must_ paint her! 

obsess by this idea, he unpack a roll of canvas, spread it on the 
tripod easel, and prepare crayon and charcoal; he will start the 
picture as soon as it is day. he will paint her as circe, mock at her 
grovel herd of swine! 

he creeps into bed and falls asleep. 

* * * * * 

soft the rain patter against the window-pane. 

a distant clock boom out eleven strokes. 

lou arnaud raise his head. then noiseless he slide out of bed on the 
chill wooden boarding. as in a trance he cross the room, seize 
charcoal, and feverishly works at the blank canvas on the easel. 

for twenty minutes his hand never falters, then the charcoal drops from 
his nerveless fingers! grope his way with half-closed eyes back to the 
bed, he falls again into a heavy, dreamless slumber. 

* * * * * 

the early morning sun chase away the raindrop of the night before. 
sign of activity are abroad in the inn; the swish of brooms; the noisy 
clatter of pails. a warm aroma of coffee float up the stairs and under 
the door of number fourteen, awake arnaud to pleasant thought of 
breakfast. he is partly dress before his eye lights on the canvas he 
had prepared. 

"_nom de dieu!_" 

he falls back against the wall, staring stupefy at the picture before 
him. it is the picture of a girl, crouch in a kneel position, all 
the agony of death showing clearly in her upturned eyes. at her throat, 
cruelly, relentless do their murderous work, are a pair of 
hands--ugly, podgy hands, but with what power behind them! 

the face is the face of jehane--a distorted, terrify jehane! arnaud 
recoils, covering his eyes with his hands. who could have drawn this 
unspeakable thing? he looks again closely; the style is his own! there 
is no mistake those bold, black lines, that peculiar way of indicate 
muscle beneath the tight stretch skin--it _is_ his own work! 
anywhere would he have known it! 

a knock at the door! jean potin enters, radiate cheerfulness. 

"breakfast in your room, monsieur? we are busy this morning; i share in 
the work. permit me to move the table and the easel--_sacré-bleu!_" 

sudden his rosy lip grow stern. "this is jehane. did she sit for 
you--and when? you only came last night. what devil's work is this?" 

"that is what i would like to find out; i know no more about it than you 
yourself. when i awoke this morning the picture was there!" 

"did you draw it?" suspiciously. 

"yes. at least, no! yes, i suppose i did. but i----" 

potin clench his fist: "i will have the truth from the girl herself! 
there is something here i do not like!" roughly he push past the 
artist and mount to jehane's room. 

she is not there, neither is she at her desk. nor yet down in the 
village. they search everywhere; there is a hue and cry; people rush to 
and fro. 

then sudden a shout; and a silence, a dreadful silence. 

something is carry slow into the "loup noir." something that was 
found huddle up in the shadow of the wall that border the courtyard. 
something with ugly purple patch on the white throat. 

it is jehane, and she is dead; strangle by a pair of hand that came 
from behind. 

the story of the picture is rapid pass from mouth to mouth. people 
look strange at lou arnaud; they remember his loud, strained voice and 
threaten gesture on the preceding night. 

finally he is arrest on the charge of murder. 

* * * * * 

i was the judge, gentlemen, on the occasion of the arnaud trial. 

the prisoner is question about the picture. he know nothing; can tell 
nothing of how it came there. his fellow-artists testify to its being 
his work. from them also leak out the tale of his brother claude, of 
the latter's infatuation and ruin. no need now to explain the quarrel in 
the courtyard. the accused has good reason to hate the dead girl. 

the avocat for the defence do his best. the picture is produce in 
court; it create a sensation. 

if only lou arnaud could complete it--could sketch in the owner of those 
merciless hands. he is hand the charcoal; again and again he tries--in 
vain. 

the hand are not his own; but that is a small point in his favour. why 
should he have incriminate himself by drawing his own hands? but again, 
why should he have drawn the picture at all? 

there is nobody else on whom falls a shadow of suspicion. i sum up 
impartially. the jury convict on circumstantial evidence, and i sentence 
the prisoner to death. 

a short time must elapse between the sentence and carry it into 
force. the avocat for the defence obtain for the prisoner a slight 
concession; he may have picture and charcoal in his cell. perhaps he can 
yet free himself from the web which has inmeshe him! 

arnaud try to blot out thought by sketch in and erase again 
fanciful figures twist into a peculiar position; he cannot adjust the 
pose of the unknown murderer. so in despair he give it up. 

one morning, three days before the execution, the innkeeper come to 
visit him and find him lie face downwards on the narrow pallet. 
despite his own grief, he is sorry for the young man; nor is he 
convinced in his shrewd bourgeois mind of the latter's guilt. 

"you _must_ draw in the second figure," he repeat again and again. "it 
is your last, your only chance! think of the face you saw at the 'loup 
noir.' do none of them recall anything to you? you quarrel with 
jehane in the garden about your brother. then you went to your room. oh, 
what did you think in your room?" 

"i thought of your niece," respond arnaud wildly. "how very beautiful 
she was, and what a model she would make. then i prepared a blank 
canvas for the morning, and went to bed. when i woke up the picture was 
there." 

"and you remember nothing more--nothing at all?" insist jean potin. 
"you fell asleep at once? you heard no sound?" 

against the barred window of the cell the rain patter softly. a distant 
clock boom out eleven strokes. 

something in the artist's brain seem to snap. he raise his head. he 
slide from the bed. as in a trance he cross the cell, seize a piece 
of charcoal, and feverishly works at the picture on the easel! 

not daring to speak, jean potin watches him. the figure behind the hand 
grow and grow beneath arnaud's fingers. 

a woman's figure! 

then the face: a coarse, malignant face, distort by evil passions. 

"ah!" 

it is a cry of recognition from the breathless innkeeper. it break the 
spell. the charcoal drops, and the prisoner, passing his hand across his 
eyes, gaze bewilder at his own work. 

"who? what?" 

"but i know her! it is the woman in whose room you slept! she was 
stay at the 'loup noir' the very night before you arrived, and she 
left that morning. she and her husband, monsieur guillaumet. but it is 
incredible if _she_ should have----" 

i will be short with you, gentlemen. madame guillaumet was trace to her 
flat in paris. arnaud's avocat confront her with the now complete 
picture. she was confounded--babbled like a mad woman--confessed! 

a reprieve for further inquiry was grant by the state. finally arnaud 
was cleared, and allow to go free. 

the motive for the murder? a woman's jealousy. monsieur and madame 
guillaumet had been married only ten months. her age was forty-nine; his 
twenty-seven. every second of their married life was to her weighted 
with intolerable suspicions; how soon would this young husband, so dear 
to her, forsake her for another, now that his debt were paid? it prey 
upon her mind, distort it, unbalance it; each glance, each movement 
of his she exaggerate into an intrigue. 

on their way to paris they stay a few days at the "loup noir"; charles 
guillaumet was interested in racing. also, he became interested in a 
certain mdlle. jehane. madame, quick to see, insist on an instant 
departure. 

the evening of the day of their departure she miss her husband, and 
found he had taken the car. where should he have gone? back to the inn, 
of course, only half-an-hour's run from paris. she hire another car and 
follow him, driving it herself. it was not a pleasant journey. the 
first car she discover forsaken, about half-a-mile distant from the 
inn. her own car she left beside it, and trudge the remain distance 
on foot. 

the rest was easy. 

finding no sign of guillaumet in front of the house, she stole round to 
the back. there she found a door in the wall of the courtyard--a door 
that led into the lane. that door was slightly ajar. she slip in and 
crouch down in the shadow. 

yes, there they were, her husband and jehane; the latter was laughing, 
lure him on--and she was young; oh, so young! 

the woman watched, fascinated. 

charles bade jehane good-bye, promising to come again. he kiss her 
tenderly, pass through the gate; his steps were heard muffle along 
the lane. 

jehane blew him a kiss, and then fasten the little door. 

a distant clock boom out eleven strokes, and a pair of hand stole 
round the girl's throat, bury themselves deep, deep in the white 
flesh. 

* * * * * 

"and the husband, was he an accessory after the fact?" inquire the boy. 

"possibly he guess at the deed, yes; but, being a weakling, said 
nothing for fear of implicate himself. it wasn't proved." 

the host move uneasy in his chair. 

"do you mean to tell me that the mystery of the picture has never been 
clear up?" he asked. "could arnaud have actually seen the murder from 
his window, and fixed it on the canvas?" 

the little france judge shook his head. 

"did i not tell you that his window face front?" he replied. "no, that 
point has not yet been explained. it is beyond us!" 

he made a sweeping gesture, knock over his liqueur glass; it fell 
with a crash on the parquet floor. 

the bore woke with a start. 

"and did they marry?" he queried. 

"who should marry?" 

"that artist-chap and the girl--what was her name?--jehane." 

"monsieur," quoth the little france judge very gently and ironically, "i 
grieve to state that was impossible, jehane being dead." 

the boy at the corner of the table stood up and threw the stump of his 
cigar into the fire. 

"i think spiritualism is all rot!" he declared. 




miller, son, & compy., limited, 
printers, 
fakenham and london. 




some notable sixpenny books 

to be had of all booksellers, or post free (inland) 8d. each; four 
volumes for 2s. 5d., or six for 3s. 6d. from the publisher, 17, 
henrietta street, london, w.c. 


the mystery of modern london. 

by george r. sims, 
_author of "the devil in london," &c._ 

"full of fascinating interest and romance. those who are interested 
in the curious will find here much that is piquant and 
stimulating."--_daily news._ 

"is as fascinating as its title and its author's name would lead one 
to expect."--_t.p.'s weekly._ 


seventy years a showman 

my adventure in camp and caravan the world over. 
by "lord" george sanger. 
_illustrated._ 

in this volume the famous showman relate many exciting experience 
of his early days on the road, and recall the trial and triumph 
of a career more interesting than many a work of fiction. 


queens of frailty 

by c. l. mccluer stevens, 
author of "the secret history of the mormons." 
illustrate picture wrapper. 

this volume contain biography of the following famous women: nell 
gwyn, the marchioness of brinvilliers, the wicked countess of 
shrewsbury, the duchess of kendal (the maypole duchess), hannah 
lightfoot, elizabeth chudleigh (the bigamous duchess), jeanne de 
valois, lady hamilton, jeanne du barry, mary ann clarke, the lady 
with the camelias, lola montez, cora pearl, adah menken. 


the secret history of the mormon 

a true narrative of the most extraordinary 
religious imposture of modern times. 
by c. l. mccluer stevens. 


fifty years a fighter 

the life story of jem mace. 
(_formerly champion of the world._) 
told by himself. 
_illustrated._ 

a record of the last of the old prizefighters, who fought to a 
finish many battle in the old prize ring. a list of the notorious 
champion mace met and vanquish would fill many pages, but he has 
here set on record the romance of as wonderful a life as was ever 
lived. 


confession of a poacher 

by j. connell. 
_with illustration by s. t. dadd._ 

_field_: "the book is very remarkable, instructive in its 
disclosure of the dubious ways of poachers, and an intend reader 
cannot but be interested and amused." 




_books to make us merry_ 

price 1/- each net. (postage, 3d. extra.) 

_in stiff pictorial paper boards._ 


the amusement series. 

after-dinner sleights. by lang neil. with many photographs, showing 
trick in actual operation. 

card trick without sleight of hand or apparatus. by l. widdop. 
illustrated. 

conjure with coins. including trick by nelson downs and other eminent 
performers. fully illustrate with photograph and diagrams. 

fun on the billiard table. a collection of 75 amuse tricks. by 
stancliffe. with photographs. 

hand shadows. the complete art of shadowgraphy. by louis nikola. fully 
illustrated. 

indoor games for children and young people. edit by e. m. baker. 
illustrated. 

modern card manipulation. by c. lang neil. enlarge edition. with many 
photographs, showing trick in operation. 

the new book of puzzles. up-to-date and original. by a. cyril pearson. 
with upwards of 100 illustrations. 

the pearson puzzle book. a collection of over 100 of the best puzzles. 
edit by j. k. benson. 

pearson's book of fun, mirth and mystery. edit by mr. x. 

pearson's humorous recite and reader. 

play for amateur actors. contain nine original plays. six for 
adults, two for children, and one for scouts. 

play and display for scout entertainments. this volume contain six 
long plays, also several short plays, and recitations. 

practice stroke at billiards. for table of all sizes. from the match 
play of john robert and other leading players. 

recitation for children. select by jean belfrage. with three original 
play for children. 

simple conjure trick that anybody can perform. by will goldston. 

trick for everyone. by david devant. illustrate with 134 photographs. 




transcriber's note: 

minor typographic error have been correct without note. dialect 
spelling have been retained. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of uncanny tales, by various 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook uncanny tale *** 

***** this file should be name 26606-0.txt or 26606-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/0/26606/ 

produce by david clarke, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive/american libraries.) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
