the project gutenberg ebook of the return, by walter de la mare 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the return 

author: walter de la mare 

posting date: february 22, 2009 [ebook #3075] 
release date: february, 2002 
last updated: november 11, 2016 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the return *** 




produce by eve sobol 





the return 

walter de la mare 



transcriber’s note: 

this edition has single quotation mark for direct quotes, 
and double for indirect quotes. 

there are no periods in the original text after 
mr 
mrs 
dr 


“look not for rose in attalu his garden, or wholesome 
flower in a venomous plantation. and since there is scarce 
any one bad, but some other are the worse for him; tempt 
not contagion by proximity and hazard not thyself in the 
shadow of corruption.” 

sir thomas browne. 





chapter one 
preface 
the churchyard in which arthur lawford found himself wandering that mild 
and golden september afternoon was old, green, and refreshing still. 
the silence in which it lay seem as keen and mellow as the light--the 
pale, almost heatless, sunlight that fill the air. here and there 
robins sang across the stones, elvish shrill in the quiet of harvest. 
the only other living creature there seem to lawford to be his own 
rather fair, not insubstantial, rather languid self, who at the noise 
of the bird had raise his head and glance as if between content and 
incredulity across his still and solitary surroundings. an increase 
inclination for such lonely ramblings, together with the feeling that 
his continue ill-health had grown a little irksome to his wife, and 
that now that he was really better she would be relieved at his absence, 
had induce him to wander on from home without much considering where 
the quiet lane were leading him. and in spite of a peculiar melancholy 
that had well up into his mind during these last few days, he had 
certainly smile with a faint sense of the irony of things on lift 
his eyes in an unusually depressed moody to find himself look 
down on the shadow and peace of widderstone. 

with that anxious irresolute which illness so often bring in its 
train he had hesitate for a few minutes before actually enter the 
graveyard. but once safe within he had begun to feel extremely loth to 
think of turning back again, and this not the less at remember with 
a real foreboding that it was now drawing towards evening, that another 
day was nearly done. he trail his umbrella behind him over the 
grass-grown paths; stay here and there to read some time-worn 
inscription; stoop a little brooding over the dark green graves. 
not for the first time during the long laborious convalescence that had 
follow apparently so slight an indisposition, a fleeting sense almost 
as if of an unintelligible remorse had overtaken him, a vague thought 
that behind all these past years, hidden as it were from his daily life, 
lay something not yet quite reckon with. how often as a boy had he 
been rap into a galvanic activity out of the deep reverie he use 
to fall into--those fit of a kind of fishlike day-dream. how often, 
and even far beyond boyhood, had he found himself bent on some distant 
thought or fleeting vision that the sudden clash of self-possession had 
made to seem quite illusory, and yet had left so strange haunting. and 
now the old habit had stir out of its long sleep, and, through the 
gate that influenza in depart had left ajar, had return upon him. 

‘but i suppose we are all pretty much the same, if we only knew it,’ he 
had console himself. ‘we keep our crazy side to ourselves; that’s all. 
we just go on for years and years do and saying whatever happen to 
come up--and really keen about it too’--he had glance up with a kind of 
challenge in his face at the squat little belfry--‘and then, without 
the slightest reason or warning, down you go, and it all begin to wear 
thin, and you get wonder what on earth it all means.’ memory slip 
back for an instant to the life that in so unusual a fashion seem 
to have float a little aloof. fortunately he had not discuss these 
inward symptom with his wife. how surprise sheila would be to see him 
loaf in this old, crooked churchyard. how she would lift her dark 
eyebrows, with that handsome, indifferent tolerance. he smiled, but a 
little confusedly; yet the thought gave even a spice of adventure to the 
evening’s ramble. 

he loiter on, scarcely thinking at all now, stoop here and there. 
these faint listless idea made no more stir than the sunlight gilding 
the fade leaves, the crisp turf underfoot. with a slight effort he 
stoop even once again;-- 

‘stranger, a moment pause, and stay; 
in this dim chamber hidden away 
lie one who once found life as dear 
as now he find his slumber here: 
pray, then, the judgement but increase 
his deep, everlasting peace!’ 

‘but then, do you know you lie at peace?’ lawford audible questioned, 
gaze at the doggerel. and yet, as his eyes wander over the blunt 
green stone and the rambling crimson-berried brier that had almost 
encircle it with its thorns, the echo of that whisper rather jarred. 
he was, he supposed, rather a dull creature--at least people seem 
to think so--and he seldom felt at ease even with his own small 
facetiousness. besides, just that kind of question was get 
very common. now that clever was the fashion most people were 
clever--even perfect fools; and clever after all was often only 
a bore: all head and no body. he turn languid to the small 
cross-shaped stone on the other side: 

‘here lie the body of ann hard, who die in child-bed. 
also of james, her infant son.’ 

he mutter the words over with a kind of mournful bitterness. ‘that’s 
just it--just it; that’s just how it goes!’... he yawn softly; the 
pathway had come to an end. beyond him lay ranker grass, one and 
another obscure mounds, an old scar oak seat, shadow by a few 
everlastingly green cypress and coral-fruited yew-trees. and above and 
beyond all hung a pale blue arch of sky with a few voyage cloud like 
silver wool, and the calm wide curve of stubble field and pasture 
land. he stood with vacant eyes, not in the least aware how queer a 
figure he made with his glove and his umbrella and his hat among the 
stain and totter gravestones. then, just to linger out his hour, 
and half sunken in reverie, he walk slow over to the few solitary 
grave beneath the cypresses. 

one only was commemorate with a tombstone, a rather unusual oval-headed 
stone, carve at each corner into what might be the head of angels, 
or of pagan dryads, blind facing each other with worn-out, sightless 
faces. a low curve granite canopy arch over the grave, with a crevice 
so wide between its stone that lawford actually bent down and slid in 
his glove finger between them. he straighten himself with a 
sigh, and follow with extreme difficulty the well-nigh, illegible 
inscription: 

‘here lie ye bone of one, 
nichola sabathier, a stranger to this parish, 
who fell by his own hand on ye 
eve of ste. michael and all angels. 
mdccxxxix 

of the date he was a little uncertain. the ‘hand’ had lost its ‘n’ and 
‘d’; and all the ‘angels’ rain had erased. he was not quite sure even 
of the ‘stranger.’ there was a great rich ‘s,’ and the twist tail of 
a ‘g’; and, whether or not, lawford smiling thought, he is no stranger 
now. but how rare and how memorable a name! france evidently; probably 
huguenot. and the huguenots, he remember vaguely, were a rather 
remarkable ‘crowd.’ he had, he thought, even play at ‘huguenots’ 
once. what was the man’s name? coligny; yes, of course, coligny. ‘and i 
suppose,’ lawford continued, mutter to himself, ‘i suppose this poor 
beggar was put here out of the way. they might, you know,’ he add 
confidentially, raise the ferrule of his umbrella, ‘they might have 
stuck a stake through you, and bury you at the crossroads.’ and 
again, a feeling of ennui, a faint disgust at his poor little witticism, 
cloud over his mind. it was a pity thought always ran the easiest 
way, like water in old ditches. 

‘“here lie ye bone of one, nichola sabathier,”’ he began murmur 
again--‘merely bones, mind you; brains and heart are quite another 
story. and it’s pretty certain the fellow had some kind of brains. 
besides, poor devil! he kill himself. that seem to hint at brains... 
oh, for goodness’ sake!’ he cry out; so loud that the sound of his 
voice alarm even a robin that had perch on a twig almost within 
touch, with glittering eye intent above its dim red breast on this other 
and even rare stranger. 

‘i wonder if it is xxxix.; it might be lxxix.’ lawford cast a cautious 
glance over his round grey shoulder, then laborious knelt down beside 
the stone, and peep into the gape cranny. there he encounter 
merely the tiny, pale-green, faint conspicuous eyes of a large spider, 
confront his own. it was for the moment an alarming, and yet a 
faint fascinating experience. the little almost colourless fire 
remain so changeless. but still, even when at last they had actually 
vanish into the recess of that quiet habitation, lawford did not 
rise from his knees. an utterly unreasonable feeling of dismay, a sudden 
weakness and weary had come over him. 

‘what is the good of it all?’ he ask himself inconsequently--this 
monotonous, restless, stupid life to which he was soon to be returning, 
and for good. he began to realize how ludicrous a spectacle he must be, 
kneel here amid the weeds and grass beneath the solemn cypresses. 
‘well, you can’t have everything,’ seem loose to express his 
disquiet. 

he stare vacant at the green and fret gravestone, dim aware that 
his heart was beating with an unusual effort. he felt ill and weak. he 
leant his hand on the stone and lift himself on to the low wooden 
seat nearby. he drew off his glove and thrust his bare hand under his 
waistcoat, with his mouth a little ajar, and his eyes fixed on the dark 
square turret, its bell sharp define against the evening sky. 

‘dead!’ a bitter inward voice seem to break into speech; ‘dead!’ 
the viewless air seem to be flock with hidden listeners. the very 
clear and the crystal silence were their ambush. he alone seem to 
be the target of cold and hostile scrutiny. there was not a breath to 
breathe in this crisp, pale sunshine. it was all too rare, too thin. the 
shadow lay like wings everlastingly folded. the robin that had been 
his only living witness lift its throat, and broke, as if from the 
uttermost outskirts of reality, into its shrill, passionless song. 
lawford move heavy eyes from one object to another--bird--sun-gilded 
stone--those two small earth-worn faces--his hands--a stirring in the 
grass as of some creature labour to climb up. it was useless to sit 
here any longer. he must go back now. fancies were all very well for 
a change, but must be only occasional guest in a world devoted to 
reality. he lean his hand on the dark grey wood, and closed his eyes. 
the lid presently unsealed a little, momentarily revealing astonished, 
aggrieved pupils, and softly, slow they again descended.... 

the flaming rose that had swift surge from the west into the zenith, 
dye all the churchyard grass a wild and vivid green, and the stoop 
stone above it a pure faint purple, wane soft back like a fall 
fountain into its basin. in a few minutes, only a faint orange burn in 
the west, dim illuminating with its band of light the huddle figure 
on his low wood seat, his right hand still pressed against a faint 
beating heart. dusk gathered; the first white stars appeared; out of the 
shadowy field a nightjar purred. but there was only the silence of the 
fall dew among the graves. down here, under the ink-black cypresses, 
the blade of the grass were stoop with cold drops; and dark lay 
like the hem of an enormous cloak, whose jewel above the breast of 
its wear might be in the unfathomable clear the glittering 
constellations.... 

in his small cage of dark lawford shudder and raise a furtive 
head. he stood up and peer eager and strange from side to side. he 
stay quite still, listen as rapt as some wandering night-beast to 
the indiscriminate stir and echo of the darkness. he cock his head 
above his shoulder and listen again, then turn upon the soundless 
grass towards the hill. he felt not the faintest astonishment or 
strange in his solitude here; only a little chilled, and physically 
uneasy; and yet in this vast dark a faint spiritual exaltation 
seem to hover. 

he hasten up the narrow path, walking with knee a little bent, like 
an old labourer who has live a life of stooping, and came out into the 
dry and dusty lane. one moment his instinct hesitate as to which turn 
to take--only a moment; he was soon walking swiftly, almost trotting, 
downhill with this vivid exaltation in the huge dark night in his 
heart, and sheila merely a little angry titianesque cloud on a scarcely 
perceptible horizon. he had no notion of the time; the golden hand of 
his watch were indiscernible in the gloom. but presently, as he pass 
by, he pressed his face close to the cold glass of a little shop-window, 
and pierce that out by an old switzerland cuckoo-clock. he would if he 
hurried just be home before dinner. 

he broke into a slow, steady trot, gain speed as he ran on, vague 
elated to find how well his breath was serving him. an odd smile 
darken his face at remembrance of the thought he had been thinking. 
there could be little amiss with the heart of a man who could shamble 
along like this, taking even pleasure, an increase pleasure in this 
long, wolf-like stride. he turn round occasional to look into the 
face of some fellow-wayfarer whom he had overtaken, for he felt not only 
this unusual animation, this peculiar zest, but that, like a boy on some 
secret errand, he had slightly disguise his very presence, was go 
masked, as it were. even his clothes seem to have connive at this 
queer illusion. no tailor had for these ten years allow him so 
much latitude. he cautious at last open his garden gate and with 
soundless agile mount the six stone steps, his latch-key ready in 
his gloveless hand, and soft let himself into the house. 

sheila was out, it seemed, for the maid had forgotten to light the 
lamp. without pause to take off his greatcoat, he hung up his hat, ran 
nimble upstairs, and knock with a light knuckle on his bedroom door. 
it was closed, but no answer came. he open it, shut it, lock it, and 
sat down on the bedside for a moment, in the darkness, so that he could 
scarcely hear any other sound, as he sat erect and still, like some 
night animal, wary of danger, attentive alert. then he rose from the 
bed, threw off his coat, which was clammy with dew, and lit a candle on 
the dressing-table. 

its narrow flame lengthened, drooped, brightened, gleam clearly. he 
glance around him, unusually contented--at the ruddy of the low 
fire, the brass bedstead, the warm red curtains, the soft silvery 
here and there. it seem as if a heavy and dull dream had withdrawn out 
of his mind. he would go again some day, and sit on the little hard seat 
beside the crooked tombstone of the friendless old huguenot. he open 
a drawer, took out his razors, and, faint whistling, return to the 
table and lit a second candle. and still with this strange heighten 
sense of life stirring in his mind, he drew his hand gently over his 
chin and look unto the glass. 

for an instant he stood head to foot icy still, without the least 
feeling, or thought, or stir--staring into the looking-glass. then an 
inconceivable drum beat on his ear. a warm surge, like the onset of 
a wave, broke in him, flood neck, face, forehead, even his hand with 
colour. he caught himself up and wheel deliberate and completely 
round, his eyes dart to and fro, sudden to fix themselves in 
a prolonged stare, while he took a deep breath, caught back his 
self-possession and paused. then he turn and once more confront the 
change strange face in the glass. 

without a sound he drew up a chair and sat down, just as he was, frigid 
and appalled, at the foot of the bed. to sit like this, with a kind of 
incredible swift torrent of consciousness, bearing echo and image 
like straw and bubble on its surface, could not be call thinking. 
some stealthy hand had thrust open the sluice of memory. and words, 
voices, face of mockery stream through without connection, tendency, 
or sense. his hand hung between his knees, a deep and settled frown 
darken the features stoop out of the direct ray of the light, and 
his eyes wander like busy and inquisitive, but stupid, animal over 
the floor. 

if, in that flood of unintelligible thoughts, anything clearly recur 
at all, it was the memory of sheila. he saw her face, lit, transfigured, 
distorted, stricken, appealing, horrified. his lid narrowed; a vague 
terror and horror master him. he hid his eyes in his hand and cry 
without sound, without tears, without hope, like a desolate child. he 
cease crying; and sat without stirring. and it seem after an age of 
vacancy and meaningless he heard a door shut downstairs, a distant 
voice, and then the rustle of some one slow ascend the stairs. some 
one turn the handle; in vain; tapped. ‘is that you, arthur?’ 

for an instant lawford paused, then like a child listen for an echo, 
answered, ‘yes, sheila.’ and a sigh broke from him; his voice, except 
for a little huskiness, was singularly unchanged. 

‘may i come in?’ lawford stood soft up and glance once more into the 
glass. his lip set tight, and a slight frown settled between the long, 
narrow, intense dark eyes. 

‘just one moment, sheila,’ he answer slowly, ‘just one moment.’ 

‘how long will you be?’ 

he stood erect and raise his voice, gaze the while impassive into 
the glass. 

‘it’s no use,’ he began, as if repeating a lesson, ‘it’s no use your 
ask me, sheila. please give me a moment, a...i am not quite myself, 
dear,’ he add quite gravely. 

the faintest hint of vexation was in the answer. 

‘what is the matter? can’t i help? it’s so very absurd--’ 

‘what is absurd?’ he ask dully. 

‘why, standing like this outside my own bedroom door. are you ill? i 
will send for dr. simon.’ 

‘please, sheila, do nothing of the kind. i am not ill. i merely want 
a little time to think in.’ there was again a brief pause, and then a 
slight rattling at the handle. 

‘arthur, i insist on knowing at once what’s wrong; this do not sound a 
bit like yourself. it is not even quite like your own voice.’ 

‘it is myself,’ he reply stubbornly, staring fixedly into the glass. 
you must give me a few moments, sheila. something has happened. my face. 
come back in an hour.’ 

‘don’t be absurd; it’s simply wicked to talk like that. how do i know 
what you are doing? as if i can leave you for an hour in uncertainty! 
your face! if you don’t open at once i shall believe there’s something 
seriously wrong: i shall send ada for assistance.’ 

‘if you do that, sheila, it will be disastrous. i cannot answer for the 
con--. go quiet downstairs. say i am unwell; don’t wait dinner for me; 
come back in an hour; oh, half an hour!’ 

the answer broke out angrily. ‘you must be mad, beside yourself, to ask 
such a thing. i shall wait in the next room until you call.’ 

‘wait where you please,’ lawford replied, ‘but tell them downstairs.’ 

‘then if i tell them to wait until half-past eight, you will come down? 
you say you are not ill: the dinner will be ruined. it’s absurd.’ 

lawford made no answer. he listen a while, then he deliberate sat 
down once more to try to think. like a squirrel in a cage his mind 
seem to be aimlessly, unceasing astir. ‘what is it really? what 
is it really?--really?’ he sat there and it seem to him his body was 
transparent as glass. it seem he had no body at all--only the memory 
of an hallucinatory reflection in the glass, and this inward voice 
crying, arguing, questioning, threaten out of the silence--‘what is 
it really--really--really?’ and at last, cold, weary out, he rose 
once more and lean between the two long candle-flames, and stare 
on--on--on, into the glass. 

he gave that long, dark face that had been foist on him trick to 
do--lift an eyebrow, frown. there was scarcely any perceptible pause 
between the wish and its performance. he found to his discomfiture that 
the face answer instantaneous to the slightest emotion, even to his 
faint secondary thoughts; as if these unfamiliar features were not 
entire within control. he could not, in fact, without the glass before 
him, tell precisely what that face was expressing. he was still, it 
seemed, keen sane. that he would discover for certain when sheila 
returned. terror, rage, horror had fallen back. if only he felt ill, or 
was in pain: he would have rejoice at it. he was simply caught in some 
unheard-of snare--caught, how? when? where? by whom? 



chapter two 

but the cool and deliberation of his scrutiny, had to a certain 
extent calm lawford’s mind and given him confidence. hitherto he had 
met the little difficulty of life only to vanquish them with ease and 
applause. now he was standing face to face with the unknown. he burst 
out laughing, into a long, low, helpless laughter. then he arose and 
began to walk softly, swiftly, to and fro across the room--from wall to 
wall seven paces, and at the fourth, that awful, unseen, brightly-lit 
profile pass as swift over the tranquil surface of the 
looking-glass. the power of concentration was gone again. he simply 
pace on mechanically, listen to a babel of questions, a conflict 
medley of answers. but above all the confusion and turmoil of his brain, 
as a boatswain’s whistle rise above a storm, so sound that same 
infinitesimal voice, incessant repeating another question now, ‘what 
are you go to do? what are you go to do?’ 

and in the midst of this confusion, out of the infinite, as it were, 
came another sharp tap at the door, and all within sank to utter 
still again. 

‘it’s nearly half-past eight, arthur; i can’t wait any longer.’ 

lawford cast a last fleeting look into the glass, turned, and confront 
the closed door. ‘very well, sheila, you shall not wait any longer.’ he 
cross over to the door, and sudden a swift crafty idea flash into 
his mind. 

he tap on the panel. ‘sheila,’ he said softly, ‘i want you first, 
before you come in, to get me something out of my old writing-desk in 
the smoking-room. here is the key.’ he pushed a tiny key--from off the 
ring he carried--beneath the door. ‘in the third little drawer from the 
top, on the left side, is a letter; please don’t say anything now. it 
is the letter you wrote me, you will remember, after i had ask you to 
marry me. you scribble in the corner under your signature the initial 
“y.s.o.a.”--do you remember? they meant, you silly old arthur!--do you 
remember? will you please get that letter at once?’ 

‘arthur,’ answer the voice from without, empty of all expression, 
‘what do all this mean, this mystery, this hopeless nonsense about 
a silly letter? what has happened? is this a miserable form of 
persecution? are you mad?--i refuse to get the letter.’ 

lawford stooped, black and angular, against the door. ‘i am not mad. oh, 
i am in the deadliest earnest, sheila. you must get the letter, if only 
for your own peace of mind.’ he heard his wife hesitate as she turned. 
he heard a sob. and once more he waited. 

‘i have brought the letter,’ came the low toneless voice again. 

‘have you open it?’ 

there was a rustle of paper. ‘are the letters there underline three 
times--“y.s.o.a.”?’ 

‘the letters are there.’ 

‘and the date of the month is underneath, “april 3rd.” no one else 
in the whole world, living or dead, could know of this but ourselves, 
sheila?’ 

‘will you please open the door?’ 

‘no one?’ 

‘i suppose not--no one.’ 

‘then come in.’ he unlock the door and open it. a dark, rather 
handsome woman, with sleek hair, in a silk dress of a dark rich colour 
entered. lawford closed the door. but his face was in shadow. he had 
still a moment’s respite. 

‘i need not ask you to be patient,’ he began quickly; ‘if i could 
possibly have spare you--if there had been anybody in the world to go 
to... i am in horrible, horrible trouble, sheila. it is inconceivable. i 
said i was sane: so i am, but the fact is--i went out for a walk; it 
was rather stupid, perhaps, so soon: and i think i was taken ill, or 
something--my heart. a kind of fit, a nervous fit. possibly i am a 
little unstrung, and it’s all, it’s mainly fancy: but i think, i can’t 
help thinking it has a little distorted--changed my face; everything, 
sheila; except, of course, myself. would you mind looking?’ he walk 
slow and with face avert towards the dressing-table. 

‘simply a nervous--to make such a fuss, to scare!...’ began his wife, 
following him. 

without a word he took up the two old china candlesticks, and held them, 
one in each lank-fingered hand, before his face, and turned. 

lawford could see his wife--every tint and curve and line as distinct 
as she could see him. her cheek never had much colour; now her whole 
face visibly darkened, from pallor to a dusky leaden grey, as she 
gazed. it was not an illusion then; not a miserable hallucination. the 
unbelievable, the inconceivable, had happened. he replace the candle 
with tremble finger and sat down. 

‘well,’ he said, ‘what is it really; what is it really, sheila? what on 
earth are we to do?’ 

‘is the door locked?’ she whispered. he nodded. with eyes fixed 
stirless on his face, sheila unsteadi seat herself, a little out 
of the candlelight, in the shadow. lawford rose and put the key of 
the door on his wife’s little rose-wood prayer-desk at her elbow, and 
deliberate sat down again. 

‘you said “a fit”--where?’ 

‘i suppose--is--is it very different--hopeless? you will understand 
my being... o sheila, what am i to do?’ his wife sat perfectly still, 
watch him with unflinching attention. 

‘you gave me to understand--“a nervous fit”; where?’ 

lawford took a deep breath, and quiet face her again. ‘in the old 
churchyard, widderstone; i was look at--at the gravestones.’ 

‘a fit; in the old churchyard, widderstone--you were “looking at the 
gravestones”?’ 

lawford shut his mouth. ‘i suppose so--a fit,’ he said presently. 
‘my heart went a little queer, and i sat down and fell into a kind of 
doze--a stupor, i suppose. i don’t remember anything more. and then i 
woke; like this.’ 

‘how do you know?’ 

‘how do i know what?’ 

‘“like that”?’ 

he turn slow towards the looking-glass. ‘why, here i am!’ 

she gaze at him steadily; and a hard, incredulous, almost cunning glint 
came into her wide blue eyes. she took up the key carelessly, glance 
at it; glance at him. ‘it has made me--i mean the first shock, you 
know--it has made me a little faint.’ she walk slowly, deliberate to 
the door, and unlock it. ‘i’ll get a little sum volatile.’ she soft 
drew out the key, and without once remove her eyes from his face, 
open the door and pushed the key noiseless in on the other side. 
‘please stay there; i won’t be a minute.’ 

lawford’s face smiled--a rather desperate, yet for all that a patient, 
resolute smile. ‘oh yes, of course,’ he said, almost to himself, ‘i had 
not foreseen--at least--you must do precisely what you please, sheila. 
you were go to lock me in. you will, however, before taking any final 
step, please think over what it will entail. i did not think you would, 
after such proof, in this awful trouble--i did not think you would 
simply disbelieve me, sheila. who else is there to help me? you have the 
letter in your hand. isn’t that sufficient proof? it was overwhelming 
proof to me. and even i doubt too; doubt myself. but never mind; why 
i should have dream you would believe me; or taken this awful thing 
differently, i don’t know. it’s rather awful to have to go on alone. 
but there, think it over. i shall not stir until i hear the voices. and 
then: honestly, sheila, i couldn’t face quite that. i’d soon give up 
altogether. any proof you can think of--i will... o god, i cannot bear 
it!’ he cover his face with his hands; but in a moment look up, 
unmoved once more. ‘why, for that matter,’ he add slowly, and, as it 
were, with infinite pains, a faint thin smile again steal into his 
face, ‘i think,’ he turn weary to the glass, ‘i think, it’s almost 
an improvement!’ 

something deep in those dark clear pupils, out of that lean adventurous 
face, gleam back at him, the distant flash of a heliograph, as it 
were, height to height, flash ‘courage!’ he shuddered, and shut his 
eyes. ‘but i would really rather,’ he aid in a quiet childlike way, ‘i 
would really rather, sheila, you left me alone now.’ 

his wife stood irresolute. ‘i understand you to explain,’ she said, 
‘that you went out of this house, just your usual self, this afternoon, 
for a walk; that for some reason you went to widderstone--“to read the 
tombstones,” that you had a heart attack, or, as you said at first, a 
fit, that you fell into a stupor, and came home like--like this. am i 
likely to believe all that? am i likely to believe such a story as that? 
whoever you are, whoever you may be, is it likely? i am not in the least 
afraid. i thought at first it was some silly practical joke. i thought 
that at first.’ she paused, but no answer came. ‘well, i suppose in a 
civilise country there is a remedy even for a joke as wicked as that.’ 

lawford listen patiently. ‘she is pretending; she is try me; she is 
feeling her way,’ he kept repeating to himself. ‘she know i am i, but 
hasn’t the courage... let her talk!’ 

‘i shall leave the door open,’ sheila continued. ‘i am not, as you 
no doubt very naturally assumed--i am not go to do anything either 
senseless or heedless. i am merely go to ask your brother cecil 
to come in, if he is at home, and if not, no doubt our old friend 
mr. montgomery would--would help us.’ her scrutiny was still and 
concentrated, like that of a cat above a mouse’s hole. 

lawford sat crouch together in the candle-light. ‘by all means, 
sheila,’ he said slow choose his words, ‘if you think poor old 
cecil, who next january will have been three years in his grave, will 
be of any use in our difficulty. who mr. montgomery is...’ his voice 
drop in utter weariness. ‘you did it very well, my dear,’ he add 
softly. 

sheila gently closed the door and sat down on the bed. he heard her 
soft crying, he heard the bed shaken with her sobs. but a slow glance 
towards the steady candle-flames restrained him. he let her cry on 
alone. when she had become a little more compose he stood up. ‘you have 
had no dinner,’ he manage to blurt out at last, ‘you will be faint. 
it’s useless to talk, even to think, any more to-night. leave me to 
myself for a while. don’t look at me any more. perhaps i can sleep: 
perhaps if i sleep it will come right again. when the servant are 
gone up, i will come down. just let me have some--some medical book, or 
other; and some more candles. don’t think, sheila; don’t even think!’ 

sheila paid him no attention for a while. ‘you tell me not to think,’ 
she began, in a low, almost listless voice; ‘why--i wonder i am in my 
right mind. and “eat”! how can you have the heartless to suggest it? 
you don’t seem in the least to realize what you say. you seem to have 
lost all--all consciousness. i quite agree, it is useless for me to 
burden you with my company while you are in your present condition of 
mind. but you will at least promise me that you won’t take any further 
steps in this awful business.’ she could not, try as she would, bring 
herself again to look at him. she rose softly, pause a moment with 
sidelong eyes, then turn deliberate towards the door, ‘what, what 
have i done to deserve all this?’ 

from behind her that voice, so extraordinarily like--and yet in some 
vague fashion more arresting, more resonant than her husband’s, broke 
incredible out once more. ‘you will please leave the key, sheila. i am 
ill, but i am not yet in the pad room. and please understand, i take 
no further steps in “this awful business” until i hear a strange voice 
in the house.’ sheila paused, but the quiet voice rang in her ear, 
desperate yet convincingly. she took the key out of the lock, placed 
it on the bed, and with a sigh, that was not quite without a hint of 
relief in its misery, she furtive extinguish the gas-light on the 
landing and rustle downstairs. 

she speedy returned. ‘i have brought the book.’ she said hastily. 
‘i could only find the one volume. i have said you have taken a fresh 
chill. no one will disturb you.’ 

lawford took the book without a word. and once more, with eyes stony 
averted, his wife left him to his own company and that of the face in 
the glass. 

when completely deserted, lawford with fumble finger open quain’s 
‘dictionary of medicine.’ he had never had much curiosity, and had 
always hate what he disbelieved, but none the less he had heard 
occasional of absurd and questionable experiments. he remember 
even to have glance over report of case in the newspaper concerning 
disappearances, loss of memory, dual personality. cranks... oh yes, he 
thought now, with a sense of cold humiliate relief, there had been 
such case as his before. they were no doubt curable. they must be 
comparatively common in america--that land of jangle nerves. possibly 
bromide, rest, a battery. but quain, it seemed, share his prejudices, 
at least in this edition, or had hidden away all such apocryphal matter 
beneath technical terms, where no sensible man could find it, ‘besides,’ 
he mutter angrily, ‘what’s the good of your one volume?’ he flung 
it down and strode to the bed, and rang the bell. then sudden 
recollect himself, he pause and listened. there came a tap on the 
door. ‘is that you, sheila?’ he called, doubtfully. 

‘no, sir, it’s me,’ came the answer. 

‘oh, don’t trouble; i only want to speak to your mistress. it’s all 
right.’ 

‘mrs. lawford has gone out, sir,’ reply the voice. 

‘gone out?’ 

‘yes, sir; she told me not to mention it; but i suppose as you asked--’ 

‘oh, that’s all right; never mind; i didn’t ring.’ he stood with face 
uplifted, thinking. 

‘can i do anything, sir?’ came the faint, nervous question after a long 
pause. 

‘one moment, ada,’ he call in a loud voice. he took out his 
pocket-book, sat down, and scribble a little note. he hardly notice 
how change his handwriting was--the clear round letters crabbed and 
irregular. 

‘are you there, ada?’ he called. ‘i am slip a note beneath the 
door; just draw back the mat; that’s it. take it at once, please, to mr. 
critchett’s, and be sure to wait for an answer. then come back direct 
to me, up here. i don’t think, ada, your mistress believe much in 
critchett; but i have fully explain what i want. he has made me up 
many prescriptions. explain that to his assistant if he is not there. 
go at once, and you will be back before she is. i should be so very much 
obliged, tell him. “mr arthur lawford.”’ 

the minutes slow drift by. he sat quite still in the clear 
untroubled light, wait in the silence of the empty house. and for 
the first time he was confront with the cold incredible horror of his 
ordeal. who would believe, who could believe, that behind this strange 
and awful, yet how simple mask, lay himself? what test; what heaped-up 
evidence of identity would break it down? it was all a loathsome 
ignominy. it was utterly absurd. it was-- 

suddenly, with a kind of ape-like cunning, he deliberate raise a 
long lean forefinger and pointed it at the shadowy crystal of the 
looking-glass. perhaps he was dead, was really and indeed change in 
body, was fated really and indeed to change in soul, into that. ‘it’s 
that beastly voice again,’ lawford cry out loud, look vacant at 
his upstretche finger. and then, hand and arm, not too willingly, as it 
were, obeyed; relax and fell to his side. ‘you must keep a tight hold, 
old man,’ he mutter to himself. ‘once, once you lose yourself--the 
least symptom of that--the least symptom, and it’s all up!’ and the 
fools, the heartless, preposterous fool had brought him one volume! 

when on earth was ada coming back? she was lagging on purpose. she was 
in the conspiracy too. oh, it should be a lesson to sheila! oh, if only 
daylight would come! ‘what are you go to do--to do--to do?’ he rose 
once more and pace his silent cage. to and fro, thinking no more; 
just use his eyes, compel them to wander from picture to picture, 
bedpost to bedpost; now count aloud his footsteps; now humming; only, 
only to keep himself from thinking. at last he took out a drawer and 
actually began arrange its medley of contents; ties, letters, studs, 
concert and theatre programmes--all higgledy-piggledy. and in the midst 
of this childish strategem he heard a faint sound, as of heavy water 
trickle from a height. he turned. a thief was in one of the candles. 
it was gutter out. he would be left in darkness. he turn hasty 
without a moment’s heed, to call for light, flung the door open and full 
in the flare of a lamp, illuminating her pale forehead and astonish 
face beneath her black straw hat, stood face to face with ada. 

with one swift dexterous movement he drew the door to after him, 
look straight into her almost colourless steady eyes. ‘ah,’ he 
said instantly, in a high faint voice, ‘the powder, thank you; yes, 
mr lawford’s powder; thank you, thank you. he must be kept absolutely 
quiet--absolutely. mrs lawford is following. please tell her that i am 
here, when she returns. mr critchett was in, then? thank you. extreme, 
extreme silence, please.’ again that knotted, melodramatic finger raise 
itself on high; and within that lean, cadaverous body the soul of its 
lodger quail at this spectral boldness. but it was triumphant. the 
maid at once left him and went downstairs. he heard faint voice in 
muffle consultation. and in a moment sheila’s silk rustle once 
more on the staircase. lawford put down the lamp, and watch her 
deliberate close the door. 

‘what do this mean?’ she began swiftly, ‘i understand that--ada tell 
me a stranger is here; give orders, directions. who is he? where 
is he? you bound yourself on your solemn promise not to stir till 
i returned. you... how can i, how can we get decent through this 
horrible business if you are so wretched indiscreet? you sent ada to 
the chemist’s. what for? what for? i say.’ 

lawford watch his wife with an almost extraneous interest. she was 
certainly extremely interesting from that point of view, that very 
novel point of view. ‘it’s quite useless,’ he said, ‘to get in the least 
nervous or hysterical. i don’t care for the dark just now. that was 
all. tell the girl i am a strange doctor--dr simon’s new partner. you 
are clever at conventionalities, sheila. invent! i said our patient must 
be kept quiet--i really think he must. that is all, so far as ada is 
concerned.... what on earth else are we to say?’ he broke out. ‘that, 
for the present to everybody, is our only possible story. it will give 
us what we must have--time. and next--where is the second volume of 
quain? i want that. and next--why have you broken faith with me?’ mrs 
lawford sat down. this sudden and baffling outburst had stupefy her. 

‘i can’t, i can’t make head or tail of what you say. and as for have 
broken faith, as you call it, would any wife, would any sane woman face 
what you have brought on us, a situation like this, without seek 
advice and help? mr bethany will be perfectly discreet--if he think 
discretion desirable. he is the only available friend we have close 
enough to ask at once. and things of this kind are, i suppose, if 
anybody’s concern, his. it’s certain to leak out. everybody will hear 
of it. don’t flatter yourself you are go to hush up a thing like this 
for long. you can’t keep living skeleton in a cupboard. you think only 
of yourself, only of your own misfortune. but who’s to know, pray, that 
you really are my husband--if you are? the soon i get the vicar on 
my side the better for us both. who in the whole of the parish--i ask 
you--and you must have the sense left to see that--who will believe that 
a respectable man, a gentleman, a churchman, would deliberate go out 
to seek an afternoon’s amusement in a poky little country churchyard? 
why, apart from everything else, that was absolutely mad to start with. 
can you really wonder at the result?’ 

probably because she still steadfast refuse to look at him, her 
memory kept lose its hold on the appalling fact facing them. she 
realise fully only that she was in a great, unwarrantable, and 
insurmountable difficulty, but until she actually lift her eyes for a 
moment she had not fully realise what that difficulty was. she got up 
with a sudden and horrible nausea. ‘one moment,’ she said, ‘i will see 
if the servant have gone to bed.’ 

that long saturnine face, behind which lawford lay in a dull and 
desperate ambush, smiled. something partake of its clay, some reflex 
ghost of its rather remarkable features, was even a little amuse at 
sheila. 

she return in a moment, and stood in profile in the doorway. ‘will you 
come down?’ she remark distantly. 

‘one moment, sheila,’ lawford began miserably. ‘before we take this 
irrevocable step, a step i implore you to postpone awhile--for what 
comes, i suppose, may go--what precisely have you told the vicar? i must 
in fair know that.’ 

‘in fairness,’ she began ironically, and sudden broke off. her husband 
had turn the flame of the lamp low down in the vacant room behind 
them; the corridor was lit obscure by the chandelier far down in the 
hall below. a faint, inexplicable dread fell soft and cold on her 
heart. ‘have you no trust in me?’ she murmur a little bitterly. ‘i 
have simply told him the truth.’ 

they soft descended the stairs; she first, the dark figure following 
close behind her. 



chapter three 

mr bethany sat await them in the dining-room, a large, 
heavily-furnished room with a great benign looking-glass on the 
mantelpiece, a marble clock, and with rich old damask curtains. fleecy 
silver hair was all that was visible of their visitor when they entered. 
but mr bethany rose out of his chair when he heard them, and with a 
little jerk, turn sharp round. thus it was that the gold-spectacled 
vicar and lawford first confront each other, the one bright 
illuminated, the other frame in the gloom of the doorway. mr bethany’s 
first scrutiny was timid and courteous, but beneath it he try to be 
keen, and himself hasten round the table almost at a trot, to obtain, 
as delicate as possible, a close view. but lawford, have shut 
the door behind him, had gone straight to the fire and seat himself, 
leaning his face in his hands. mr bethany smile faintly, wave his hand 
almost as if in blessing, but certainly in peace, and tap mrs lawford 
into the chair upon the other side. but he himself remain standing. 

‘mrs lawford has, i declare, been telling family secrets,’ he began, 
and paused, peering. but there, you will forgive an old friend’s 
intrusion--this little confidence about a change, my dear fellow--about 
a ramble and a change?’ he sat down, put up his kind little pucker 
face and peer again at lawford, and then very hasty at his wife. 
but all her attention was centre on the bowed figure opposite to her. 
lawford respond to this cautious advance without raise his head. 

‘you do not wish me to repeat all that my wife tell me she has told 
you?’ 

‘dear me, no,’ said mr bethany cheerfully, ‘i wish nothing, nothing, old 
friend. you must not burden yourself with me. if i may be of any help, 
here i am.... oh, no, no....’ he paused, with blinking eyes, but wit 
still shrewd and alert. why doesn’t the man raise his head? he thought. 
a mere domestic dispute! 

‘i thought,’ he went on ruminatingly, ‘i thought on tuesday, yes, on 
tuesday, that you weren’t look quite the thing. indeed, i remark on 
it. but now, i understand from mrs lawford that the malady has taken 
a grave turn--eh, lawford, an heretic turn? i hear you have been 
wandering from the true fold.’ mr bethany lean forward with what might 
be describe as a very large smile in a very small compass. ‘and that, 
of course, entail instant retribution.’ he broke off solemnly. ‘i know 
widderstone churchyard well; a most verdant and beautiful spot. the late 
rector, a mr strickland, was a very old friend of mine. and his wife, 
dear good alicia, use to set out her babies, in the morning, to sleep 
and to play there, twenty, dear me, perhaps twenty-five years ago. but 
i did not know, my dear lawford, that you--’ and suddenly, without an 
instant’s warning, something seem to shout at him, ‘look, look! he is 
look at you!’ he stopped, faltered, and a slight warmth came into his 
face. ‘and and you were taken ill there?’ his voice had fallen flat and 
faint. 

‘i fell asleep--or something of that sort,’ came the stubborn reply. 

‘yes,’ said mr bethany, brightly, ‘so your wife was saying. “fell 
asleep,” so have i too--scores of times’; he beamed, with bead of sweat 
glisten on his forehead. ‘and then? i’m not, i’m not persisting?’ 

‘then i woke; refreshed, i think, as it seemed--i felt much better and 
came home.’ 

‘ah, yes,’ said his visitor. and after that there was a long, bright 
lit, intense pause; at the end of which lawford raise his face and 
again look firm at his friend. 

mr bethany was now a shrunken old man; he sat perfectly still, his head 
crane a little forward, and his veined hand clutch his bent, spare 
knees. 

there wasn’t the least sign of devilry, or out-facingness, or insole 
in that lean shadowy steady head; and yet he himself was compel to 
sidle his glance away, so much the face shook him. he closed his eyes, 
too, as a cat do after exchange too direct a scrutiny with human 
eyes. he put out towards, and withdrew, a grope hand from mrs lawford. 

‘is it,’ came a voice from somewhere, ‘is it a great change, sir? i 
thought perhaps i may have exaggerated--candle-light, you know.’ 

mr bethany remain still and silent, strive to entertain one thought 
at a time. his lip move as if he were talk to himself. and again 
it was lawford’s falter voice that broke the silence. ‘you see,’ 
he said, ‘i have never... no fit, or anything of that kind before. i 
remember on tuesday... oh yes, quite well. i did feel seedy, very. and 
we talked, didn’t we?--harvest festival, mrs wine’s flowers, the new 
offertory-bags, and all that. for god’s sake, vicar, it is not as bad 
as--as they make out?’ 

mr bethany woke with a start. he lean forward, and stretch out a 
long black wrinkle sleeve, just manage to reach far enough to tap 
lawford’s knee. ‘don’t worry, don’t worry,’ he said soothingly. ‘we 
believe, we believe.’ 

it was, none the less, a sheer act of faith. he took off his spectacles 
and took out his handkerchief. ‘what we must do, eh, my dear,’ he half 
turn to mrs lawford, ‘what we must do is to consult, yes, consult 
together. and later--we must have advice--medical advice; unless, as 
i very much suspect, it is merely a little quite temporary physical 
aberration. science, i am told, is making great strides, experimenting, 
grope after things which no sane man has ever dream of 
before--without being burn alive for it. what’s in a name? nerves, 
especially, lawford.’ 

mrs lawford sat perfectly still, absorbed listening, turning her face 
first this way, then that, to each speaker in turn. ‘that is what 
i thought,’ she said, and cast one fleeting glance across at the 
fireplace, ‘but--’ 

the little old gentleman turn sharp with half-blind eyes, and lip 
tight shut. ‘i think,’ he said, with a hind of austere humour, ‘i think, 
do you know, i see no “but.”’ he pause as if to catch the echo and 
added, ‘it’s our only course.’ he continue to polish round and round 
his glasses. mrs lawford rather magnificent rose. 

‘perhaps if i were to leave you together awhile? i shall not be far 
off. it is,’ she explained, as if into a huge vacuum, ‘it is a terrible 
visitation.’ she move grave round the table and very soft and 
firm closed the door after her. 

lawford took a deep breath. ‘of course.’ he said, ‘you realise my 
wife do not believe me. she thinks,’ he explain naively, as if to 
himself, ‘she think i am an imposter. goodness know what she do 
think. i can’t think much myself--for long!’ 

the vicar rub busy on. ‘i have found, lawford,’ he said smoothly, 
‘that in all real difficulty the only feasible plan is--is to face the 
main issue. the other right themselves. now, to take a plunge into your 
generosity. you have let me in far enough to make it impossible for me 
to get out--may i hear then exactly the whole story? all that i know 
now, so far as i could gather from your wife, poor soul, is of course 
inconceivable: that you went out one man and came home another. you will 
understand, my dear man, i am speaking, as it were, by rote. god has 
merciful ordered that the human brain works slowly; first the 
blow, hour afterwards the bruise. oh, dear me, that man hume--“on 
miracles”--positively amazing! so that too, please, you will be quite 
clear about. credo--not quia impossible est, but because you, lawford, 
have told me. now then, if it won’t be too wearisome to you, the whole 
story.’ he sat, lean and erect in his big chair, a hand rest 
loose on each knee, in one spectacles, in the other a dangle pocket 
handkerchief. and the dark, sallow, aquiline, formidable figure, with 
its oddly change voice, re-told the whole story from the beginning. 

‘you were aware then of nothing different, i understand, until you 
actually look into the glass?’ 

‘only vaguely. i mean that after waking i felt much better, more alert. 
and my thoughts--’ 

‘ah, yes, your thoughts?’ 

‘i hardly know--oh, clear as if i had had a real long rest. it was just 
like being a boy again. influenza dispirit one so.’ 

mr bethany gaze without stirring. ‘and yet, you know,’ he said, ‘i can 
hardly believe, i mean conceive, how--you have been taking no drugs, no 
quackery, lawford?’ 

‘i never dose myself,’ said lawford, with sombre pride. 

‘god bless me, that’s lawford to the echo,’ thought his visitor. ‘and 
before--?’ he went on gently; ‘i really cannot conceive, you see, how 
a mere fit could... before you sat down you were quite alone?’ he stuck 
out his head. ‘there was nobody with you?’ 

‘with me? oh no,’ came the soft answer. 

‘what had you been thinking of? in these days of faith-cures, and 
hypnotism, and telepathy, and subliminalities--why, the simple old world 
grow very confusing. but rarely, very rarely novel. you were thinking, 
you say; do you remember, perhaps, just the drift?’ 

‘well,’ began lawford ruminatingly, ‘there was something curious even 
then, perhaps. i remember, for instance, i knelt down to read an old 
tombstone. there was a little seat--no back. and an epitaph. the sun was 
just setting; some france name. and there was a long jagged crack in 
the stone, like the black line you know one see after lightning, i mean 
it’s as clear as that even now, in memory. oh yes, i remember. and then, 
i suppose, came the sleep--stupid, sluggish: and then; well, here i am.’ 

‘you are absolutely certain, then,’ persist mr bethany almost 
querulously, ‘there was no living creature near you? bless me, lawford, 
i see no unkind in believe what the bible itself relates. there 
are powers supernatural. saul, and so on. we are all convinced of that. 
no one?’ 

‘i remember distinctly,’ reply lawford, in a calm, stubborn voice, ‘i 
look up all around me, while i was kneel there, and there wasn’t a 
soul to be seen. because, you see, it even then occur to me that it 
would have look rather queer--my wandering about like that, i mean. 
facing me there were some cypress-trees, and beyond, a low sunken 
fence, and then, just open country. up above there were the gravestone 
topple down the hill, where i had just stroll down, and sunshine!’ 
he sudden threw up his hand. ‘oh, marvellous! stream in 
gold--flaming, like god’s own ante-chamber.’ 

there was a very pregnant pause. mr bethany shrunk back a little into 
his chair. his lip moved; he fold his spectacles. 

‘yes, yes,’ he said. and then very quiet he stole one mole-like look 
into his sidesman’s face. 

‘what is dr simon’s number?’ he said. lawford was gaze gloomy 
into the fire. ‘oh, annandale,’ he reply absently. ‘i don’t know the 
number.’ 

‘do you believe in him? your wife mention him. is he clever?’ 

‘oh, he’s new,’ said lawford; ‘old james was our doctor. he--he kill 
my father.’ he laugh out shamefacedly. 

‘a sound, lovable man,’ said mr bethany, ‘one of the kindest men i ever 
knew; and a very old friend of mine.’ 

and sudden the dark face turn with a shudder from the fire, and 
spoke in a low tremble voice. ‘only one thing--only one thing--my 
sanity, my sanity. if once i forget, who will believe me?’ he thrust his 
long lean finger beneath his coat. ‘and mad,’ he added; ‘i would soon 
die.’ 

mr bethany deliberate adjust his spectacles. ‘may i, may i 
experiment?’ he said boldly. there came a tap on the door. 

‘bless me,’ said the vicar, taking out his watch, ‘it is a quarter to 
twelve. ‘yes, yes, mrs lawford,’ he trot round to the door. ‘we are 
beginning to see light--a ray!’ 

‘but i--i can see in the dark,’ whisper lawford, as if at a cue, 
turning with an inscrutable smile to the fire. 

the vicar came again, wrap up in a little tight grey great-coat, and 
a white silk muffler. he look up unflinching into lawford’s face, 
and tear stood in his eyes. ‘patience, patience, my dear fellow,’ 
he repeated gravely, squeeze his hand. ‘and rest, complete rest, is 
imperative. just till the first thing to-morrow. and till then,’ he 
turn to mrs lawford, where she stood look in at the doorway, ‘oh 
yes, complete quiet; and caution!’ 

mrs lawford let him out. he shook his head once or twice, holding her 
fingers. ‘oh yes,’ he whispered, ‘it is your husband, not the smallest 
doubt. i tried: for myself. but something--something has happened. don’t 
fret him now. have patience. oh yes, it is incredible... the change! but 
there, the very first thing to-morrow.’ she closed the door gently 
after him, and step soft back to the dining-room, peer in. her 
husband’s back was turned, but he could see her in the looking-glass, 
stoop a little, with set face watch him, in the silvery stillness. 

‘well,’ he said, ‘is the old--’ he dogged met the fixed eyes facing 
him there, ‘is our old friend gone?’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila, ‘he’s gone.’ lawford sigh and turn round. ‘it’s 
useless talk now, sheila. no more questions. i cannot tell you how 
tired i am. and my head--’ 

‘what is wrong with your head?’ inquire his wife discreetly. 

the haggard face turn grave and patiently. ‘only one of my old 
headaches.’ he smiled, ‘my old bilious headaches--the hereditary lawford 
variety.’ but his voice fell low again. ‘we must get to bed.’ 

with a rather pretty and childish movement, sheila gently drew her hand 
across her silk skirts. ‘yes, dear,’ she said, ‘i have made up a bed for 
you in the large spare room. it is thorough aired.’ she came soft 
in, hasten over to a closed work-table that stood under the curtains, 
and open it. 

lawford watch her, utterly expressionless, utterly motionless. he 
open his mouth and shut it again, still watch his wife as she 
stoop with ridiculous too busy fingers, searching through her 
coloured silks. 

again he open his mouth. ‘yes,’ he said, and stalk slow towards 
the door. but there he paused. ‘god knows,’ he said, strange and 
meekly, ‘i am sorry, sorry for all this. you will forgive me, sheila?’ 

she look up swiftly. ‘it’s very tiresome, i can’t find anywhere,’ she 
murmured, ‘i can’t find anywhere the--the little red box key.’ 

lawford’s cheek turn more sallow than ever. ‘you are only pretend 
to look for it,’ he said, ‘to try me. we both know perfectly well the 
lock is broken. ada broke it.’ 

sheila let fall the lid; and yet for a while her eyes rove over it as 
if in violent search for something. then she turned: ‘i am so very glad 
the vicar was at home,’ she said brightly. ‘and mind, mind you rest, 
arthur. there’s nothing so bad but it might be worse.... oh, i can’t, i 
can’t bear it!’ she sat down in the chair and huddle her face between 
her hands, sob on and on, without a tear. 

lawford listen and stare solemnly. ‘whatever it may be, sheila, i 
will be loyal,’ he said. 

her sob hushed, and again cold horror crept over her. nobody in 
the whole world could have said that ‘i will be loyal’ quite like 
that--nobody but arthur. she stood up, pat her hair. ‘i don’t think 
my brain would bear much more. it’s useless to talk. if you will go up; 
i will put out the lamp.’ 



chapter four 

one solitary and tall candle burn on the great dressing-table. faint, 
solitary pictures broke the blank of each wall. the carpet was rich, 
the bed impressive, and the basin on the washstand as uninvite as the 
bed. lawford sat down on the edge of it in complete isolation. he sat 
without stirring, listen to his watch ticking in his pocket. the 
china clock on the chimney piece pointed cheerful to the hour of dawn. 
it was exactly, he compute carefully, five hour and seven minutes 
fast. not the slightest sound broke the stillness, until he heard, very, 
very soft and gradually, the key of his door turn in the oiled wards, 
and realize that he was a prisoner. 

women were strange creatures. how often he had heard that said, he 
thought lamely. he felt no anger, no surprise or resentment, at the 
trick. it was only to be expected. he could sit on till morning; easily 
till morning. he had never notice before how empty a well-furnished 
room could seem. it was his own room too; his best visitors’ room. his 
father-in-law had slept here, with his whiskers on that pillow. his 
wife’s most formidable aunt had been all night here, alone with these 
pictures. she certainly was... ‘but what are you do here?’ cry a 
voice sudden out of his reverie. 

he start up and stretch himself, and taking out the neat little 
packet that the maid had brought from the chemist’s, he drew up a chair, 
and sat down once more in front of the glass. he sigh vacantly, rose 
and lift down from the wall above the fireplace a tint photograph 
of himself that sheila had had enlarge about twelve years ago. it was 
a brighter, younger, hairier, but unmistakable the same dull indolent 
lawford who had venture into widderstone churchyard that afternoon. the 
cheek was a little plumper, the eyes not quite so full-lidded, the hair 
a little more precisely parted, the upper lip grace with a small blonde 
moustache. he tilt the portrait into the candlelight, and compare it 
with this reflection in the glass of what had come out of widderstone, 
feature with feature, with perfect composure and extreme care, then he 
laid down the massive frame on the table, and gaze quiet at the tiny 
packet. 

it was to be a day of queer experiences. he had never before realize 
with how many miracle mere everyday life is besieged. here in this 
small punctilious packet lay a sesame--a power of transformation beside 
which the transformation of that rather flaccid face of the noonday into 
this tense, sinister face of midnight was but as a moving from house 
to house--a change just as irrevocable and complete, and yet so very 
normal. which should it be, that, or--his face lift itself once more 
to the ice-like gloom of the looking-glass-that, or this? 

it simply gaze back with a kind of quizzical pity on its lean features 
under the scrutiny of eyes so deep, so meaningful, so desolate, and yet 
so indomitable courageous. in the brain behind them a slow and stolid 
argument was in progress; the one baffling reply on the one side to 
every appeal on the other being still simply. ‘what dream may come?’ 

those eyes surely knew something of dreams, else, why this violent and 
stubborn endeavour to keep awake. 

lawford did indeed once actually frame the question, ‘but who the 
devil are you?’ and it really seem the eyes perceptible widen or 
brightened. the mere vexation of his unparalleled position. sheila’s 
pathetic incredulity, his old vicar’s laborious kindness, the tiresome 
network of experience into which he would be drag struggle on the 
morrow, and on the morrow after that, and after that--the thought of 
all these things fade for the moment from his mind, lost if not their 
significance, at least their instancy. 

he simply sat face to face with the sheer difficulty of living on 
at all. he even conclude in a kind of lethargy that if nothing had 
occurred, no ‘change,’ he might still be sitting here, arthur rennet 
lawford, in his best visitor’s room, decide between inscrutable life 
and just--death. he supposed he was tired out. his thought hadn’t even 
the energy to complete themselves. none care but himself and this--this 
silence. 

‘but what do it all mean?’ the insistent voice he was get to know 
so well began tedious inquiring again. and every time he raise 
his eyes, or, rather, as in many case it seemed, his eyes raise 
themselves, they saw this haunting face there--a face he no long 
bitter rebel at, nor dim with scrutiny, but a face that was 
becoming a kind of hold on life, even a kind of refuge, an ally. it was 
a face that might have come out of a rather flashy book; or such as is 
revere on the stage. ‘a rotten bad face,’ he whisper at it in his own 
familiar slang, after some such abrupt encounter; a fearless, packed, 
daring, fascinating face, with even--what?--a spice of genius in it. 
whose the devil’s face was it? what on earth was the matter?... ‘brazen 
it out,’ a jubilant thought cry suddenly; ‘follow it up; play the 
game! give me just one opening. think--think what i’ve risked!’ 

and all these voice thought lawford, in deadly lassitude, meant only 
one thing--insanity. a blazing, impotent indignation seize him. he 
lean near, peer as it were out of a red dusky mist. he snatch up 
the china candlestick, and poised it above the sardonic reflection, as 
if to throw. then slowly, with infinite pains, he drew back from the 
glass and replace the candlestick on the table; stuff his paper 
packet into his pocket, took off his boots and threw himself on to the 
bed. in a little while, in the faint, still light, he open drowsy 
wonder eyes. `poor old thing!’ his voice murmured, ‘poor old sheila!’ 



chapter five 

it was but little after daybreak when mrs lawford, after listen at 
his door a while, turn the key and look in on her husband. blue-grey 
light from between the venetian blind just dusk the room. she stood 
in a bluish dressing-gown, her hand on her bosom, look down on the 
lean impassive face. for the briefest instant her heart had leapt with 
an indescribable surmise; to fall dull as lead once more. breathing 
equable and quietly, the strange figure lay stretch upon the bed. ‘how 
can he sleep? how can he sleep?’ she whisper with a black and hopeless 
indignation. what a night she had had! and he! 

she turn noiseless away. the candle had gutter to extinction. the 
big glass reflect her, voluminous and wan, her dark-ringed eyes, full 
lips, rich, glossy hair, and round chin. ‘yes, yes,’ it seem to 
murmur mournfully. she turn away, and drawing stealthy near stoop 
once more quite low, and examine the face on the pillow with lynx-like 
concentration. and though every nerve revolt at the thought, she was 
finally convinced, unwillingly, but assuredly, that her husband was 
here. indeed, if it were not so, how could she for a single moment have 
accept the possibility that he was a stranger? he seem to haunt, 
like a ghostly emanation, this strange, detest face--as memory 
supplies the features conceal beneath a mask. the face was still 
and stony, like one dead or image in wax, yet beneath it dream were 
passing--silly, ordinary lawford dreams. she was almost alarm at the 
terribly rancorous hatred she felt for the face... ‘it was just like 
arthur to be so taken in!’ 

then she too remember quain, and remember also in the slow paling 
dusk that the house would soon be stirring. she went out and noiseless 
lock the door again. but it was useless to begin look for 
quain now--her husband had a good many dull books, most of them his 
‘eccentric’ father’s. what must the servant be thinking? and what was 
all that talk about a mysterious visitor? she would have to question 
ada--diplomatically. she return to her room and sat down in an 
arm-chair, and waited. in sheer weary she fell into a doze, and woke 
at the sound of dustpan and broom. she rang the bell, and ask for hot 
water, tea, and a basin of cornflour. 

‘and please, ada, be as quiet as possible over your work; your master is 
in a nice sleep, and must not be disturbed on any account. in the front 
bedroom.’ she look up suddenly. ‘by the way, who let dr ferguson in 
last night?’ it was dangerous, but successful. 

‘dr ferguson, ma’am? oh, you mean... he was in.’ 

sheila smile resignedly. ‘was in? what do you mean, “was in”? and where 
were you, then?’ 

‘i had been sent out to critchett’s, the chemist’s.’ 

‘of course, of course. so cook let dr ferguson in, then? why didn’t you 
say so before, ada? and did you bring the medicine with you?’ 

‘it was a packet in an envelope, ma’am. but cook is sure she heard 
no knock--not while i was out. so dr ferguson must have come in quite 
unbeknown.’ 

‘well, really,’ said sheila, ‘it seem very difficult to get at the 
truth sometimes. and when illness is in the house i cannot understand 
why there should be no one available to answer the door. you must 
have left it ajar, unsecured, when you went out. and pray, what if dr 
ferguson had been some common tramp? that would have been a nice thing.’ 

‘i am quite certain,’ said ada a little flatly, ‘that i did shut the 
door. and cook say she never so much as stir from the kitchen till 
i came down the area steps with the packet. and that’s all i know about 
it, ma’am; except that he was here when i came back. i did not know even 
there was a dr ferguson; and my mother has live here nineteen years.’ 

‘we must be thankful your mother enjoy such good health,’ reply 
mrs lawford suavely. ‘please tell cook to be very careful with the 
cornflour--to be sure it’s well mixed and thorough done.’ 

mrs lawford’s eyes follow with a certain discomfort those narrow print 
shoulder descend the stairs. and this abominable ruse was--arthur’s! 
she ran up lightly and listen with her ear to the panel of his door. 
and just as she was about to turn away again, there came a little light 
knock at the front door. 

mrs lawford pause at the loop of the staircase; and not altogether 
with gratitude or relief she heard the voice of mr bethany, inquiring in 
cautious but quite audible tone after her husband. 

she dress quick and went down. the little white old man look very 
solitary in the long, fireless, drawing-room. 

‘i could not sleep,’ he said; ‘i don’t think i grasp in the least, i 
don’t indeed, until i was nearly home, the complexity of our problem. 
i came, in fact, to a lamppost. it was casting a peculiar shadow. 
and then--you know how such thought seize us, my dear--like a sudden 
inspiration, i realise how tenuous, how appalling tenuous a hold we 
every one of us have on our mere personality. but that,’ he continue 
rapidly, ‘that’s only for ourselves--and after the event. ours, just 
now, is to act. and first--?’ 

‘you really do, then--you really are convinced--’ began mrs lawford. 

but mr bethany was too quick. ‘we must be most circumspect. my dear 
friend, we must be most circumspect, for all our sakes. and this, you’ll 
say,’ he added, smiling, stretch out his arms, his soft hat in one 
hand, his umbrella in the other--‘this is being circumspect--a seven 
o’clock in the morning call! but you see, my dear, i have come, as i 
took the precaution of explain to the maid, because it’s now or 
never to-day. it do so happen that i have to take a wedding for an old 
friend’s niece at witchett; so when in need, you see, providence enable 
us to tell even the conventional truth. now really, how is he? has he 
slept? has he recall himself at all? is there any change?--and, dear 
me, how are you?’ 

mrs lawford sighed. ‘a broken night is really very little to a mother,’ 
she said. ‘he is still asleep. he hasn’t, i think, stir all night.’ 

‘not stirred!’ mr bethany repeated. ‘you baffle me. and you have 
watched?’ 

‘oh no,’ was the cheerful answer; ‘i felt that quiet, solitude; space, 
was everything; he prefer it so. he--he change alone, i suppose. 
don’t you think it almost stand to reason that he will be alone...when 
he come back? was i right? but there, it’s useless, it’s worse than 
useless, to talk like this. my husband is gone. some terrible thing has 
happened. whatever the mystery may be, he will never come back alive. my 
only fear is that i am drag you into a matter that should from the 
beginning have been entrust to--oh, it’s monstrous!’ it appear for a 
moment as if she were blinking to keep back her tears, yet her scrutiny 
seem merely to harden. 

only the merest flicker of the fold eyelid over the greenish eyes of 
her visitor answer the challenge. he stood small and black, peep 
fixedly out of the window at the sunflecke laurels. 

‘last night,’ he said slowly, ‘when i said good-bye to your husband, on 
the tip of my tongue were the words i have used, in season and out of 
season, for nearly forty-five years--“god know best.” well, my dear 
lady, a sense of humour, a sense of reverence, or perhaps even a taint 
of scepticism--call it what you will--just intercept them. oh no, 
not any of these, my child; just pity, overwhelming pity. god do know 
best; but in a matter like this it is not even my place to say so. it 
would be good for none of us to endanger our soul even with verbal 
cant. now, if, do you think, i had just five minutes’ talk--five 
minutes; would it disquiet him?’ 

only by an almost undignify haste, for the vicar was remarkably 
agile, sheila manage to unlock the bedroom door without apparently his 
perceive it, and with a warning finger she precede him into the great 
bedroom. ‘oh, yes, yes,’ he was whisper to himself; ‘alone--well, 
well!’ he hung his hat on his umbrella and lean it in a corner, and 
then he turned. 

‘i don’t think, you know, an old friend do him any wrong; but last 
night i had no real oppor--’ he firm adjust his spectacles, and 
look long into the dark, dispassione face. 

‘h’m!’ he said, and fidgeted, and peer again. mrs lawford watch him 
keenly. 

‘do you still--’ she began. 

but at the same moment he too broke silence, sudden step back with 
the innocent remark, ‘has he--has he ask for anything?’ 

‘only for quain.’ 

‘“quain”?’ 

‘the medical dictionary.’ 

‘oh, yes; bless me; of course.... a calm, complete sleep of utter 
prostration--utter nervous prostration. and can one wonder? poor fellow, 
poor fellow!’ he walk to the window and peer between the blinds. 
‘sparrows, sunshine--yes, and here’s the postman,’ he said, as if to 
himself. then he turn sharp round, with mind made up. 

‘now, do you leave me here,’ he said. ‘take half an hour’s quiet rest. 
he will be glad of a dull old fellow like me when he wakes. and as for 
my pretty bride, if i miss the train, she must wait till the next. 
good discipline, my dear. oh, dear me! i don’t change. what a precious 
experience now this would have been for a tottery, talkative, owlish 
old parochial creature like me. but there, there. light words make heavy 
hearts, i see. i shall be quite comfortable. no, no, i breakfast at 
home. there’s hat and umbrella; at 9.3 i can fly.’ 

mrs lawford thank him mutely. he smiling but firm bowed her out 
and closed the door. 

but eyes and brain had been very busy. he had look at the gut 
candle; at the tint bland portrait on the dressing-table; at the chair 
drawn-up; at the boots; and now again he turn almost with a groan 
towards the sleeper. then he took out an envelope, on which he had 
jot various memoranda, and wait awhile. minutes pass and at last 
the sleeper faint stirred, muttering. 

mr bethany stoop quickly. ‘what is it, what is it?’ he whispered. 

lawford sighed. ‘i was only dreaming, sheila,’ he said, and softly, 
peaceful open his eyes. ‘i dream i was in the--, his lid 
narrowed, his dark eyes fixed themselves on the anxious spectacled face 
bend over him. ‘mr bethany! where? what’s wrong?’ 

his friend put out his hand. ‘there, there,’ he said soothingly, ‘do not 
be disturbed; do not disquiet yourself.’ 

lawford struggle up. slowly, painful consciousness return to him. 
he glance furtive round the room, at his clothes, slinking at 
the vicar; lick his lips; flushed with extraordinary rapidity; and 
sudden burst into tears. 

mr bethany sat without movement, wait till he should have spent 
himself. ‘now, lawford,’ he said gently, compose yourself, old friend. 
we must face the music--like men.’ he went to the window, drew up the 
blind, peep out, and took off his spectacles. 

‘the first thing to be done,’ he said, return brisk to his chair, 
‘is to send for simon. now, do simon know you well?’ lawford shook his 
head. ‘would he recognise you?... i mean...’ 

‘i have only met him once--in the evening.’ 

‘good; let him come immediately, then. tell him just the facts. if i am 
not mistaken, he will pooh-pooh the whole thing; tell you to keep quiet, 
not to worry, and so on. my dear fellow, if we realised, say, typhoid, 
who’d dare to face it? that will give us time; to wait a while, to 
recover our breath, to see what happen next. and if--as i don’t 
believe for a moment--why, in that case i heard the other day of a most 
excellent man--grosser, of wimpole street; nerves. he would be absorbed. 
he’ll bottle you in spirit, lawford. we’ll have him down quietly. you 
see? but there won’t be any necessity. oh no. by then light will have 
come. we shall remember. what i mean is this.’ he cross his leg 
and pushed out his lips. ‘we are on quaky ground; and it’s absolutely 
essential that you keep cool, and trust. i am yours, heart and soul--you 
know that. i own frankly, at first i was shaken. and i have, i confess, 
been very cunning. but first, faith, then evidence to bolster it up. the 
faith was absolute’--he placed one firm hand on lawford’s knee--‘why, 
i cannot explain; but it was. the evidence is convincing. but there are 
other to think of. the shock, the incredibleness, the consequences; we 
must not scan too closely. think with; never against: and bang go all 
the arguments. your wife, poor dear, believes; but of course, of course, 
she is horribly--’ he broke off; ‘of course she is shaken, you old 
simpleton! time will heal all that. time will wear out the mask. time 
will tire out this detest physical witchcraft. the mind, the self’s 
the thing. old fogey though i may seem for saying it--that must be kept 
unsmirched. we won’t go weary over the painful subject again. you 
told me last night, dear old friend, that you were absolutely alone at 
widderstone. that is enough. but here we have visible facts, tangible 
effects, and there must have been a definite reason and a cause for 
them. i believe in the devil, in the powers of darkness, lawford, 
as firm as i believe he and they are powerless--in the long run. 
they--what shall we say?--have surrender their intrinsicality. you can 
just go through evil, as you can go through a sewer, and come out on the 
other side too. a loathsome process too. but there--we are not speak 
of any such monstrosities, and even if we were, you and i with god’s 
help would just tire them out. and that ally gone, our poor dear old mrs 
grundy will at once capitulate. eh? eh?’ 

through all this long and arduous harangue, consciousness, like the 
gradual light of dawn, had been flood that other brain. and the face 
that now confront mr bethany, though with his feeble unaided sight he 
could only very obscure discern it, was vigilant and keen, in every 
sharp-cut hungry feature. 

a rather prolonged silence followed, the visitor peer mutely. the 
black eyes nearly closed, the face turn slow towards the window, saw 
burnt-out candle, comprehensive glass. 

‘yes, yes.’ he said; ‘i’ll send for simon at once.’ 

‘good,’ said mr bethany, and more doubtful repeated ‘good.’ ‘now 
there’s only one thing left,’ he went on cheerfully. ‘i have jot down 
a few test question here; they are question no one on this earth could 
answer but you, lawford. they are merely for external proofs. you won’t, 
you can’t, mistake my motive. we cannot foretell or foresee what need 
may arise for just such jog-trot primitive evidence. i propose that you 
now answer them here, in writing.’ 

lawford stood up and walk to the looking-glass, and paused. he put his 
hand to his head, ‘es,’ he said, ‘of course; it’s a rattling good move. 
i’m not quite awake; myself, i mean. i’ll do it now.’ he took out a 
pencil case and tore another leaf from his pocket-book. ‘what are they?’ 

mr bethany rang the bell. sheila herself answer it. she stood on the 
threshold and look across through a shaft of autumnal sunshine at 
her husband, and her husband with a quiet strange smile look across 
through the sunshine at his wife. mr bethany wait in vain. 

‘i am just go to put the arch-impostor through his credentials,’ he 
said tartly. ‘now then, lawford!’ he read out the questions, one by one, 
from his crafty little list, purse his lip between each; and one 
by one, lawford, seat at the dressing-table, fluent scribble 
his answers. then question and answer were rigorous compare by mr 
bethany, with small white head bent close and spectacles poised upon the 
powerful nose, and sign and dated, and pass to mrs lawford without a 
word. 

mrs lawford read question and answer where she stood, in complete 
silence. she look up. ‘many of these question i don’t know the 
answer to myself,’ she said. 

‘it is immaterial,’ said mr bethany. 

‘one answer is--is inaccurate. ‘yes, yes, quite so: due to a mistake in 
a letter from myself.’ 

mrs lawford read quiet on, fold the papers, and held them out 
between finger and thumb. ‘the--handwriting...’ she remark very 
softly. 

‘wonderful, isn’t it?’ said mr bethany warmly; ‘all the general look and 
run of the thing different, but every real essential feature unchanged. 
now into the envelope. and now a little wax?’ 

mrs lawford stood waiting. ‘there’s a green piece of sealing-wax,’ 
almost drawl the quiet voice, ‘in the top right drawer of the nest 
in the study, which old james gave me the christmas before last.’ he 
glance with lower eyelid at his wife’s flushed cheek. their eyes 
met. 

‘thank you,’ she said. 

when she return the vicar was sitting in a chair, leaning his chin on 
the knob handle of his umbrella. he rose and lit a taper for her 
with a match from a little green pot on the table. and mrs lawford, with 
tremble fingers, seal the letter, as he directed, with his own seal. 

‘there!’ he said triumphantly, ‘how many more such brilliant lawyers, i 
wonder, lie dormant in the church? and who shall keep this?... why, all 
three, of course.’ he went on without pausing. ‘some little drawer now, 
secret and undetectable, with a lock.’ just such a little drawer that 
lock itself with a spring lay by chance in the looking-glass. there 
the letter was hidden. and mr bethany look at his watch. ‘nineteen 
minutes,’ he said. ‘the next thing, my dear child--we’re get on 
swimmingly--and it’s astonish how things are simplify by mere 
use--the next thing is to send for simon.’ 

sheila took a deep breath, but did not look up. ‘i am entire in your 
hands,’ she replied. 

‘so be it,’ said he crisply. ‘get to bed, lawford; it’s better so. and 
i’ll look in on my way back from witchett. i came, my dear fellow, in 
gloomy disturbance of mind. it was get up too early; it fog old 
brains. good-bye, good-bye.’ 

he squeeze lawford’s hand. then, with umbrella under his arm, his hat 
on his head, his spectacles readjusted, he hurried out of the room. mrs 
lawford follow him. for a few minutes lawford sat motionless, with 
head bent a little, and eyes restless scan the door. then he rose 
abruptly, and in a quarter of an hour was in bed, alone with his slow 
thoughts: while a basin of cornflour stood untasted on a little table 
at his bedside, and a cheerful fire burn in the best visitors’ room’s 
tiny grate. 

at half-past eleven dr simon enter this soundless seclusion. he sat 
down beside lawford, and took temperature and pulse. then he half closed 
his lids, and scan his patient out of an unusually dark, un-english 
face, with straight black hair, and listen attentive to his rather 
incoherent story. it was a story very much modify and round off. 
nor did lawford draw dr simon’s attention to the portrait now smile 
conventional above their head from the wall over the fireplace. 

‘it was rather bleak--the wind; and, i think, perhaps, i had had a 
touch of influenza. it was a silly thing to do. but still, dr simon, one 
doesn’t expect--well, there, i don’t feel the same man--physically. i 
really cannot explain how great a change has taken place. and yet i feel 
perfectly fit in myself. and if it were not for--for being laugh at, 
go back to town, to-day. why my wife scarcely recognise me.’ 

dr simon continue his scrutiny. try as he would, lawford could not 
raise his downcast eyes to meet direct the doctor’s polite attention. 

‘and what,’ said dr simon, ‘what precisely is the nature of the change? 
have you any pain?’ 

‘no, not the least pain,’ said lawford; ‘i think, perhaps, or rather my 
face is a little shrunken--and yet lengthened; at least it feel so; 
and a faint twinge of rheumatism. but my hair--well, i don’t know; it’s 
difficult to say one’s self.’ he could get on so very much better, 
he thought, if only his mind would be at peace and these preposterous 
prompt and voice were still. 

dr simon face the window, and drew his hand soft over his head. 
‘we never can be too cautious at a certain age, and especially after 
influenza,’ he said. ‘it undermine the whole system, and in particular 
the nervous system; leave the mind the prey of the most melancholy 
fancies. i should astound you, mr lawford, with the devil influenza 
plays.... a slight nervous shock and a chill; quite slight, i hope. a 
few days’ rest and plenty of nourishment. there’s nothing; temperature 
inconsiderable. all perfectly intelligible. most certainly reassure 
yourself! and as for the change you speak of’--he look steady at the 
dark face on the pillow and smile amiably--‘i don’t think we need 
worry much about that. it certainly was a bleak wind yesterday--and a 
cemetery, my dear sir! it was indiscreet--yes, very.’ he held out his 
hand. ‘you must not be alarmed,’ he said, very distinct with 
the merest trace of an accent; ‘air, sunshine, quiet, nourishment; 
sleep--that is all. the little window might be a few inch open, 
and--and any light reading.’ 

he open the door and join mrs lawford on the staircase. he talk 
to her quiet over his shoulder all the way downstairs. ‘it was, it was 
sporting with providence--a wind, believe me, nearly due east, in spite 
of the warm sunshine.’ 

‘but the change--the change!’ mrs lawford manage to murmur tragically, 
as he strode to the door. dr simon smiled, and graceful tap his 
forehead with a red-gloved forefinger. 

‘humour him, humour him,’ he repeated indulgently. ‘rest and quiet 
will soon put that little trouble out of his head. oh yes, i did notice 
it--the set drawn look, and the droop: quite so. good morning.’ 

mrs lawford gently closed the door after him. a glimpse of ada, crossing 
from room to room, suggest a precaution. she call out in her 
clearest notes. ‘if dr ferguson should call while i am out, ada, will 
you please tell him that dr simon regret that he was unable to wait? 
thank you.’ she pause with hand on the balusters, then slow ascend 
the stairs. her husband’s face was turn to the ceiling, his hand 
clasp above his head. she took up her stand by the fireplace, rest 
one silk-slippered foot on the fender. ‘dr simon is reassuring,’ she 
said, ‘but i do hope, arthur, you will follow his advice. he looks a 
fairly clever man.... but with a big practice.... do you think, dear, he 
quite realise the extent of the--the change?’ 

‘i told him what happened,’ said her husband’s voice out of the 
bed-clothes. 

‘yes, yes, i know,’ said sheila soothingly; ‘but we must remember he is 
comparatively a stranger. he would not detect--’ 

‘what did he tell you?’ ask the voice. 

mrs lawford deliberate considered. if only he would always thus keep 
his face concealed, how much easy it would be to discuss matter 
rationally. ‘you see, dear,’ she said softly, ‘i know, of course, 
nothing about the nerves; but personally, i think his suggestion absurd. 
no mere fancy, surely, can make a lasting alteration in one’s face. and 
your hair--i don’t want to say anything that may seem unkind--but isn’t 
it really quite a distinct shade darker, arthur?’ 

‘any great strain will change the colour of a man’s hair,’ said lawford 
stolidly; ‘at any rate, to white. why, i read once of a fellow in india, 
a hindoo, or something, who--’ 

‘but have you had any intense strain, or anxiety?’ broke in sheila. ‘you 
might, at least, have confide in me; that is, unless--but there, don’t 
you think really, arthur, it would be much more satisfactory in every 
way if we had further advice at once? alice will be home next week. 
to-morrow is the harvest festival, and next week, of course, the 
dedication; and, in any case, the bazaar is out of the question. they 
will have to find another stall-holder. we must do our utmost to avoid 
comment or scandal. every minute must help to--to fix a thing like that. 
i own even now i cannot realise what this awful calamity means. it’s 
useless to brood on it. we must, as the poor dear old vicar said only 
last night, keep our head clear. but i am sure dr simon was under a 
misapprehension. if, now, it was explain to him, a little more fully, 
arthur--a photograph. oh, anything on earth but this dreadful wearing 
uncertainty and suspense! besides ...is simon quite an english name?’ 

lawford drew further into his pillow. ‘do as you think best, sheila,’ 
he said. ‘for my own part, i believe it may be as he suggests--partly an 
illusion, a touch of nervous breakdown. it simply can’t be as bad as i 
think it is. if it were, you would not be here talk like this; and 
bethany wouldn’t have believe a word i said. whatever it is, it’s no 
good crying it on the housetops. give me time, just time. besides, how 
do we know what he really thought? doctor don’t tell their patient 
everything. give the poor chap a chance, and more so if he is a 
foreigner. he’s’--his voice sank almost to a whisper--‘he’s no dark 
than this. and do, please, sheila, take this infernal stuff away, and 
let me have something solid. i’m not ill--in that way. all i want is 
peace and quiet, time to think. let me fight it out alone. it’s been 
sprung on me. the worst’s not over. but i’ll win through; wait! and 
if not--well, you shall not suffer, sheila. don’t be afraid. there are 
other ways out.’ 

sheila broke down. ‘any one would think to hear you talk, that i was 
perfectly heartless. i told ada to be most careful about the cornflour. 
and as for other ways out, it’s a positively wicked thing to say to me 
when i’m nearly distracted with trouble and anxiety. what motive could 
you have had for loiter in an old cemetery? and in an east wind! it’s 
useless for me to remain here, arthur, to be accused of every horrible 
thing that come into a morbid imagination. i will leave you, as you 
suggest, in peace.’ 

‘one moment, sheila,’ answer the muffle voice. ‘i have accused you 
of nothing. if you knew all; if you could read my thoughts, you would 
be surprised, perhaps, at my--but never mind that. on the other hand, i 
really do think it would be better for the present to discuss the thing 
no more. to-day is friday. give this miserable face a week. talk it over 
with bethany if you like. but i forbid’--he struggle up in bed, 
sallow and sinister--‘i flatly forbid, please understand, any other 
interference till then. afterwards you must do exactly as you please. 
send round the town crier! but till then, silence!’ 

sheila with raise head confront him. ‘this, then, is your gratitude. 
so be it. silence, no doubt! until it’s too late to take action. until 
you have worm your way in, and think you are safe. to have believed! 
where is my husband? that is what i am ask you now. when and how you 
have learned his secret god only knows, and your conscience! but he 
always was a simpleton at heart. i warn you, then. until next thursday 
i consent to say nothing provided you remain quiet; make no disturbance, 
no scandal here. the servant and all who inquire shall simply be told 
that my husband is confine to his room with--with a nervous breakdown, 
as you have yourself so glib suggested. i am at your mercy, i own it. 
the vicar believe your preposterous story--with his spectacles off. 
you would convince anybody with the wicked cunning with which you have 
cajole and wheedle him, with which you have deceive and fool a 
foreign doctor. but you will not convince me. you will not convince 
alice. i have friends in the world, though you may not be aware of it, 
who will not be quite so apt to believe any cock-and-bull story you may 
see fit to invent. that is all i have to say. to-night i tell the vicar 
all that i have just told you. and from this moment, please, we are 
strangers. i shall come into the room no more than necessity dictates. 
on friday we resume our real parts. my husband--arthur--to--to connive 
at... phh!’ 

rage had transfigure her. she scarcely heard her own words. they pour 
out senselessly, monotonously, one calling up another, as if from the 
lip of a cassandra. lawford sank back into bed, clutch the sheet 
with both lean hands. he took a deep breath and shut his mouth. 

‘it remind me, sheila,’ he began arduously, ‘of our first quarrel 
before we were married, the evening after your aunt rose die at 
llandudno--do you remember? you threw open the window, and i think--i 
save your life.’ a pause followed. then a queer, almost inarticulate 
voice added, ‘at least, i am afraid so.’ 

a cold and awful quiet fell on sheila’s heart. she stare fixedly 
at the tuft of dark hair, the only visible sign of her husband, on the 
pillow. then, taking up the basin of cold cornflour, she left the room. 
in a quarter of an hour she reappear carry a tray, with ham and 
egg and coffee and honey inviting displayed. she laid it down. 

‘there is only one other question,’ she said, with perfect 
composure--‘that of money. your signature as it appear on the--the 
document drawn up this morning, would, of course, be quite useless on 
a cheque. i have taken all the money i could find; it is in safety. 
you may, however, conceivable be in need of some yourself; here is five 
pounds. i have my own cheque-book, and shall therefore have no need 
to consider the question again for--for the present. so far as you are 
concerned, i shall be guide solely by mr bethany. he will, i do not 
doubt, take full responsibility.’ 

‘and may the lord have mercy on my soul!’ utter a stifled, unfamiliar 
voice from the bed. mrs lawford stooped. ‘arthur!’ she cry faintly, 
‘arthur!’ 

lawford raise himself on his elbow with a sigh that was very near to 
being a sob. ‘oh, sheila, if you’d only be your real self! what is the 
use of all this pretence? just consider my position a little. the fear 
and horror are not all on your side. you call me arthur even then. i’d 
willing do anything you wish to save you pain; you know that. can’t we 
be friends even in this--this ghastly--won’t you, sheila?’ 

mrs lawford drew back, struggle with a doubtful heart. 

‘i think,’ she said, `it would be better not to discuss that now.’ 

the rest of the morning lawford remain in solitude. 



chapter six 

there were three books in the room--jeremy taylor’s ‘holy living and 
dying,’ a volume of the quiver, and a little gilded book on wildflowers. 
he read in vain. he lay and listen to the uproar of his thought on 
which an occasional sound--the drone of a fly, the cry of a milkman, 
the noise of a passing van--obtruded from the workaday world. the pale 
gold sunlight edge soft over the bed. he ate up everything on his 
tray. he even, on the shoal of nightmare, dream awhile. but by and 
by as the hour wheel slow on he grew less calm, less strenuous 
resolve on lie there inactive. every sparrow that twitter cry 
reveille through his brain. he long with an ardour strange to his 
temperament to be up and doing. 

what if his misfortune was, as he had in the excitement of the moment 
suggest to sheila, only a morbid delusion of mind; share too in part 
by sheer force of his absurd confession? even if he was go mad, who 
know how peaceful a release that might not be? could his shrewd old 
vicar have implicit believe in him if the change were as complete 
as he supposed it? he flung off the bedclothes and lock the door. 
he dress himself, noticing, he fancied, with a deadly revulsion 
of feeling, that his coat was a little too short in the sleeves, his 
waistcoat too loose. in the midst of his dressing came sheila bring 
his luncheon. ‘i’m sorry,’ he call out, stoop quick beside the 
bed, ‘i can’t talk now. please put the tray down.’ 

about half an hour afterwards he heard the outer door close, and peep 
from behind the curtains saw his wife go out. all was drowsy quiet in 
the house. he devour his lunch like a schoolboy. that finished to the 
last crumb, without a moment’s delay he cover his face with a towel, 
lock the door behind him, put the key in his pocket, and ran lightly 
downstairs. he stuff the towel into an ulster pocket, put on a soft, 
wide-brimmed hat, and noiseless let himself out. then he turn 
with an almost hysterical delight and ran--ran like the wind, without 
pausing, without thinking, straight on, up one turning, down another, 
until he reach a broad open common, thick wooded, sprinkle with 
gorse and hazel and may, and faint purple with fade heather. there 
he flung himself down in the beautiful sunlight, among the yellow 
bracken, to recover his breath. 

he lay there for many minutes, thinking almost with composure. flight, 
it seemed, had for the moment quieten the demand of that other feeble 
struggle personality which was beginning to insinuate itself into his 
consciousness, which had so miraculous broken in and taken possession 
of his body. he would not think now. all he need was a little quiet 
and patience before he threw off for good and all his right to be free, 
to be his own master, to call himself sane. 

he scramble up and turn his face towards the westere sun. what was 
there in the still of its beautiful splendour that seem to sharpen 
his horror and difficulty, and yet to stir him to such a daring and 
devilry as he had never known since he was a boy? there was little sound 
of life; somewhere an unknown bird was singing, and a few late bee were 
drone in the bracken. all these years he had, like an old blind horse, 
stolid plod round and round in a dull self-set routine. and now, 
just when the spirit had come for rebellion, the mood for a harmless 
truancy, there had fallen with them too this hideous enigma. he sat 
there with the dusky silhouette of the face that was now drench with 
sunlight in his mind’s eye. he set off again up the stony incline. 

why not walk on and on? in time real wholesome weary would come; he 
could sleep at ease in some pleasant wayside inn, without once meeting 
the eyes that stood as it were like a window between himself and a 
shrewd incredulous scoff world that would turn him into a monstrosity 
and his story into a fable. and in a little while, perhaps in three 
days, he would awaken out of this engrossing nightmare, and know he 
was free, this black dog gone from his back, and (as the old saying 
express it without any one dream what it really meant) his own 
man again. how astonish sheila would be; how warm she would welcome 
him!... oh yes, of course she would. 

he came again to a standstill. no voice answer him out of that 
illimitable gold and blue. nothing seem aware of him. but as he stood 
there, doubtful as cain on the outskirts of the unknown, he caught the 
sound of a footfall on the lonely and stone-strewn path. 

the ground slope steeple away to the left, and slow mount the 
hillside came mildly on an old lady he knew, a miss sinnet, an old 
friend of his mother’s. there was just such a little seat as that 
other he knew so well, on the brow of the hill. he made his way to it, 
intend to sit quiet there until the little old lady had pass by. 
up and up she came. her large bonnet appeared, and then her mild white 
face, inclined a little towards him as she ascended. evidently this very 
seat was her goal; and evasion was impossible. evasion!... memory rush 
back and set his pulse beating. he turn bold to the sun, and the 
old lady, with a brief glance into his face, compose herself at the 
other end of the little seat. she gaze out of a gentle reverie into the 
golden valley. and so they sat a while. and almost as if she had 
felt the bond of acquaintance between them, she presently sighed, and 
address him: ‘a very, very, beautiful view, sir.’ 

lawford paused, then turn a gloomy, earnest face, gilded with 
sunshine. ‘beautiful, indeed,’ he said, ‘but not for me. no, miss 
sinnet, not for me.’ 

the old lady grave turn and examine the aquiline profile. ‘well, i 
confess,’ she remark urbanely, ‘you have the advantage of me.’ 

lawford smile uneasily. ‘believe me, it is little advantage.’ 

‘my sight,’ said miss sinnet precisely, ‘is not so good as i might wish; 
though better perhaps than i might have hoped; i fear i am not much 
wiser; your face is still unfamiliar to me.’ 

‘it is not unfamiliar to me,’ said lawford. whose trickery was this? he 
thought, putt such affected stuff into his mouth. 

a faint lighten of pity came into the silvery and scrupulous 
countenance. ‘ah, dear me, yes,’ she said courteously. 

lawford rest a lean hand on the seat. ‘and have you,’ he asked, ‘not 
the least recollection in the world of my face?’ 

‘now really,’ she said, smile blandly, ‘is that quite fair? think of 
all the score and score of face in seventy long years; and how very 
treacherous memory is. you shall do me the service of remind me of 
one whose name has for the moment escape me.’ 

‘i am the son of a very old friend of yours, miss sinnet,’ said lawford 
quiet ‘a friend that was once your schoolfellow at brighton.’ 

‘well, now,’ said the old lady, grasping her umbrella, ‘that is 
undoubted a clue; but then, you see, all but one of the friends of my 
girlhood are dead; and if i have never had the pleasure of meeting her 
son, unless there is a decided resemblance, how am i to recollect her by 
look at him?’ 

‘there is, i believe, a likeness,’ said lawford. 

she nod her great bonnet at him with gentle amusement. ‘you are 
insistent in your fancy. well, let me think again. the last to leave 
me was fanny urquhart, that was--let me see--last october. now you are 
certainly not fanny urquhart’s son,’ she stoop austerely, ‘for she 
never had one. last year, too, i heard that my dear, dear mrs jameson 
was dead. her i hadn’t met for many, many years. but, if i may venture 
to say so, yours is not a scotland face; and she not only married a 
scotland husband, but was herself a dunbar. no, i am still at a loss.’ 

a miserable strife was in her chance companion’s mind, a strife of anger 
and recrimination. he turn his eyes weary to the fast decline sun. 
‘you will forgive my persistency, but i assure you it is a matter of 
life or death to me. is there no one my face recalls? my voice?’ 

miss sinnet drew her long lip together, her eyebrow lift with the 
faintest perturbation. ‘but he certainly know my name,’ she said to 
herself. she turn once more, and in the still autumnal beauty, beneath 
that pale blue arch of evening, these two human being confront 
one another again. she eye him blandly, yet with a certain grave 
directness. 

‘i don’t really think,’ she said, ‘you can be mary lawford’s son. i 
could scarcely have mistaken him.’ 

lawford gulp and turn away. he hardly knew what this surge of 
feeling meant. was it hope, despair, resentment; had he caught even the 
echo of an unholy joy? his mind for a moment became confuse as if 
in the tumult of a struggle. he heard himself expostulate, ‘ah, miss 
bennett, i fear i set you too difficult a task.’ 

the old lady drew abrupt in, like a trustful and gentle snail into its 
shock house. ‘bennett, sir; but my name is not bennett.’ 

and again lawford accept the miserable prompting. ‘not bennett!... how 
can i ever then apologise for so frantic a mistake?’ 

the little old lady took firm hold of her umbrella. she did not answer 
him. ‘the likeness, the likeness!’ he began unctuously, and stopped, 
for the glance that dwelt fleeting on him was cold with the formidable 
dignity and displeasure of age. he raise his hat and turn miserably 
home. he strode on out of the last gold into the blue twilight. what 
fantastic foolery of mind was master him? he cast a hurried look 
over his shoulder at the kindly and offend old figure sitting there, 
solitary, on the little seat, in her great bonnet, with back turn 
resolute upon him--the friend of his dead mother who might have prove 
in his need a friend indeed to him. and he had by this insane caprice 
hopeless estrange her. 

she would remember this face well enough now, he thought bitterly, 
and would take her place among his quiet enemies, if ever the day of 
reckoning should come. it was scandalous, it was banal to have abuse 
her trust and courtesy. oh, it was hopeless to struggle any more! the 
fates were against him. they had play him a trick. he was to be their 
transitory sport, as many a better man he could himself recollect had 
been before him. he would go home and give in; let sheila do with him 
what she pleased. no one but a lunatic could have act as he had, with 
just that frantic hint of method so remarkable in the insane. 

he left the common. a lamplighter was lighting the lamps. a thin 
evening haze was on the air. if only he had stay at home that fateful 
afternoon! who, what had induce him, entice him to venture out? and 
even with the thought well up into his mind an intense desire to go 
to the old green time-worn churchyard again; to sit there contented 
alone, where none heed the completest metamorphosis, down beside the 
yew-trees. what a fool he had been. there alone, of course, lay his only 
possible chance of recovery. he would go to-morrow. perhaps sheila had 
not yet discover his absence; and there would be no difficulty in 
repeating so successful a stratagem. 

remembrance of his miserable mistake, of miss sinnet, faint return 
to him as he swift mount the steps to his porch. poor old lady. he 
would make amends for his discourtesy when he was quite himself again. 
she should some day hear, perhaps, his infinite tragic, infinite 
comic experience from his own lips. he would take her some flowers, some 
old keepsake of his mother’s. what would he not do when the old mood 
and brains of the stupid arthur lawford, whom he had appreciate so 
little and so superficially, came back to him. 

he ran up the steps and stop dead, his hand in his pocket, chill 
and aghast. sheila had taken his keys. he stood there, daze and still, 
beneath the dim yellow of his own fanlight; and once again that inward 
spring flew back. ‘brazen it out; brazen it out! knock and ring!’ 

he knock flamboyantly, and rang. 

there came a quiet step and the door opened. ‘dr simon, of course, has 
called?’ he inquire suavely. 

‘yes, sir.’ 

‘ah, and gone’--as i feared. and mrs lawford?’ 

‘i think mrs lawford is in, sir.’ 

lawford put out a detain hand. ‘we will not disturb her; we will not 
disturb her. i can find my way up; oh yes, thank you!’ 

but ada still pale barred the way. ‘i think, sir,’ she said, ‘mrs 
lawford would prefer to see you herself; she told me most particularly 
“all callers.” and mr lawford was not to be disturbed on any account.’ 

‘disturbed? god forbid!’ said lawford, but his dark eyes fail to 
move these lightest hazel. ‘well,’ he continue nonchalantly, 
‘perhaps--perhaps it--would be as well if mrs lawford should know that 
i am here. no, thank you, i won’t come in. please go and tell--’ 
but even as the maid turn to obey, sheila herself appear at the 
dining-room door in hat and veil. 

lawford hesitate an immeasurable moment. in one swift glance 
he perceive the lamplit mystery of evening, beckoning, calling, 
pleading--fly, fly! home’s here for you. begin again, begin again. and 
there before him in quiet and hostile decorum stood maid and mistress. 
he took off his hat and step quick in. 

‘so late, so very late, i fear,’ he began glibly. ‘a sudden call, a 
perfectly impossible distance. shall we disturb him, do you think?’ 

‘wouldn’t it,’ began sheila softly, ‘be rather a pity perhaps? dr simon 
seem to think.... but, of course, you must decide that.’ 

ada turn quiet small eyes. 

‘no, no, by no means,’ he almost mumbled. 

and a hard, slow smile pass over sheila’s face. ‘excuse me one 
moment,’ she said; ‘i will see if he is awake.’ she swept swift 
forward, superb and triumphant, beneath the gaze of those dark, restless 
eyes. but so still was home and street that quite distinct a clear 
and youthful laughter was heard, and light footstep approaching. sheila 
paused. ada, in the act of close the door, peer out. ‘miss alice, 
ma’am,’ she said. 

and in this infinitesimal advantage of time dr ferguson had seize his 
vanish opportunity, and was already swift mount the stairs. mrs 
lawford stood with veil half raise and cold smile lip and, as if 
it were by pre-arrangement, her daughter’s laugh greeting from the 
garden, and from the landing above her, a faint ‘ah, and how are we 
now?’ broke out simultaneously. and ada, silent and discreet, had thrown 
open the door again to the twilight and to the young people ascend 
the steps. 

lawford was still sitting on his bed before a cold and ashy hearth when 
sheila knock at the door. 

‘yes?’ he said; ‘who’s there?’ no answer followed. he rose with a 
shudder sigh and turn the key. his wife entered. 

‘that little exhibition of finesse was part of our agreement, i 
suppose?’ 

‘i say--’ began lawford. 

‘to creep out in my absence like a thief, and to return like a 
mountebank; that was part of our compact?’ 

‘i say,’ he stubborn began again, ‘did you wire for alice?’ 

‘will you please answer my question? am i to be a mere catspaw in your 
intrigues, in this miserable masquerade before the servants? to set the 
whole place ring with the name of a doctor that doesn’t exist, and 
a bedridden patient that slips out of the house with his bedroom key in 
his pocket! are you aware that ada has been hammer at your door 
every half-hour of your absence? are you aware of that? how much,’ 
she continue in a low, bitter voice, ‘how much should i offer for her 
discretion?’ 

‘who was that with alice?’ inquire the same toneless voice. 

‘i refuse to be ignored. i refuse to be made a child of. will you please 
answer me?’ 

lawford turned. ‘look here, sheila,’ he began heavily, ‘what about 
alice? if you wired: well, it’s useless to say anything more. but if you 
didn’t, i ask you just this one thing. don’t tell her!’ 

‘oh, i perfectly appreciate a father’s natural anxiety.’ 

her husband drew up his shoulder as if to receive a blow. ‘yes, yes,’ 
he said, ‘but you won’t?’ 

the sound of a young laugh voice came faint up from below. ‘how did 
jimmie fortescue know she was coming home to-day?’ 

‘will you not inquire of jimmie fortescue for yourself?’ 

‘oh, what is the use of sneering?’ began the dull voice again. ‘i am 
horrible tired, sheila. and try how you will, you can’t convince me that 
you believe for a moment that i am not myself, that you are as hard 
as you pretend. an acquaintance, even a friend might be deceived; but 
husband and wife--oh no! it isn’t only a man’s face that’s himself--or 
even his hands.’ he look at them, straighten them slow out, and 
bury them in his pockets. ‘all i care about now is alice. is she, or 
is she not go to be told? i am simply ask you to give her just a 
chance.’ 

‘“simply ask me to give alice a chance”; now isn’t that really just a 
little...?’ 

lawford slow shook his head. ‘you know in your heart it isn’t, sheila; 
you understand me quite well, although you persistent pretend not to. 
i can’t argue now. i can’t speak up for myself. i am just about as far 
down as i can go. it’s only alice.’ 

‘i see; a lucid interval?’ suggest his wife in a low, tremble voice. 

‘yes, yes, if you like,’ said her husband patiently, ‘“a lucid 
interval.” don’t please look at my face like that, sheila. think--think 
that it’s just lupus, just some horrible disfigurement.’ 

not much light was in the large room, and there was something so 
extraordinarily characteristic of her husband in those stoop 
shoulders, in the head hung a little forward, and in the preternatural 
solemn voice, that sheila had to bend a little over the bed to catch a 
glimpse of the sallow and keen face again. she sighed; and even on her 
own strained ear her sigh sound almost like one of relief. 

‘it’s useless, i know, to ask you anything while you are in this mood,’ 
continue lawford dully; ‘i know that of old.’ 

the white, ring hand clenched, ‘“of old!”’ 

‘i didn’t mean anything. don’t listen to what i say. it’s only--it’s 
just alice knowing, that was all; i mean at once.’ 

‘don’t for a moment suppose i am not perfectly aware that it is only 
alice you think of. you were particularly anxious about my feelings, 
weren’t you? you broke the news to me with the tenderest solicitude. i 
am glad our--our daughter shares my husband’s love.’ 

‘look here,’ said lawford densely, ‘you know that i love you as much as 
ever; but with this--as i am; what would be the good of my saying so?’ 
mrs lawford took a deep breath. 

and a voice call soft at the door, ‘mother, are you there? is father 
awake? may i come in?’ 

in a flash the memory return to her; twenty-four hour ago she was 
ask that very question of this unspeakable figure that sat hunched-up 
before her. 

‘one moment, dear,’ she called. and add in a very low voice, ‘come 
here!’ 

lawford look up. ‘what?’ he said. 

‘perhaps, perhaps,’ she whispered, ‘it isn’t quite so bad.’ 

‘for mercy’s sake, sheila,’ he said, ‘don’t torture me; tell the poor 
child to go away.’ 

she paused. ‘are you there, alice? would you mind, father says, wait 
a little? he is so very tired.’ 

‘too tired to.... oh, very well, mother.’ 

mrs lawford open the door, and call after her, ‘is jimmie gone?’ 

‘oh, yes, hours.’ 

‘where did you meet?’ 

‘i couldn’t get a carriage at the station. he carry my dressing-bag; 
i beg him not to. the other’s coming on. you know what jimmie is. 
how very, very lucky i did come home. i don’t know what made me; just an 
impulse; they did laugh at me so. father dear--do speak to me; how are 
you now?’ 

lawford open his mouth, gulped, and shook his head. 

‘ssh, dear!’ whisper sheila, ‘i think he has fallen asleep. i will 
be down in a minute.’ mrs lawford was about to close the door when ada 
appeared. 

‘if you please, ma’am,’ she said, ‘i have been waiting, as you told me, 
to let dr ferguson out, but it’s nearly seven now; and the table’s not 
laid yet.’ 

‘i really should have thought, ada,’ sheila began, then caught back the 
angry words, and turn and look over her shoulder into the room. 
‘do you think you will need anything more, dr ferguson?’ she ask in a 
sepulchral voice. 

again lawford’s lip moved; again he shook his head. 

‘one moment, ada,’ she said close the door. ‘some more medicine--what 
medicine? quick! she mustn’t suspect.’ 

‘“what medicine?”’ repeated lawford stolidly. 

‘oh, vexing, vexing; don’t you see we must send her out? don’t you see? 
what was it you sent to critchett’s for last night? tell him that’s 
gone: we want more of that.’ 

lawford stare heavily. oh, yes, yes,’ he said thickly, ‘more of 
that....’ 

sheila, with a shrug of extreme distaste and vexation, hasty open 
the door. ‘dr ferguson wants a further supply of the drug which mr 
critchett made up for mr lawford yesterday evening. you had better go at 
once, ada, and please make as much haste as you possibly can.’ 

‘i say, i say,’ began lawford; but it was too late, the door was shut. 

‘how i detest this wretched falsehood and subterfuge. what could have 
induce you....?’ 

‘yes,’ said her husband, ‘what! i think i’ll be get to bed again, 
sheila; i forgot i had been ill. and now i do really feel very tired. 
but i should like to feel--in spite of this hideous--i should like to 
feel we are friends, sheila.’ 

sheila almost imperceptible shuddered, cross the room, and face 
the still, almost lifeless mask. ‘i spoke,’ she said, in a low, cold, 
difficult voice--‘i spoke in a temper this morning. you must try to 
understand what a shock it has been to me. now, i own it frankly, i 
know you are--arthur. but god only know how it frighten me, 
and--and--horrifies me.’ she shut her eyes beneath her veil. they wait 
on in silence a while. 

‘poor boy!’ she said at last, lightly touching the loose sleeve; ‘be 
brave; it will all come right, soon. meanwhile, for alice’s sake, if 
not for mine, don’t give way to--to caprices, and all that. keep quiet 
here, arthur. and--and forgive my impatience.’ 

he put out his hand as if to touch her. ‘forgive you!’ he said humbly, 
push it stubborn back into his pocket again. ‘oh, sheila, the 
forgiveness is all on your side. you know i have nothing to forgive.’ a 
long silence fell between them. 

‘then, to-night,’ at last began sheila wearily, drawing back, ‘we 
say nothing to alice, except that you are too tired--just nervous 
prostration--to see her. what we should do without this influenza, i 
cannot conceive. mr bethany will probably look in on his way home; and 
then we can talk it over--we can talk it over again. so long as you 
are like this, yourself, in mind, why i--what is it now?’ she broke off 
querulously. 

‘if you please, ma’am, mr critchett say he doesn’t know dr ferguson, 
his name’s not in the directory, and there must be something wrong with 
the message, and he’s sorry, but he must have it in writing because 
there was more even in the first packet than he ought by rights to send. 
what shall i do, if you please?’ 

still look at her husband. sheila listen quiet to the end, and 
then, as if in inarticulate disdain, she deliberate shrug her 
shoulders, and went out to play her part unaided. 



chapter seven 

her husband turn weary once more, and drawing up a chair sat down in 
front of the cold grate. he realise that sheila thought him as much 
of a fool now as she had for the moment thought him an impostor, or 
something worse, the night before. that was at least something gained. 
he realised, too, in a vague way that the exuberance of mind that had 
practically invent dr ferguson, and outrage miss sinnet, had quite 
sudden flicker out. it was astonishing, he thought, with gaze 
fixed innocent on the black coals, that he should ever have done such 
things. he detest that kind of ‘rot’; that jaunty theatrical pose so 
many men pride their jackdaw brains on. 

and he sat quite still, like a cat at a cranny, listening, as it 
were, for the faintest remotest stir that might hint at any return of 
this--activity. it was the first really sane moment he had had since 
the ‘change.’ whatever it was that had happen at widderstone was now 
distinct weaken in effect. why, now, perhaps? he stole a thievish 
look over his shoulder at the glass, and cautious drew finger and 
thumb down that beak nose. then he really quiet smiled, a smile he 
felt this abominable facial caricature was quite unused to, the superior 
lawford smile of guileless contempt for the fanatical, the fantastic, 
and the bizarre: he wouldn’t have sat with his feet on the fender before 
a burnt-out fire. 

and the animosity of that ‘he,’ utter only just under his breath, 
surprise even himself. it actually did seem as if there were a chance; 
if only he kept cool and collected. if the whole mind of a man was bent 
on being one thing, surely no power on earth, certainly not on earth, 
could for long compel him to look another, any more (followed the 
resplendent thought) than vice versa. 

that, in fact, was the trick that had been in fitful fashion play him 
since yesterday. obviously, and apart altogether from his promise to 
sheila, the best possible thing he could do would be to walk quiet 
over to widderstone to-morrow and like a child that has lost a penny, 
just make the attempt to reverse the process: look at the graves, read 
the inscription on the weather-beaten stones, compose himself once more 
to sleep on the little seat. 

magic, witchcraft, possession, and all that--well, mr bethany might 
prefer to take it on the authority of the bible if it was his duty. but 
it was at least mainly old testament stuff, like polygamy, joshua, and 
the ‘unclean beasts.’ the ‘unclean beasts.’ it was simply, as simon had 
said, mainly an affair of the nerves, like indian jugglery. he had heard 
of dozen of such cases, or similar cases. and it was hardly likely 
that case even remotely like his own would be much brag about, or 
advertised. all those mysterious ‘disappearances,’ too, which one 
read about so repeatedly? what of them? even now, he felt (and glance 
swift behind him at the fancy), it would be better to think as soft 
as possible, not to hope too openly, certainly not to triumph in the 
least degree, just in case of--well--listeners. 

he would wrap up too. and he wouldn’t tell sheila of the project till 
he had come safe back. what an excellent joke it would be to confess 
meek to his escapade, and to be scolded, and then sudden to reveal 
himself. he sat back and gaze with an almost malignant animosity at the 
face in the portrait, comely and plump. 

an inarticulate, unfathomable depression roll back on him, like a 
mist out of the sea. he hasty undressed, put watch and door-key and 
critchett’s powder under his pillow, paused, vacant ruminated, and 
then replace the powder in his waistcoat pocket, said his prayers, and 
got shiver to bed. he did not feel hurt at sheila’s leave him like 
this. so long as she really believe in him. and now--alice was home. he 
listened, try not to shiver, for her voice; and sometimes heard, he 
fancied, the clear note. it was this beastly influenza that made him 
feel so cold and lifeless. but all would soon come right--that is, if 
only that face, luminous against the floating dark within, would not 
appear the instant he closed his eyes. 

but legion of dream are influenza’s allies. he fell into a chill doze, 
heard voice innumerable, and one above the rest, shouting them down, 
until there fell a lull. and another, as it were, from afar said quite 
clearly and distinctly, ‘but surely, my dear, you have heard the story 
of the poor old charwoman who talk greece in her delirium? a little 
school france need not alarm us.’ and lawford open his eyes again on 
mr bethany standing at his bed. 

‘tt, tt! there, i’ve been and wake him. and yet they say men make such 
excellent nurse in time of war. but you see, lawford, what did i tell 
you? wasn’t i now an infallible prophet? your wife has been give me a 
most glowing account. quite your old self, she tell me, except for just 
this--this touch of facial paralysis. and i think, do you know’ (the 
kind old creature stoop over the bed, but still, lawford notice 
bitterly, still without his spectacles)--‘yes, i really think there is 
a decided improvement. not quite so--drawn. we must make haste slowly. 
wedderburn, you know, believe profound in simon; he pull his 
wife through a dangerous confinement. and here’s pill and tonic and 
liniments--a whole chemist’s shop. oh, we are get on swimmingly.’ 

flamelight was flicker in the candle dusk. lawford turn his head 
and saw sheila’s coiled, beautiful hair in the firelight. 

‘you haven’t told alice?’ he asked. 

‘my dear good man,’ said mr bethany, ‘of course we haven’t. you shall 
tell her yourself on monday. what an incredible tradition it will be! 
but you mustn’t worry; you mustn’t even think. and no more of these 
jaunts, eh? that ferguson business--that was too bad. what are we go 
to do with the fellow now we have create him? he will come home to 
roost--mark my words. and as likely as not down the vicarage chimney. 
i wouldn’t have believe it of you, my dear fellow.’ he beamed, but 
looked, none the less, very lean and fagged and depressed. 

‘how did the wedding go off?’ lawford manage to think of inquiring. 

‘oh, a1,’ said mr bethany. ‘i’ve just been describe it to alice--the 
bride, her bridegroom, mother, aunts, cake, presents, finery, blushes, 
tears, and everything that was hers. we’ve been in fits, haven’t we, mrs 
lawford? and alice say i’m a worth in a clerical collar--didn’t she? 
and that it’s only art that has kept me out of an apron. now look here; 
quiet, quiet, quiet; no excitement, no pranks. what is there to worry 
about, pray? and now little dorrit’s down with influenza too. and craik 
and i will have double work to do. well, well; good-bye, my dear. god 
bless you, lawford. i can’t tell you how relieved, how unspeakable 
relieved i am to find you so much--so much better. feed him up, my other 
dear; body and mind and soul and spirit. and there go the bell. i must 
have a biscuit. i’ve swallow nothing but a cupid in plaster of paris 
since breakfast. goodnight; we shall miss you both--both.’ 

but when sheila returned, her husband was sunk again into a quiet sleep, 
from which not even the many question she fret to put to him seem 
weighty enough to warrant his disturbance. 

so when lawford again open his eyes he found himself lie wide awake, 
clear and refreshed, and eager to get up. but upon the air lay the still 
hush of early morning. he try in vain to catch back sleep again. 
a distant shred of dream still float in his mind, like a cloud 
at evening. he rarely dreamed, but certainly something immensely 
interesting had but a moment ago elude him. he sat up and look at 
the clear red cinders and their maze of grottoes. he got out of bed and 
peep through the blinds. to the east and opposite to him garden and 
an apple-orchard lay, and there in strange liquid tranquill hung the 
morning star, and rose, rifling into the dusk of night, the first grey 
of dawn. the street beneath its autumn leaves was vacant, charmed, 
deserted. 

hardly since childhood had lawford seen the dawn unless over his winter 
breakfast-table. very much like a child now he stood gaze out of his 
bow-window--the child whom time’s busy robins had long ago cover over 
with the leaves of numberless hours. a vague exultation fume up into 
his brain. still on the border of sleep, he unlock the great wardrobe 
and took out an old fade purple and crimson dressing-gown that had 
belong to his grandfather, the chief glory of every christmas charade. 
he pull the cowl-like hood over his head and strode majestic over 
to the looking-glass. 

he look in there a moment on the strange face, like a child dismay 
at its own excitement, and a fit of sob that was half uncontrollable 
laughter swept over him. he threw off the hood and turn once more to 
the window. consciousness had flood back indeed. what would sheila 
have said to see him there? the unearthly beauty and stillness, and 
man’s small labours, garden and wall and roof-tree idle and smokeless in 
the light of daybreak--there seem to be some half-told secret between 
them. what had life done with him to leave a reality so clouded? he 
put on his slippers, and, gently opening the door, crept with extreme 
caution up the stairs. at a long, narrow landing window he confront 
a panorama of starry night-gardens, slope orchards; and beyond them 
fields, hills, orion, the dogs, in the clear and cloudless darkness. 

‘my god, how beautiful!’ a voice whispered. and a cock crow misty 
afar. he stood staring like a child into the wintry bright of a 
pastry-cook’s. then once more he crept stealthy on. he stoop and 
listen at a closed door, until he fancy that above the beating of 
his own heart he could hear the breathing of the sleeper within. then, 
taking firm hold of the handle with both hands, he slow noiseless 
turn it, and peep in on alice. 

the moon was long past her faint shining here. the blind was down. and 
yet it was not pitch dark. he stood with eyes fixed, waiting. then he 
edge soft forward and knelt down beside the bed. he could hear her 
breathing now: long, low, quiet, unhastening--the miracle of life. he 
could just dim discern the dark of her hair against the pillow. 
some long-sealed spring of tender seem to rise in his heart with a 
grief and an ache he had never known before. here at least he could find 
a little peace, a brief pause, however futile and stupid all his hope 
of the night had been. he leant his head on his hand on the counterpane 
and refuse to think. he felt a quick tremor, a startle movement, and 
knew that eyes wide open with fear were strive to pierce the gloom 
between them. 

‘there, there, dearest,’ he said in a low whisper, ‘it’s only me, only 
me.’ he stroke the narrow hand and gaze into the shadowiness. her 
finger lay quiet and passive in his, with that strange sense of 
immaterial that sleep bring to the body. 

‘you, you!’ she answer with a deep sigh. ‘oh, dearest, how you 
frightened me. what is wrong? why have you come? are you worse, dearest, 
dearest?’ 

he kiss her hand. ‘no, alice, not worse. i couldn’t sleep, that was 
all.’ 

‘oh, and i came so utterly miserable to bed because you would not see 
me. and mother would tell me only so very little. i didn’t even know 
you had been ill.’ she pressed his hand between her own. ‘but this, you 
know, is very, very naughty--you will catch cold, you bad thing. what 
would mother say?’ 

‘i think we mustn’t tell her, dear. i couldn’t help it; i felt much i 
want to see you. i have been rather miserable.’ 

‘why?’ she said, stroke his hand from wrist to fingertip with one 
soft finger. ‘you mustn’t be miserable. you and me have never done such 
a thing before; have we? was it that wretched old flu?’ 

it was too dark in the little fragrant room even to see her face so 
close to his own. and yet he feared. ‘dr simon,’ she went on softly, 
‘said it was. but isn’t your voice a little hoarse, and it sound so 
melancholy in the dark. and oh’--she squeeze his wrist--‘you have grown 
so thin! you do frighten me. whatever should i do if you were really 
ill? and it was so odd, dear. when first i woke i seem to be still 
strain my eyes in a dream, at such a curious, haunting face--not very 
nice. i am glad, i am glad you were here.’ 

‘what was the dream-face like?’ came the mutter question. 

‘dark and sharp, and rather dwelling eyes; you know those long face one 
see in dreams: like a hawk, like a conjuror’s.’ 

like a conjuror’s!--it was the first unguarded and ungarbled criticism. 
‘perhaps, dear, if you find my voice different, and my hand shrunk up, 
you will find my face changed, too--like a conjuror’s.... what then?’ 

she laugh gaily and tenderly. ‘you silly silly; i should love you more 
than ever. your hand are icy cold. i can’t warm them nohow.’ 

lawford held tight his daughter’s hand. ‘you do love me, alice? you 
would not turn against me, whatever happened? ah, you shall see, you 
shall see.’ a sudden burning hope sprang up in him. surely when all was 
well again, these last few hour would not have been spent in vain. 
like the shadow of death they had been, against whose dark the green 
familiar earth seem beautiful as the plain of paradise. had he but 
realize before how much he love her--what years of life had been 
waste in leave it all unsaid! he came back from his reverie to find 
his hand wet with her tears. he stroke her hair, and touched gently her 
eyelid without speaking. 

‘you will let me come in to-morrow?’ she pleaded; ‘you won’t keep me 
out?’ 

‘ah, but, dear, you must remember your mother. she get so anxious, and 
every word the doctor say is law. how would you like me to come again 
like this, perhaps?--like santa claus?’ 

‘you know how i love have you,’ she said, and stopped. ‘but--but...’ 
he lean closer. ‘yes, yes, come,’ she said, clutch his hand and 
hiding her eyes; ‘it is only my dream--that horrible, dwelling face in 
the dream; it frightened me so.’ 

lawford rose very slow from his knees. he could feel in the dark his 
brow drawn down; there came a low, sullen beating on his ear; he saw 
his face as it were in dim outline against the dark. rage and rebellion 
surge up in him; even his love could be turn to bitterness. well, two 
could play at any game! alice sprang up in bed and caught his sleeve. 
‘dearest, dearest, you must not be angry with me now!’ 

he flung himself down beside the bed. anger, resentment die away. ‘you 
are all i have left,’ he said. 

he stole back, as he had come, in the clear dawn to his bedroom. 

it was not five yet. he put a few more coal on his fire and blew out 
the night-light, and lay down. but it was impossible to rest, to remain 
inactive. he would go down and search for that first volume of quain. 
hallucination, influenza, insanity--why, sheila must have purposely 
mislaid it. a rather formidable figure he looked, descend the stairs 
in the grey dusk of daybreak. the breakfast-room was at the back of 
the house. he tilt the blind, and a faint light flow in from the 
change colours of the sky. he open the glass door of the little 
bookcase to the right of the window, and ran eye and finger over the few 
row of books. but as he stood there with his back to the room, just as 
the shadow of a bird’s wing float across the moonlight of a pool, he 
became sudden conscious that something, somebody had pass across the 
doorway, and in passing had look in on him. 

he stood motionless, listening; but no sound broke the morning 
slumbrousness, except the faraway warble of a thrush in the first 
light. so sudden and transitory had been the experience that it seem 
now to be illusory; yet it had so caught him up, it had with so furtive 
and sinister a quiet broken in on his solitude, that for a moment he 
dare not move. a cold, indefinite sensation stole over him that he was 
being watched; that some dim, evil presence was behind him bide its 
time, patient and stealthy, with eyes fixed unmoving on him where 
he stood. but, watch and wait as silent as he might, only the day 
broaden at the window, and at last a narrow ray of sunlight stole 
tremble up into the dusky bowl of the sky. 

at any rate quain was found, with all the ill of life, from a to i; and 
lawford turn back to his bondage with the book under his arm. 



chapter eight 

the sabbath, pale with september sunshine, and monotonous with chime 
bells, had pass languid away. dr simon had come and gone, optimistic 
and urbane, yet with a faint inward dissatisfaction over a patient 
behind whose taciturn a hint of mockery and subterfuge seem to 
lurk. even mrs lawford had appear to share her husband’s reticence. 
but dr simon had happen on other case in his experience where tact 
was require rather than skill, and time than medicine. 

the voice and footsteps, even the frou-frou of worship go to 
church, the voice and footstep of worship return from church, 
had float up to the patient’s open window. sunlight had drawn across 
his room in one pale beam, and vanished. a few caller had called. 
hothouse flowers, waxen and pale, had been left with message of 
sympathy. even dr critchett had respectful and discreet made 
inquiry on his way home from chapel. 

lawford had spent most of his time in pace to and fro in his soft 
slippers. the very monotony had ease his mind. now and again he had 
lain motionless, with his face to the ceiling. he had doze and had 
awakened, cold and torpid with dream. he had hardly been aware of 
the process, but every hour had done something, it seemed, towards 
clarify his point of view. a consciousness had begun to stir in him 
that was neither that of the old, easy lawford, whom he had never been 
fully aware of before, nor of this strange ghostly intelligence that 
haunt the hawklike, restless face, and pluck so insistent at his 
distracted nerves. he had begun in a vague fashion to be aware of them 
both, could in a fashion discriminate between them, almost as if there 
really were two spirits in stubborn conflict within him. it would, of 
course, wear him down in time. there could be only one end to such a 
struggle--the end. 

all day he had long for freedom, on and on, with craving for the open 
sky, for solitude, for green silence, beyond these maddening walls. this 
heedful silken coming and going, these sunday voices, this reiterant 
yelp of a single peevish bell--would they never cease? and above all, 
betwixt dread and an almost physical greed, he hunger for night. he 
sat down with elbow on knee and head on his hands, thinking of night, 
its secrecy, its immeasurable solitude. 

his eyelid twitched; the fire before him had for an instant gone black 
out. he seem to see slow-gesturing branches, grass stoop beneath 
a grey and wind-swept sky. he start up; and the remembrance of the 
morning return to him--the glassy light, the change rays, the 
beam gilt upon the useless books. now, at last, at the windows; 
afternoon had begun to wane. and when sheila brought up his tea, as if 
chance had heard his cry, she enter in hat and stole. she put down the 
tray, and pause at the glass, look across it out of the window. 

‘alice say you are to eat every one of those delicious sandwiches, and 
especially the tiny omelette. you have scarcely touched anything to-day, 
arthur. i am a poor one to preach, i am afraid; but you know what that 
will mean--a worse breakdown still. you really must try to think of--of 
us all.’ 

‘are you go to church?’ he ask in a low voice. 

‘not, of course, if you would prefer not. but dr simon advise me most 
particularly to go out at least once a day. we must remember, this is 
not the beginning of your illness. long-continued anxiety, i suppose, 
do tell on one in time. anyhow, he said that i look worried and 
run-down. i am worried. let us both try for each other’s sakes, or even 
if only for alice’s, to--to do all we can. i must not harass you; but is 
there any--do you see the slightest change of any kind?’ 

‘you always look pretty, sheila; to-night you look prettier: that is the 
only change, i think.’ 

mrs lawford’s attitude intensify in its stillness. ‘now, speak 
quite frankly, what is it in you suggest these remark at such a time? 
that’s what baffle me. it seem so childish, so needlessly blind.’ 

‘i am very sorry, sheila, to be so childish. but i’m not, say what 
you like, blind. you are pretty: i’d repeat it if i was burning at the 
stake.’ 

sheila lower her eyes soft on to the rich-toned picture in the 
glass. ‘supposing,’ she said, watch her lip move, ‘supposing--of 
course, i know you are get better and all that--but supposing you 
don’t change back as mr bethany thinks, what will you do? honestly, 
arthur, when i think over it calmly, the whole tragedy come back on me 
with such a force it sweep me off my feet; i am for the moment scarcely 
my own mistress. what would you do?’ 

‘i think, sheila,’ reply a low, infinite weary voice, ‘i think i 
should marry again.’ it was the same wavering, faint ironic voice 
that had slightly discompose dr simon that same morning. 

‘“marry again”!’ exclaim incredulous the full lip in the 
looking-glass. ‘who?’ 

‘you, dear!’ 

sheila turn soft round, conscious in a most humiliate manner that 
she had ever so little flushed. 

her husband was pour out his tea, unaware, apparently, of her change 
of position. she watch him curiously. in spite of all her reason, of 
her absolute certainty, she wonder even again for a moment if this 
really could be arthur. and for the first time she realise the power 
and mastery of that eager and far too hungry face. her mind seem to 
pause, flutter in air, like a bird in the wind. she hasten rather 
unsteadi to the door. 

‘will you want anything more, do you think, for an hour?’ she asked. 

her husband look up over his little table. ‘is alice go with you?’ 

‘oh yes; poor child, she looks so pale and miserable. we are go to 
mrs sherwin’s, and then on to church. you will lock your door?’ 

‘yes, i will lock my door.’ 

‘and i do hope arthur--nothing rash!’ 

a change, that seem almost the effect of actual shadow, came over his 
face. ‘i wish you could stay with me,’ he said slowly. ‘i don’t think 
you have any idea what--what i go through.’ 

it was as if a child had ask on the verge of terror for a candle in 
the dark. but an hour’s terror is better than a lifetime of timidity. 
sheila sighed. 

‘i think,’ she said, ‘i too might say that. but there; give way will 
do nothing for either of us. i shall be gone only for an hour, or two 
at the most. and i told mr bethany i should have to come out before the 
sermon: it’s only mr craik.’ 

‘but why mrs sherwin? she’d worm a secret out of one’s grave.’ 

‘it’s useless to discuss that, arthur; you have always consistent 
dislike my friends. it’s scarcely likely that you would find any 
improvement in them now.’ 

‘oh, well--’ he began. but the door was already closed. 

‘sheila!’ he call in a burst of anger. 

‘well, arthur?’ 

‘you have taken my latchkey.’ 

sheila came hasty in again. ‘your latchkey?’ 

‘i am go out.’ 

‘“going out!”--you will not be so mad, so criminal; and after your 
promise!’ 

he stood up. ‘it is useless to argue. if i do not go out, i shall 
certainly go mad. as for criminal--why, that’s a woman’s word. who on 
earth is to know me?’ 

‘it is of no consequence, then, that the servant are already gossip 
about this impossible dr ferguson; that you are certain to be seen 
either go or returning; that alice is bound to discover that you are 
well enough to go out, and yet not even enough to say good-night to your 
own daughter--oh, it’s monstrous, it’s a frantic, a heartless thing to 
do!’ her voice vague suggest tears. 

lawford eye her cold and stubbornly--thinking of the empty room 
he would leave await his return, its lamp burning, its fire-flames 
shining. it was almost a physical discomfort, this longing unspeakable 
for the twilight, the green secrecy and the silence of the graves. ‘keep 
them out of the way,’ he said in a low voice; ‘it will be dark when i 
come in.’ his harden face lit up. ‘it’s useless to attempt to dissuade 
me.’ 

‘why must you always be hurt me? why do you seem to delight in try 
to estrange me?’ husband and wife face each other across the clear-lit 
room. he did not answer. 

‘for the last time,’ she said in a quiet, hard voice, ‘i ask you not to 
go.’ 

he shrug his shoulders. ‘ask me not to come back,’ he said; ‘that’s 
near your hope.’ he turn his face to the fire. without moving 
he heard her go out, return, pause, and go out again. and when he 
deliberate wheel round in his chair the little key lay conspicuous 
there on the counterpane. 



chapter nine 

the last light of sunset lay in the west; and a sullen wrack of cloud 
was mount into the windless sky when lawford enter the country 
graveyard again by its dark weather-worn lych-gate. the old stone church 
with its square tower stood amid trees, its eastern window faint aglow 
with crimson and purple. he could hear a steady, rather nasal voice 
through its open lattices. but the stoop stone and the cypress 
were out of sight of its porch. he would not be seen down there. he 
pause a moment, however; his hat was drawn down over his eyes; he was 
shivering. far over the harvest field show a grow pallor in 
the solitary seat beneath the cypresses. he stood hesitating, gaze 
steady and yet half vacant at the motionless figure, and in a while 
a face was lift in his direction, and undisconcerted eyes calm 
survey him. 

‘i am afraid,’ call lawford rather nervously--‘i hope i am not 
intruding?’ 

‘not at all, not at all,’ said the stranger. ‘i have no privilege here; 
at least as yet.’ 

lawford again hesitated, then slow advanced. ‘it’s astonishing quiet 
and beautiful,’ he said. 

the stranger turn his head to glance over the fields. ‘yes, it is, 
very,’ he replied. there was the faintest accent, a little drawl of 
unfriend in the remark. 

‘you often sit here?’ lawford persisted. 

the stranger raise his eyebrows. ‘oh yes, often.’ he smiled. ‘it is 
my own modest fashion of attend divine service. the congregation is 
rapt.’ 

‘my visits,’ said lawford, ‘have been very few--in fact, so far as i 
know, i have only once been here before.’ 

‘i envy you the novelty.’ there was again the same faint unmistakable 
antagonism in voice and attitude; and yet so deep was the relief in 
talk to a fellow creature who hadn’t the least suspicion of anything 
unusual in his appearance that lawford was extremely disinclined to turn 
back. he made another effort--for conversation with stranger had always 
been a difficulty to him--and advanced towards the seat. ‘you mustn’t 
please let me intrude upon you,’ he said, ‘but really i am very 
interested in this queer old place. perhaps you would tell me something 
of its history?’ he sat down. his companion move slow to the other 
side of the broken gravestone. 

‘to tell you the truth,’ he replied, pick his way as it were from 
word to word, ‘it’s “history,” as people call it, do not interest me 
in the least. after all, it’s not when a thing is, but what it is, that 
much matters. what this is’--he glanced, with head bent, across the 
shadowy stones, ‘is pretty evident. of course, age has its charms.’ 

‘and is this very old?’ 

‘oh yes, it’s old right enough, as things go; but even age, perhaps, 
is mainly an affair of the imagination. there’s a tombstone near that 
little old hawthorn, and there are two other side by side under the 
wall, still even legible late seventeenth century. that’s pretty 
good weathering.’ he smile faintly. ‘of course, the church itself is 
century older, drench with age. but she’s still sleep-walking while 
these old tombstone dream. glow-worms and cricket are not such bad 
bedfellows.’ 

‘what interested me most, i think,’ said lawford haltingly, ‘was this.’ 
he pointed with his stick to the grave at his feet. 

‘ah, yes, sabathier’s,’ said the stranger; ‘i know his peculiar history 
almost by heart.’ 

lawford found himself staring with unusual concentration into the 
rather long and pale face. ‘not, i suppose,’ he resume faintly--‘not, i 
suppose, beyond what’s there.’ 

his companion leant his hand on the old stoop tombstone. ‘well, you 
know, there’s a good deal there’--he stoop over--‘if you read between 
the lines. even if you don’t.’ 

‘a suicide,’ said lawford, under his breath. 

‘yes, a suicide; that’s why our christian countrymen have bury him 
outside of the fold. dead or alive, they try to keep the wolf out.’ 

‘is this, then, unconsecrated ground?’ said lawford. 

‘haven’t you noticed,’ drawl the other, ‘how green the grass grow 
down here, and how very sharp are poor old sabathier’s thorns? besides, 
he was a stranger, and they--kept him out.’ 

‘but, surely,’ said lawford, ‘was it so entire a matter of choice--the 
law of the church? if he did kill himself, he did.’ 

the stranger turn with a little shrug. ‘i don’t suppose it’s a matter 
of much consequence to him. i fancy i was his only friend. may i 
venture to ask why you are interested in the poor old thing?’ 

lawford’s mind was as calm and shallow as a millpond. ‘oh, a rather 
unusual thing happen to me here,’ he said. ‘you say you often come?’ 

‘often,’ said the stranger rather curtly. 

‘has anything--ever--occurred?’ 

‘“occurred?”’ he raise his eyebrows. ‘i wish it had. i come here 
simply, as i have said, because it’s quiet; because i prefer the company 
of those who never answer me back, and who do not so much as condescend 
to pay me the least attention.’ he smile and turn his face towards 
the quiet fields. 

lawford, after a long pause, lift his eyes. ‘do you think,’ he said 
softly, ‘it is possible one ever could?’ 

‘“one ever could?”’ 

‘answer back?’ 

there was a low rot wall of stone encompass sabathier’s grave; 
on this the stranger sat down. he glance up rather curious at his 
companion. ‘seldom the time and the place and the revenant altogether. 
the thought has occur to others,’ he venture to add. 

‘of course, of course,’ said lawford eagerly. ‘but it is an absolutely 
new one to me. i don’t mean that i have never had such an idea, just in 
one’s own superficial way; but’--he pause and glance swift into the 
fast-thickening twilight--‘i wonder: are they, do you think, really, all 
quite dead?’ 

‘call and see!’ taunt the stranger softly. 

‘ah, yes, i know,’ said lawford. ‘but i believe in the resurrection of 
the body; that is what we say; and supposing, when a man dies--supposing 
it was most frightfully against one’s will; that one hate the awful 
inaction that death brings, shut a poor devil up like a child 
kick against the door in a dark cupboard; one might surely one 
might--just quietly, you know, try to get out? wouldn’t you?’ he added. 

‘and, surely,’ he found himself beginning gently to argue again, 
‘surely, what about, say, him?’ he nod towards the old and broken 
grave that lay between them. 

‘what, sabathier?’ the other echoed, lay his hand upon the stone. 

and a sheer enormous abyss of silence seem to follow the unanswerable 
question. 

‘he was a stranger; it say so. good god!’ said lawford, ‘how he must 
have want to get home! he kill himself, poor wretch, think of the 
fret and fever he must have been in--just before. imagine it.’ 

‘but it might, you know,’ suggest the other with a smile--‘might have 
been sheer indifference.’ 

‘“nicholas sabathier, stranger to this parish”--no, no,’ said lawford, 
his heart beating as if it would choke him, ‘i don’t fancy it was 
indifference.’ 

it was almost too dark now to distinguish the stranger’s features but 
there seem a faint suggestion of irony in his voice. ‘and how do 
you suppose your angry naughty child would set about it? it’s narrow 
quarters; how would he begin?’ 

lawford sat quite still. ‘you say--i hope i am not detain you--you 
say you have come here, sat here often, on this very seat; have you ever 
had--have you ever fallen asleep here?’ 

‘why do you ask?’ inquire the other curiously. 

‘i was only wondering,’ said lawford. he was cold and shivering. he felt 
instinctive it was madness to sit on here in the thin gliding mist 
that had gather in swathe above the grass, milk-pale in the rising 
moon. the stranger turn away from him. 

‘“for in that sleep of death what dream may come must give us pause,”’ 
he said slowly, with a little satirical catch on the last word. ‘what 
did you dream?’ 

lawford glance helpless about him. the moon cast lean grey beam 
of light between the cypresses. but to his wide and wandering eyes it 
seem that a radiance other than hers haunt these mound and leaning 
stones. ‘have you ever notice it?’ he said, putt out his hand 
towards his unknown companion; ‘this stone is cracked from head to 
foot?... but there’--he rose stiff and chilled--‘i am afraid i have 
bore you with my company. you came here for solitude, and i have been 
try to convince you that we are surround with witnesses. you will 
forgive my intrusion?’ there was a kind of old-fashioned courtesy in his 
manner that he himself was dim aware of. he held out his hand. 

‘i hope you will think nothing of the kind,’ said the other earnestly; 
‘how could it be in any sense an intrusion? it’s the old story of 
bluebeard. and i confess i too should very much like a peep into his 
cupboard. who wouldn’t? but there, it’s merely a matter of time, i 
suppose.’ he paused, and together they slow ascend the path already 
glimmer with a heavy dew. at the porch they pause once more. and now 
it was the stranger that held out his hand. 

‘perhaps,’ he said, ‘you will give me the pleasure of some day 
continue our talk. as for our friend below, it so happen that i have 
manage to pick up a little more of his history than the sexton seem to 
have heard of--if you would care some time or other to share it. i live 
only at the foot of the hill, not half a mile distant. perhaps you could 
spare the time now?’ 

lawford took out his watch, ‘you are really very kind,’ he said. ‘but, 
perhaps--well, whatever that history may be, i think you would agree 
that mine is even--but, there, i’ve talk too much about myself 
already. perhaps to-morrow?’ 

‘why, to-morrow, then,’ said his companion. ‘it’s a flat wooden house, 
on the left-hand side. come at any time of the evening’; he pause again 
and smiled--‘the third house after the rectory, which is marked up on 
the gate. my name is herbert--herbert herbert to be precise.’ 

lawford took out his pocket-book and a card. ‘mine,’ he said, hand 
it grave to his companion. ‘is lawford--at least...’ it was really the 
first time that either had seen the other’s face at close quarters and 
clear-lit; and on lawford’s a moon almost at the full shone 
dazzlingly. he saw an expression--dismay, incredulity, overwhelming 
astonishment--start sudden into the dark, rather indifferent eyes. 

‘what is it?’ he cried, hasty stoop close. 

‘why,’ said the other, laugh and turning away, ‘i think the moon must 
have bewitch me too.’ 



chapter ten 

lawford listen awhile before opening his door. he heard voice in the 
dining-room. a light shone faint between the blind of his bedroom. he 
very gently let himself in, and unheard, unseen, mount the stairs. he 
sat down in front of the fire, tired out and bitter cold in spite 
of his long walk home. but his mind was weary even than his body. he 
try in vain to catch up the thread of his thoughts. he only knew for 
certain that so far as his first hope and motive had gone his errand 
had prove entire futile. ‘how could i possibly fall asleep with that 
fellow talk there?’ he had said to himself angrily; yet knew in his 
heart that their talk had driven every other idea out of his mind. he 
had not yet even glance into the glass. his every thought was vain 
wandering round and round the one curious hint that had drift in, but 
which he had not yet been able to put into words. 

supposing, though, that he had really fallen into a deep sleep, with 
none to watch or spy--what then? however ridiculous that idea, it was 
not more ridiculous, more incredible than the actual fact. if he had 
remain there, he might, it was just possible that he would by now, 
have actually awaken just his own familiar every-day self again. and 
the thought of that--though he hardly realise its full import--actually 
did send him on tip-toe for a glance that more or less effectually set 
the question at rest. and there look out at him, it seemed, the 
same dark sallow face that had so much appall him only two nights 
ago--expressionless, cadaverous, with shadowy hollow beneath the 
glittering eyes. and even as he watch it, its lips, of their own 
volition, drew together and question him--‘whose?’ 

he was not to be given much leisure, however, for fantastic reverie 
like this. as he lean his head on his hands, gladly conscious that he 
could not possibly bear this incessant strain for long, sheila open 
the door. he start up. 

‘i wish you would knock,’ he said angrily; ‘you talk of quiet; you tell 
me to rest, and think; and here you come creep and spy on me as 
if i was a child in a nursery. i refuse to be watch and guarded and 
peep on like this.’ he knew that his hand were trembling, that he 
could not keep his eyes fixed, that his voice was nearly inarticulate. 

sheila drew in her lips. ‘i have merely come to tell you, arthur, that 
mr bethany has brought mr danton in to supper. he agree with me it 
really would be advisable to take such a very old and prudent and 
practical friend into our confidence. you do nothing i ask of you. i 
simply cannot bear the burden of this incessant anxiety. look, now, what 
your night walk has done for you! you look positively at death’s door.’ 

‘what--what an instinct you have for the right word,’ said lawford 
softly. ‘and danton, of all people in the world! it was surely rather a 
curious, a thoughtless choice. has he had supper?’ 

‘why do you ask?’ 

‘he won’t believe: too--bloated.’ 

‘i think,’ said sheila indignantly, ‘it is hardly fair to speak of a 
very old and a very true friend of mine in such--well, vulgar terms as 
that. besides, arthur, as for believing--without in the least desire 
to hurt your feelings--i must candidly warn you, some people won’t.’ 

‘come along,’ said lawford, with a faint gust of laughter; ‘let’s see.’ 

they went quick downstairs, sheila with less dignity, perhaps, than 
she had been surprise into since she had left a slim girlhood 
behind. she swept into the gaze of the two gentlemen standing together 
on the hearthrug; and so was caught, as it were, between a rain of 
conflict glances, for her husband had follow instantly, and stood 
now behind her, stoop a little, and with something between contempt 
and defiance confront an old fat friend, whom that one brief 
challenging instant had congeal into a condition of passive and 
immovable hostility. 

mr danton compose his chin in his collar, and deliberate 
turn himself towards his companion. his small eyes wandered, and 
instantaneous met and rest on those of mrs lawford. 

‘arthur thought he would prefer to come down and see you himself.’ 

‘you take such formidable risks, lawford,’ said mr bethany in a dry, 
difficult voice. 

‘am i really to believe,’ danton began huskily. ‘i am sure, bethany, 
you will--my dear mrs lawford!’ said he, stirring vaguely, glancing 
restlessly. 

‘it was not my wish, vicar, to come at all,’ said a voice from the 
doorway. ‘to tell you the truth, i am too tired to care a jot either 
way. and’--he lift a long arm--‘i must positively refuse to produce 
the least, the remotest proof that i am not, so far as i am personally 
aware, even the man in the moon. danton at heart was always an 
incorrigible sceptic. aren’t you, t. d.? you pride your dear old brawn 
on it in secret?’ 

‘i really--’ began danton in a rich still voice. 

‘oh, but you know you are,’ drawl on the slightly hesitate 
long-drawn syllables; ‘it’s your parochial metier. firm, unctuous, 
subtle, scepticism; and to that end your body flourishes. you were born 
fat; you became fat; and fat, my dear danton, has been deliberate 
thrust on you--in layers! lampreys! you’ll perish of surfeit some day, 
of sheer dantonism. and fat, postmortem, danton. oh, what a basting’s 
there!’ 

mr bethany, with a convulsive effort, woke. he turn swift on mrs 
lawford. ‘why, why, could you not have seen?’ he cried. 

‘it’s no good, vicar. she’s all sheer laodicean. blow hot, blow cold. 
north, south, east, west--to have a weathercock for a wife is to marry 
the wind. there’s nothing to be got from poor sheila but.... 

‘lawford!’ the little man’s voice was as sharp as the crack of a whip; 
‘i forbid it. do you hear me? i forbid it. some self-command; my dear 
good fellow, remember, remember it’s only the will, the will that keeps 
us breathing.’ 

lawford peer as if out of a gathering dusk, that thicken and 
flicker with shadow before his eyes. ‘what’s he mean, then,’ he 
mutter huskily, ‘coming here with his black, still carcase--peeping, 
peeping--what’s he mean, i say?’ there was a moment’s silence. then with 
lift brow and wide eyes that to every one of his three witness 
left an indelible memory of clear and wolfish light within their glassy 
pupils, he turn heavily, and climb back to his solitude. 

‘i suppose,’ began danton, with an obvious effort to disentangle himself 
from the humiliate of the moment, ‘i suppose he was--wandering?’ 

‘bless me, yes,’ said mr bethany cordially--‘fever. we all know what 
that means.’ 

‘yes,’ said danton, taking refuge in mrs lawford’s white and intent 
gaze. 

‘just think, think, danton--the awful, incessant strain of such an 
ordeal. think for an instant what such a thing means!’ 

danton insert a plump, white finger between collar and chin. ‘oh yes. 
but--eh?--needlessly abusive? i never said i disbelieve him.’ 

‘do you?’ said mrs lawford’s voice. 

he poised himself, as if it were, on the monolithic stability of his 
legs. ‘eh?’ he said. 

mr bethany sat down at the table. ‘i rather fear some such temporary 
breakdown as this, danton. i think i foresaw it. and now, just while we 
are all three alone here together in friendly conclave, wouldn’t it be 
as well, don’t you think, to confront ourselves with the difficulties? 
i know--we all know, that that poor half-demented creature is arthur 
lawford. this morning he was as sane, as lucid as i hope i am now. an 
awful calamity has sudden fallen upon him--this change. i own frankly 
at the first sheer shock it stagger me as i think for the moment it 
has stagger you. but when i had seen the poor fellow face to face, 
heard him talk, and watch him there upstairs in the silence stir and 
awake and come up again to his trouble out of his sleep. i had no more 
doubt in my own mind and heart that he was he than i have in my mind 
that i--am i. we do in some mysterious way, you’ll own at once, grow so 
accustomed, so inured, if you like, to each other’s face (masks 
though they be) that we hardly realise we see them when we are speak 
together. and yet the slightest, the most infinitesimal change is 
instantly apparent.’ 

‘oh yes, vicar; but you see--’ 

mr bethany raise a small lean hand: ‘one moment, please. i have heard 
lawford’s own account. conscious or unconscious, he has been through 
some terrific strain, some such awful conflict with the unseen powers 
that we--thank god!--have only read about, and never perhaps, until 
death is upon us, shall witness for ourselves. what more likely, more 
inevitable than that such a thing should leave its scar, its cloud, its 
mask shadow?--call it what you will. a smile can turn a face we dread 
into a face we’d die for. some experience, which would be nothing but 
a hideous cruelty and outrage to ask too close about--one, perhaps, 
which he could, even if he would, poor fellow, give no account of--has 
put him temporary at the world’s mercy. they made him a nine days’ 
wonder, a byword. and that, my dear danton, is just where we come in. 
we know the man himself; and it is to be our privilege to act as a 
buffer-state, to be intermediary between him and the rest of this 
deadly, craving, sheepish world--for the time being; oh yes, just for 
the time being. other and keen and more knowledgeable mind than mine 
or yours will some day bring him back to us again. we don’t attempt to 
explain; we can’t. we simply believe.’ 

but danton merely continue to stare, as if into the quiet of an 
aquarium. 

‘my dear good danton,’ persist mr bethany with cherub patience, ‘how 
old are you?’ 

‘i don’t see quite...’ smile danton with recover ease, and 
rapid mobilise forces. ‘excuse the confidence, mrs lawford, i’m 
forty-three.’ 

‘good,’ said mr bethany; ‘and i’m seventy-one, and this child here’--he 
pointed an accuse finger at sheila--is youth perpetual. so,’ he 
brisk brightened, ‘say, between us we’re six score all told. are 
we--can we, deliberately, with this mere pinch of years at our command 
out of the wheeling million that have gone--can we say, “this is 
impossible,” to any single phenomenon? can we?’ 

‘no, we can’t, of course,’ said danton formidably. ‘not finally. that’s 
all very well, but’--he paused, and nodded, nod his round head 
upward as if towards the inaudible overhead, ‘i suppose he can’t hear?’ 

mr bethany rose cheerfully. ‘all right, danton; i am afraid you are 
exactly what the poor fellow in his delirium solemn asseverated. 
and, jesting apart, it is in delirium that we tell our sheer, plain, 
unadulterated truth: you’re a nicely cover sceptic. personally, i 
refuse to discuss the matter. mere dull, stubborn prejudice; bigotry, if 
you like. i will only remark just this--that mrs lawford and i, in our 
inmost hearts, know. you, my dear danton, forgive the freedom, merely 
incredulous grope. faith versus reason--that prehistoric armageddon. 
some day, and a day not far distant either, lawford will come back 
to us. this--this shutter will be taken down as abrupt as by some 
inconceivable drowsy heedless of common nature it has been put 
up. he’ll win through; and of his own sheer will and courage. but now, 
because i ask it, and this poor child here entreat it, you will say 
nothing to a living soul about the matter, say, till friday? what 
step-by-step creature we are, to be sure! i say friday because it 
will be exactly a week then. and what’s a week?--to nature scarcely 
the unfold of a rose. but still, friday be it. then, if nothing has 
occurred, we will, we shall have to call a friendly gathering, we shall 
be compel to have a friendly consultation.’ 

‘i’m not, i hope, a brute, bethany,’ said danton apologetically; ‘but, 
honestly, speak for myself, simply as a man of the world, it’s a 
big risk to be taking on--what shall we call it?--on mere intuition. 
personally, and even in a court of law--though heaven forbid it ever 
reach that stage--personally, i could swear that the fellow that stood 
abuse me there, in that revolting fashion, was not lawford. it would 
be easy even to believe in him, if there were not that--that glaze, 
that shocking simulation of the man himself, the very man. but then, i 
am a sceptic; i own it. and ‘pon my word, mrs lawford, there’s plenty of 
room for sceptic in a world like this.’ 

‘very well,’ said mr bethany crisply, ‘that’s settled, then. with your 
permission, my dear,’ he added, turning untarnishable clear childlike 
eyes on sheila, ‘i will take all risks--even to the foot of the gibbet: 
accessory, danton, after the fact.’ and so direct and cloudless was his 
gaze that sheila try in vain to evade it and to catch a glimpse 
of danton’s small agate-like eyes, now completely under mastery, and 
await confident the meeting with her own. 

‘of course,’ she said, ‘i am entire in your hands, dear mr bethany.’ 



chapter eleven 

lawford slept far into the cloudy monday morning, to wake steep in 
sleep, lethargic, and fretful haunt by inconclusive remembrance 
of the night before. when sheila, with obvious and capacious composure, 
brought him his breakfast tray, he watch her face for some time 
without speaking. 

‘sheila,’ he began, as she was about to leave the room again. 

she paused, smiling. 

‘did anything happen last night? would you mind telling me, sheila? who 
was it was here?’ 

her lid the least bit narrowed. ‘certainly, arthur; mr danton was 
here.’ 

‘then it was not a dream?’ 

‘oh no,’ said sheila. 

‘what did i say? what did he say? it was hopeless, anyhow.’ 

‘i don’t quite understand what you mean by “hopeless,” arthur. and must 
i answer the other questions?’ 

lawford drew his hand over his face, like a tired child. ‘he 
didn’t--believe?’ 

‘no, dear,’ said sheila softly. 

‘and you, sheila?’ came the subdued voice. 

sheila cross slow to the window. ‘well, quite honestly, arthur, i 
was not very much surprised. whatever we are agree about on the whole, 
you were scarcely yourself last night.’ 

lawford shut his eyes, and re-opened them full on his wife’s calm 
scrutiny, who had in that moment turn in the light of the one drawn 
blind to face him again. 

‘who is? always?’ 

‘no,’ said sheila; ‘but--it was at least unfortunate. we can’t, i 
suppose, rely on dr bethany alone.’ 

lawford crouch over his food. ‘will he blab?’ 

‘blab! mr danton is a gentleman, arthur.’ 

lawford roll his eyes as if in temporary vertigo. ‘yes,’ he said. and 
sheila once more prepared to make a reposeful exit. 

‘i don’t think i can see simon this morning.’ 

‘oh. who, then?’ 

‘i mean i would prefer to be left alone.’ 

‘believe me, i had no intention to intrude.’ and this time the door 
really closed. 

‘he is in a quiet, soothe sleep,’ said sheila a few minutes later. 

‘nothing could be better,’ said dr simon; and lawford, to his 
inexpressible relief, heard the fevered throb of the doctor’s car 
reverse, and turn over and shut his eyes, dull and exhaust in 
the still unfriend of the vacant room. his spirits had sunk, 
he thought, to their lowest ebb. he scarcely heed the fragment of 
dreams--clear, green landscapes, amazing gleam of peace, the 
sudden broken voices, the rustling and calling shadowy of 
subconsciousness--in this quiet sunlight of reality. the cloud had 
broken, or had been withdrawn like a veil from the october skies. one 
thought alone was his refuge; one face alone haunt him with its 
peace; one remembrance soothe him--alice. through all his scattered 
and purposeless argument he strove to remember her voice, the 
loving-kindness of her eyes, her untroubled confidence. 

in the afternoon he got up and dress himself. he could not bring 
himself to stand before the glass and deliberate shave. he even smile 
at the thought of play the barber to that lean chin. he dress by 
the fireplace. 

‘i couldn’t rest,’ he told sheila, when she presently came in on one 
of her quiet, cautious, heedful visits; ‘and one tire of reading even 
quain in bed.’ 

‘have you found anything?’ she inquire politely. 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford wearily; ‘i have discover that infinite 
worse things are infinite commoner. but that there’s nothing quite so 
picturesque.’ 

‘tell me,’ said sheila, with refreshing naivete. ‘how do it feel? do 
it even in the slightest degree affect your mind?’ 

he turn his back and look up at his broad gilt portrait for 
inspiration. ‘practically, not at all,’ he said hollowly. ‘of course, 
one’s nerves--that fellow danton--when one’s overtired. you have’--his 
voice, in spite of every effort, faint quavered--‘you haven’t notice 
anything? my mind?’ 

‘me? oh dear, no! i never was the least bit observant; you know 
that, arthur. but apart from that, and i hope you will not think me 
unsympathetic--but don’t you think we must soon or later be thinking 
of what’s to be done? at present, though i fully agree with mr bethany 
as to the wisdom of hush this unhappy business up as long as 
possible, at least from the gossip outside world, still we are only 
standing still. and your malady, dear, i suppose, isn’t. you will help 
me, arthur? you will try and think? poor alice!’ 

‘what about alice?’ 

‘she mopes, dear, rather. she cannot, of course, quite understand why 
she must not see her father, and yet his not being, or, for the matter 
of that, even if he was, at death’s door.’ 

‘at death’s door,’ murmur lawford under his breath; ‘who was it 
was saying that? have you ever, sheila, in a dream, or just as one’s 
thought go sometimes, seen that door?...its ruinous stone lintel carve 
into lichenous stone heads...stonily silent in the last thin sunlight, 
hanging in peace unlatched. heated, hunted, in agony--in that cold, 
green-clad shadow porch is haven and sanctuary....but beyond--o god, 
beyond!’ 

sheila stood listen with startle eyes. ‘and was all that in quain?’ 
she inquire rather flutteringly. 

lawford turn a sidelong head, and look steady at his wife. 

she shook herself, with a slight shiver. ‘very well, then,’ she said and 
pause in the silence. 

her husband yawned, and smiled, and almost as if lit with that thin last 
sunshine seem the smile that pass for an instant across the reverie 
of his shadowy face. he drew a hand weary over his eyes. ‘what has he 
been saying now?’ he inquire like a fretful child. 

sheila stood very quiet and still, as if in fear of scare some rare, 
wild, timid creature by the least stir. ‘who?’ she merely breathed. 

lawford pause on the hearth-rug with his comb in his hand. ‘it’s just 
the last rag of that beastly influenza,’ he said, and began vigorous 
comb his hair. and yet, simple and frank though the action was, it 
move sheila, perhaps, more than any other of the congest occurrence 
of the last few days. her forehead grew sudden cold, the palm of 
her hand began to ache, she had to hasten out of the room to avoid 
revealing the sheer physical repulsion she had experienced. 

but lawford, quite unmindful of the shock, continue in a kind of 
heedless reverie to watch, as he combed, the still visionary thought 
that pass in trance still before his eyes. he long beyond 
measure for freedom that until yesterday he had not even dream exist 
outside the cover of some old impossible romance--the magic of the 
darken sky, the invisible flock presence of the dead, the shock 
of imagination that had no words, of quixotic emotion which the 
stranger had stir in that low, mocking, furtive talk beside the 
broken stone of the huguenot. was the ‘change’ quite so monstrous, so 
meaningless? how often, indeed, he remember curious had he seem to 
be standing outside these fast-shut gate of thought, that now had been 
freely open to him. 

he drew ajar the door, and leant his ear to listen. from far away came 
a rich, long-continued chuckle of laughter, follow by the clatter of a 
fall plate, and then, still more uncontrollable laughter. there was a 
faint smell of toast on the air. lawford venture out on to the landing 
and into a little room that had once, in years gone by, been alice’s 
nursery. he stood far back from the strip of open window that show 
beneath the green blind, crane forward to see into the garden--the 
trees, their knot trunks, and then, as he stole nearer, a flower-bed, 
late roses, geraniums, calceolarias, the lawn and--yes, three wicker 
chairs, a footstool, a work-basket, a little table on the smooth grass 
in the honey-coloured sunshine; and sheila sitting there in the autumnal 
sunlight, her hand rest on the arms of her chair, her head bent, 
evidently deep engross in her thoughts. he crept an inch or two 
forward, and stooped. there was a hat on the grass--alice’s big garden 
hat--and beside it lay flitters, nose on paws, long ear sagging. he 
had forgotten flitters. had flit forgotten him? would he bark at the 
strange, distasteful scent of a--dr ferguson? the coast was clear, then. 
he turn even softlier yet, to confront, rapt, still, and hover 
betwixt astonishment and dread, the blue calm eyes of his daughter, 
look in at the door. it seem to lawford as if they had both been 
sudden swept by some unseen power into a still, unearthly silence. 

‘we thought,’ he began at last, ‘we thought just to beckon mrs lawford 
from the window. he--he is asleep.’ 

alice nodded. her whole face was in a moment flood with red. it ebb 
and left her pale. ‘i will go down and tell mother you want to see her. 
it was very silly of me. i did not quite recognise at first...i suppose, 
thinking of my father--’ the words faltered, and the eyes were lift to 
his face again with a desolate, incredulous appeal. lawford turn away 
heartsick and trembling. 

‘certainly, certainly, by no means,’ he began, listen vague to the 
glib patter that seem to come from another mouth. ‘your father, 
my dear young lady, i venture to think is now really on the road to 
recovery. dr simon make excellent progress. but, of course--two heads, 
we know, are so much better than one when there’s the least--the least 
difficulty. the great thing is quiet, rest, isolation, no possibility of 
a shock, else--’ his voice fell away, his eloquence failed. 

for alice stood gaze stirless on and on into this infinite 
strange, infinite familiar shadowy, phantasmal face. ‘oh yes,’ she 
replied, ‘i quite understand, of course; but if i might just peep even, 
it would--i should be so much, much happier. do let me just see him, 
dr ferguson, if only his head on the pillow! i wouldn’t even breathe. 
couldn’t it possibly help--even a faith-cure?’ she leant forward 
impulsively, her voice trembling, anal her eyes still shining beneath 
their faint, melancholy smile. 

‘i fear, my dear...it cannot be. he long to see you. but with his mind, 
you know, in this state, it might--?’ 

‘but mother never told me,’ broke in the girl desperately, ‘there was 
anything wrong with his mind. oh, but that was quite unfair. you don’t 
mean, you don’t mean--that--?’ 

lawford scan swift the little square beloved and memory room that 
fate had sudden convert for him into a cage of unspeakable pain 
and longing. ‘oh no; believe me, no! not his brain, not that, not even 
wandering; really: but always thinking, always longing on and on for 
you, dear, only. quite, quite master of himself, but--’ 

‘you talk,’ she broke in again angrily, ‘only in pretence! you are 
treat me like a child; and so do mother, and so it has been ever 
since i came home. why, if mother can, and you can, why may not i? why, 
if he can walk and talk in the night....’ 

‘but who--who “can walk and talk in the night?”’ inquire a low stealthy 
voice out of the quiet behind her. 

alice turn swiftly. her mother was standing at a little distance, with 
all the calm and moveless concentration of a waxwork figure, look up 
at her from the staircase. 

‘i was--i was talk to dr ferguson, mother.’ 

‘but as i came up the stairs i understood you to be inquiring something 
of dr ferguson, “if,” you were saying, “he can walk and talk in the 
night”: you surely were not refer to your father, child? that could 
not possibly be, in his state. dr ferguson, i know, will bear me out 
in that at least. and besides, i really must insist on following out 
medical directions to the letter. dr ferguson i know, will fully concur. 
do, pray, dr ferguson,’ continue sheila, raise her voice even now 
scarcely above a rapid murmur--‘do pray assure my daughter that she must 
have patience; that however much even he himself may desire it, it is 
impossible that she should see her father yet. and now, my dear child, 
come down, i want to have a moment’s talk with dr ferguson. i fear 
from his beckon at the window that something was amiss.’ 

alice turned, dismayed, and look steadily, almost with hostility, 
at the stranger, so curious transfix and isolated in her small old 
play-room. and in this scornful yet pleading confrontation her eye fell 
sudden on the pin in his scarf--the claw and the pearl she had known 
all her life. from that her gaze flitted, like some wild demented 
thing’s, over face, hair, hands, clothes, attitude, expression, and her 
heart stood still in an awful, inarticulate dread of the unknown. she 
turn slow towards her mother, grope forward a few steps, turn 
once more, stretch out her hand towards the vague still figure 
whose eyes had call so piteous to her out of their depths, and fell 
faint in the doorway. lawford stood motionless, vacant watch 
sheila, who knelt, chafe the cold hands. ‘she has fainted?’ he said; 
‘oh, sheila, tell me--only fainted?’ 

sheila made no answer; did not even raise her eyes. 

‘some day, sheila’ he began in a dull voice, and broke off, and without 
another word, without even another glance at the still face and blue, 
twitch lids, he pass her rapid by, and in another instant sheila 
heard the house-door shut. she got up quickly, and after a glance into 
the vacant bedroom turn the key; then she hasten upstairs for sum 
volatile and eau de cologne.... 

it was yet clear daylight when lawford appear beneath the portico of 
his house. with a glance of circumspect that almost seem to suggest 
a fear of pursuit, he descended the steps, only to be made aware in so 
do that ada was with a kind of furtive eager point out the 
mysterious dr ferguson to a steady gaze cook. one or two well-known 
and many a well-remembered face he encounter in the thin stream of 
city men tread blackly along the pavement. it was a still, high 
evening, and something very like a forlorn compassion rose in his mind 
at sight of their grave, rather pretentious, rather dull, respectable 
faces. 

he found himself walking with an affectation of effrontery, and smile 
with a faint contempt on all alike, as if to keep himself from slinking, 
and the wolf out of his eyes. he felt restless, and watchful, and 
suspicious, as if he had sudden come down in the world. his, then, was 
a disguise as effectual as a shabby coat and a glazing eye. his 
heart sickened. was it even worth while living on a crust of social 
respectability so thin and so exquisite treacherous? he challenge 
no one. one or two actual acquaintance raise and lower a faint 
inquiring eyebrow in his direction. one even recall in his confusion 
a smile of recognition just a moment too late. there was, it seemed, 
a peculiar aura in lawford’s presence, a shadow of a something in his 
demeanour that prove him alien. 

none the less green widderstone kept calling him, much as a bell in the 
imagination toll on and on, the echo of reality. if the worst should 
come to the worst, why--there is pasture in the solitary by-ways for 
the beast that strays. he quicken his pace along lonely streets, 
and soon strode freely through the little flag and cobble village of 
shops, past the same small jut window whose clock had told him the 
hour on that first dark hurried night. all was pale and faint with die 
colours now; and decay was in the leaf, and the last swallow fill 
the gold air with their clash stillness. no one heed him here. he 
look from side to side, exult in the strangeness. shop were 
left behind, the last milestone passed, and in a little while he was 
descend the hill beneath the elm boughs, which he remember had 
stood like a turret wall against the sunset when first he had wander 
down into the churchyard. 

at the foot of the hill he pass by the green and white rectory, and 
there was the parson, a short fat, pursy man with wrist protrude from 
his jacket sleeve as he stood on tip-toe tie up a rambling rose-shoot 
on his trim cedar lawn. the next house barely show its old red 
chimney-tops, above its bowers; the next was empty, with window 
vacant gazing, its path people with great bearded weeds that stood 
mute watch and guard the seldom-opened gate. then came more 
lofty grandmother elms, a dense hedge of every leaf that pricks, and 
then lawford found himself standing at the small canopy gate of 
the queer old wooden house that the stranger of his talk had in part 
described. 

it stood square and high and dark in a small amphitheatre of verdure. 
rose here and there sprang from the grass, and a narrow box-edged path 
led to a small door in a low green-mantled wing, with its one square 
window above the porch. and while, with vacant mind, lawford stood 
waiting, as one stand foreboding upon the eve of a new experience he 
heard as if at a distance the sound of fall water. he still pause on 
the country roadside, scrutinise this strange, still, wooden presence; 
but at last with an effort he pushed open the gate, follow the winding 
path, and pull the old iron hanging bell. there came presently a 
quiet tread, and herbert himself open the door which led into a 
little square wood-panelled hall, hung with queer old print and obscure 
portrait in dark frames. 

‘ah, yes, come in, mr lawford,’ he drawled; ‘i was beginning to be 
afraid you were not coming.’ 

lawford laid hat and walking-stick on an oak bench, and follow his 
churchyard companion up a slightly inclined corridor and a staircase 
into a high room, cover far up the yellowish wall with old books on 
shelves and in cases, between which hung in little black frames, mezzo 
tints, etchings, and antiquated maps. a large table stood a few pace 
from the deep alcove of the window, which was surround by a low, 
faded, green seat, and was screen from the sunshine by wooden 
shutters. and here the tranquil surge of fall water shook incessant 
on the air, for the three lower case stood open to the fade 
sunset. on a small table were spread cups, old earthenware dishes of 
fruit, and a big bowl of damask roses. 

‘please sit down; i shan’t be a moment; i am not sure that my sister is 
in; but if so, i will tell her we are ready for tea.’ left to himself 
in this quiet, strange old room, lawford forgot for a while everything 
else, he was for the moment so taken up with his surroundings. 

what seize on his fancy and strange affected his mind was this 
incessant change roar of fall water. it must be the widder, he said 
to himself, flowing close to the walls. but not until he had had the 
bold to lean head and shoulder out of the nearest window did he 
fully realize how close indeed the widder was. it came sweeping dark 
and deep and begreene and full with the early autumnal rains, actually 
against the lower wall of the house itself, and in the middle sudden 
swerve in a black, smooth arch, and tumble headlong into a great 
pool, nod with tall slender water-weeds, and charged in its bubble 
black here and there with the last crimson of the setting sun. to 
the left of the house, where the waters float free again, stood vast, 
still tree above the cluster rushes; and in glimpse between their 
spread bough lay the far-stretching countryside, now dim with the 
first mists of approach evening. so absorb he became as he stood 
leaning over the wooden sill above the fall water, that eye and ear 
became enslave by the roar and stillness. and in the faint atmosphere 
of age that seem like a veil to hang about the odd old house and these 
prodigious branches, he fell into a kind of waking dream. 

when at last he did draw back into the room it was perceptible darker, 
and a thin keen shaft of recollection struck across his mind--the 
recollection of what he was, and of how he came to be there, his reason 
for coming and of that dark indefinable presence which like a raven had 
begun to build its dwelling in his mind. he sat on, his eyes restless 
wandering, his face leaning on his hands; and in a while the door open 
and herbert returned, carry an old crimson and green teapot and a 
dish of hot cakes. 

‘they’re all out,’ he said; ‘sister, sallie, and boy; but these were in 
the oven, so we won’t wait. i hope you haven’t been very much bored.’ 

lawford drop his hand from his face and smiled. ‘i have been look 
at the water,’ he said. 

‘my sister’s favorite occupation; she sit for hour and hours, with not 
even a book for an apology, staring down into the black old roaring pot. 
it has a sort of hypnotic effect after a time. and you’d be surprise 
how quick one get use to the noise. to me it’s even less distract 
than sheer silence. you don’t know, after all, what on earth sheer 
silence means--even at widderstone. but one can just realize a 
water-nymph. they chatter; but, thank heaven, it’s not articulate.’ he 
hand lawford a cup with a certain nice and self-consciousness, 
lift his eyebrow slightly as he turned. 

lawford found himself listen out of a peculiar still of mind 
to the voice of this suave and rather inscrutable acquaintance. ‘the 
curious thing is, do you know,’ he began rather nervously, ‘that though 
i must have pass your gate at least twice in the last few months, i 
have never notice it before, never even caught the sound of the water.’ 

‘no, that’s the best of it; nobody ever does. we are just bury alive. 
we have live here for years, and scarcely know a soul--not even our 
own, perhaps. why on earth should one? acquaintances, after all, are 
little else than a bad habit.’ 

‘but then, what about me?’ said lawford. 

‘but that’s just it,’ said herbert. ‘i said acquaintances; that’s just 
exactly what i’m go to prove--what very old friends we are. you’ve no 
idea! it really is rather queer.’ he took up his cup and saunter over 
to the window. 

lawford eye him vacant for a moment, and, following rather his 
own curious thought than seek any light on this somewhat vague 
explanation, again broke the silence. ‘it’s odd, i suppose, but this 
house affect me much in the same way as widderstone does. i’m not 
particularly fanciful--at least, i use not to be. but sitting here i 
seem, i hope it isn’t a very frantic remark, it seem as though, if only 
my ear would let me, i should hear--well, voices. it’s just what you 
said about the silence. i suppose it’s the age of the place; it is very 
old?’ 

‘pretty old, i suppose; it’s worm-eaten and rat-eaten and tindery enough 
in all conscience; and the damp doesn’t exactly foster it. it’s a queer 
old shanty. there are two or three account of it in some old local 
stuff i have. and of course there’s a ghost.’ 

‘a ghost?’ echo lawford, look up. 



chapter twelve 

what’s in a name?’ laugh herbert. ‘but it really is a queer show-up of 
human oddity. a fellow come in here, searching; that’s all.’ his back 
was turned, as he stood staring absently out, sip his tea between 
his sentences. ‘he come in--oh, it’s a positive fact, for i’ve seen him 
myself, just sitting back in my chair here, you know, watch him as 
one would a tramp in one’s orchard.’ he cast a candid glance over his 
shoulder. ‘first he looks round, like a pry servant. then he come 
cautious on--a kind of grizzled, fawn-coloured face, middle-size, with 
big hands; and then just like some quiet, groping, nocturnal creature, 
he begin his precious search--shelves, drawers that are not here, 
cupboard gone years ago, quest and nose no end, and quite 
methodical too, until he reach the window. then he stops, looks 
back, narrows his foxy lids, listens--quite perceptibly, you know, a 
kind of gingerish blur; then he seem to open this corner bookcase here, 
as if it were a door and go out along what i suppose might at some 
time have been an outside gallery or balcony, unless, as i rather fancy, 
the house extend once beyond these windows. anyhow, out he go quite 
deliberately, tread the air as lightly as botticelli’s angels, 
until, however far you lean out of the window, you can’t follow him any 
further. and then--and this is the bit that take one’s fancy--when you 
have contented noddle down again to whatever you may have been do 
when the wretch appeared, or are sitting in a cold sweat, with bolt 
eyes await developments, just according to your school of thought, 
or of nerves, the creature come back--comes back; and with what looks 
uncommonly like a light candle in his hand. that really is a thrill, i 
assure you.’ 

‘but you’ve seen this--you’ve really seen this yourself?’ 

‘oh yes, twice,’ reply herbert cheerfully. ‘and my sister, quite 
by haphazard, once saw him from the garden. she was shell pea one 
evening for sallie, and she distinct saw him shamble out of the window 
here, and go shuffle along, mid-air, across the roaring washpot down 
below, turn sharp round the high corner of the house, sheer against 
the stars, in a kind of frightened hurry. and then, after five minutes’ 
concentrated watch over the shucks, she saw him come shuffle back 
again--the same distraction, the same nebulous snuff colour, and a 
candle trail its smoke behind him as he whisk in home.’ 

‘and then?’ 

‘ah, then,’ said herbert, lagging along the bookshelves, and scan 
the book-backs with eyes partially closed: he turn with lift teapot, 
and refill his visitor’s cup; ‘then, wherever you are--i mean,’ he 
added, cutting up a little cake into six neat slices, ‘wherever the 
chance inmate of the room happen to be, he come straight for you, at 
a quite alarm velocity, and fades, vanishes, melts, or, as it were, 
silt inside.’ 

lawford listen in a curious hush that had sudden fallen over his 
mind. ‘“fades inside? silts?”--i’m awfully stupid, but what on earth 
do you mean?’ the room had slow empty itself of daylight; its own 
darkness, it seemed, had met that of the narrow night, and herbert 
deliberate lit a cigarette before replying. his clear pale face, with 
its smooth outline and thin mouth and rather long dark eyes, turn with 
a kind of serene good-humour towards his questioner. 

‘why,’ he said, ‘i mean frankly just that. besides, it’s grisel’s own 
phrase; and an old nurse we use to have said much the same. he comes, 
or it come towards you, first just walking, then with a kind of 
gradual accelerate slide or glide, and sweep straight into you,’ he 
tap his chest, ‘me, whoever it may be is here. in a kind of panic, i 
suppose, to hide, or perhaps simply to get back again.’ 

‘get back where?’ 

‘be resumed, as it were, via you. you see, i suppose he is compel to 
regain his circle, or purgatory, or styx, whatever you like to call it, 
via consciousness. no one present, then no revenant or spook, or 
astral body, or hallucination: what’s in a name? and of course even an 
hallucination is mind-stuff, and on its own, as it were. what i mean is 
that the poor devil must have some kind of human personality to get back 
through in order to make his exit from our sphere of consciousness 
into his. and naturally, of course to make his entrance too. if like 
a tenuous smoke he can get in, the probability is that he get out 
in precisely the same fashion. for really, if you weren’t conscious 
expect the customary impact (you actually jerk forward in the act of 
resistance unresisted), you would not notice his going. i am afraid i 
must be horrible bore you with all these tangle theories. all i mean 
is, that if you were really absorb in what you happen to be do at 
the time, the thing might come and go, with your mind for entrance and 
exit, as it were, without your being conscious of it at all.’ there was 
a longish pause, in which herbert slow inhale and soft breathe out 
his smoke. 

‘and what--what is the poor wretch searching for? and what--why, what 
become of him when he do go?’ 

‘ah, there you have me! one merely surmise just as one’s temperament or 
conviction lean. grisel say it’s some poor derelict soul in search of 
peace--that the poor beggar wants finally to die, in fact, and can’t. 
sallie smell crime. after all, what is every man?’ he talk on; ‘a 
horde of ghosts--like a china nest of boxes--oaks that were acorn 
that were oaks. death lie behind us, not in front--in our ancestors, 
back and back, until--’ 

‘“until?”’ lawford manage to remark. 

‘ah, that settle me again. don’t they call it an amoeba? but really i 
am abject ignorant of all that kind of stuff. we are all we are, and 
all in a sense we care to dream we are. and for that matter, anything 
outlandish, bizarre, is a godsend in this rather stodgy life. it is 
after all just what the old boy said--it’s only the impossible that’s 
credible; whatever credible may mean....’ 

it seem to lawford as if the last remark had waft him bodily into 
the presence of his kind, blinking, intense anxious old friend, mr 
bethany. and what league asunder the two men were who had happen on 
much the same words to express their convictions. 

he drew his hand gropingly over his face, half rose, and again seat 
himself. ‘whatever it may be,’ he said, ‘the whole thing remind me, you 
know--it is in a way so curious like my own--my own case.’ 

herbert sat on, a little drawn up in his chair, quiet smoking. the 
crash of the fall water, after seeming to increase in volume with 
the fade of evening, had again die down in the dark to a low 
multitudinous tumult as of countless inarticulate, echo voices. 

‘“bizarre,” you said; god know i am.’ but herbert still remain 
obdurate silent. ‘you remember, perhaps,’ lawford faint began again, 
‘our talk the other night?’ 

‘oh, rather,’ reply the cordial voice out of the dusk. 

‘i suppose you thought i was insane?’ 

‘insane!’ there was a genuine amuse astonishment in the echo. ‘you 
were lucid itself. besides--well, honestly, if i may venture, i don’t 
put very much truck in what one call one’s sanity: except, of course, 
as a bond of respectability and a means of livelihood.’ 

‘but did you realise in the least from what i said how i really 
stand? that i went down into that old shadowy hollow one man, and came 
back--well--this?’ 

‘i gather vague something like that. i thought at first it was 
merely an affectation--that what you said was an affectation, i 
mean--until--well, to be frank, it was the “this” that so immensely 
interested me. especially,’ he add almost with a touch of gaiety, 
‘especially the last glimpse. but if it’s really not a forbidden 
question, what precisely was the other? what precise manner of man, i 
mean, came down into widderstone?’ 

‘it is my face that is changed, mr herbert. if you’ll try to understand 
me--my face. what you see now is not what i really am, not what i was. 
oh, it is all quite different. i know perfectly well how absurd it must 
sound. and you won’t press me further. but that’s the truth: that’s what 
they have done for me.’ 

it seem to lawford as if a remote tiny shout of laughter had been 
sudden caught back in the silence that had follow this confession. 
he peer in vain in the direction of his companion. even his cigarette 
reveal no sign of him. ‘i know, i know,’ he went gropingly on; ‘i felt 
it would sound to you like nothing but frantic incredible nonsense. you 
can’t see it. you can’t feel it. you can’t hear these hoot voices. 
it’s no use at all blinking the fact; i am simply on the verge, if not 
over it, of insanity.’ 

‘as to that, mr lawford,’ came the still voice out of the darkness; 
‘the very fact of your being able to say so seem to me all but proof 
positive that you’re not. insanity is on another plane, isn’t it? 
in which one can’t compare one’s states. as for what you say being 
credible, take our precious noodle of a spook here! ninety-nine 
hundredth of this amiable world of ours would have guffaw the 
poor creature into imperceptible age ago. to such poor credulous 
creature as my sister and i he is no more and no less a fact, a 
personality, an amuse reality than--well, this teacup. here we are, 
amazing mystery both of us in any case; and all round us are score 
of books, dealing just with life, pure, candid, and unexpurgated; and 
there’s not a single one among them but read like a taradiddle. yet 
grope between the lines of any autobiography, it’s pretty clear what 
one has got--a feeble, timid, creep attempt to describe the 
indescribable. as for what you say your case is, the bizarre--that kind 
very seldom get into print at all. in all our make-believe, all our 
pretence, how, honestly, could it? but there, this is immaterial. the 
real question is, may i, can i help? what i gather is this: you just 
trundle down into widderstone all among the dead men, and--but one 
moment, i’ll light up.’ 

a light flicker up in the dark. shading it in his hand from the night 
air stray through the open window, herbert lit the two candle 
that stood upon the little chimneypiece behind lawford’s head. then 
saunter over to the window again, almost as if with an affectation 
of nonchalance, he drew one of the shutters, and sat down. ‘nothing much 
struck me,’ he went on, leaning back on his hands, ‘i mean on sunday 
evening, until you said good-bye. it was then that i caught in the moon 
a distinct glimpse of your face.’ 

‘this,’ said lawford, with a sudden horrible sink of the heart. 

herbert nodded. ‘the fact is, i have a print of it,’ he said. 

‘a print of it?’ 

‘a miserable little dingy engraving.’ 

‘of this?’ herbert nodded, with eyes fixed. ‘where?’ 

‘that’s the nuisance. i search high and low for it the instant i got 
home. for the moment it has been mislaid; but it must be somewhere in 
the house and it will turn up all in good time. it’s the frontispiece 
of one of a queer old hotchpotch of pamphlets, sewn up together by 
some amateur enthusiast in a marbled paper cover--confessions, travels, 
trial and so on. all eighteenth century, and all in french.’ 

‘and mine?’ said lawford, gaze stony across the candlelight. 

herbert, from a head slightly stooping, gaze back in an almost birdlike 
fashion across the room at his visitor. 

‘sabathier’s,’ he said. 

‘sabathier’s!’ 

‘a really curious resemblance. of course, i am speak only from 
memory; and perhaps it’s not quite so vivid in this light; but still 
astonishing clear.’ 

lawford sat drawn up, staring at his companion’s face in an intense and 
helpless silence. his mouth open but no words came. 

‘of course,’ began herbert again, ‘i don’t say there’s anything in 
it--except the--the mere coincidence,’ he pause and glance out of the 
open case beside him. ‘but there’s just one obvious question. do you 
happen to know of any strain of france blood in your family?’ 

lawford shut his eyes, even memory seem to be forsake him at last. 
‘no,’ he said, after a long pause, ‘there’s a little dutch, i think, on 
my mother’s side, but no french.’ 

‘no sabathier, then?’ said herbert, smiling. ‘and then there’s another 
question--this change; is it really as complete as you suppose? has 
it--please just warn me off if i am in the least intruding--has it been 
noticed?’ 

lawford hesitated. ‘oh, yes,’ he said slowly, ‘it has been noticed--my 
wife, a few friends.’ 

‘do you mind this infernal clatter?’ said herbert, lay his finger on 
the open casement. 

‘no, no. and you think?’ 

‘my dear fellow, i don’t think anything. it’s all the craziest 
conjecture. stranger things even than this have happened. there are 
dozen here--in print. what are we human being after all? clay in the 
hand of the potter. our body are merely an inheritance, packed tight 
and cord up. we have practically no control over their main functions. 
we can’t even replace a little finger-nail. and look at the face of 
us--what atrocious mockery most of them are of any kind of image! but 
we know our body change--age, sickness, thought, passion, fatality. it 
prove they are amazing plastic. and merely even as a theory it is not 
in the least untenable that by force of some violent convulsive effort 
from outside one’s body might change. it answer with odd voluntary 
to friend or foe, smile or snarl. as for what we call the law of 
nature, they are pure assumption to-day, and may be nothing better 
than scrap-iron tomorrow. good heavens, lawford, consider man’s abysmal 
impudence.’ he smoke on in silence for a moment. ‘you say you fell 
asleep down there?’ 

lawford nodded. herbert tap his cigarette on the sill. ‘just 
following up our ludicrous conjecture, you know,’ he remark musingly, 
‘it wasn’t such a bad opportunity for the poor chap.’ 

‘but surely,’ said lawford, speak as it were out of a dream of 
candle-light and reverberate sound and clearest darkness, towards 
this strange deliberate phantom with the unruffled clear-cut 
features--‘surely then, in that case, he is here now? and yet, on my 
word of honour, though every friend i ever had in the world should 
deny it, i am the same. memory stretch back clear and sound to my 
childhood. i can see myself with extraordinary lucidity, how i think, my 
motive and all that; and in spite of these voice that i seem to hear, 
and this peculiar kind of longing to break away, as it were, just 
to press on--it is i,--i myself, that am speak to you now out of 
this--this mask.’ 

herbert glance reflective at his companion. ‘you mustn’t let me tire 
you,’ he said; ‘but even on our theory it would not necessarily 
follow that you yourself would be much affected. it’s true this fellow 
sabathier really was something of a personality. he had a rather 
unusual itch for life, for try on and on to squeeze something out 
of experience that isn’t there; and he seem never to weary of a 
magnificent attempt to find in his fellow-creatures, especially in the 
women he met, what even--if they have it--they cannot give. the little 
book i want to show you is partly autobiographical and really do 
manage to set the fellow on his feet. even there he do absolutely take 
one’s imagination. i shall never forget the thrill of pick him up in 
the char cross road. you see, i had known the queer old tombstone for 
years. he’s enormously vivid--quite beyond my feeble to describe, 
with a kind of france verve and rapture. unlucki we can’t get near 
than two years to his death. i shouldn’t mind guess some last 
devastating dream swept over him, held him the breath of an instant too 
long beneath the wave, and he cave in. we know he kill himself; and 
perhaps live to regret it ever after. 

‘after all, what is this precious die we talk so much about?’ herbert 
continue after a while, his eyes restless wandering from shelf to 
shelf. ‘you remember our talk in the churchyard? we all know that the 
body fade quick enough when its occupant is gone. supposing even in the 
sleep of the living it lie very feeble guarded. and supposing in that 
state some infernal potent thing outside it, wandering disembodied, 
just happen on it--like some hungry sexton beetle on the carcase of 
a mouse. supposing--i know it’s the most outrageous theorising--but 
supposing all these years of sun and dark, sabathier’s emanation, 
or whatever you like to call it, horrible restless, by some fatality 
longing on and on just for life, or even for the face, the voice, of 
some “impossible she” whom he couldn’t get in this muddle world, simply 
loathing all else; supposing he has been lingering in ambush down beside 
those poor old dusty bone that had pour out for him such marrowy 
hospitality--oh, i know it; the dead do. and then, by a chance, one 
quiet autumn evening, a veritable godsend of a little miss muffet come 
wandering down under the shade of his immortal cypresses, half asleep, 
fagged out, depressed in mind and body, perhaps: imagine yourself in his 
place, and he in yours!’ herbert stood up in his eagerness, his sleek 
hair shining. ‘the one clinch chance of a century! wouldn’t you 
have made a fight for it? wouldn’t you have risk the raid? i can just 
conceive it--the amazing struggle in that dark within a darkness; 
like some daze alien bee burst through the sentinel of a hive; 
one mad impetuous clutch at victory; then the appalling stirring on the 
other side; the grope back to a house dismantled, rearranged, not, 
mind you, disorganise or disintegrated....’ he broke off with a smile, 
as if of apology for his long, fantastic harangue. 

lawford sat listening, his eyes fixed on herbert’s colourless face. 
there was not a sound else, it seemed, than that slightly drawl 
scrupulous voice poke its way amid a maze of enticing, baffling 
thoughts. herbert turn away with a shrug. ‘it’s tempt stuff,’ he 
said, choose another cigarette. ‘but anyhow, the poor beggar failed.’ 

‘failed?’ 

‘why, surely; if he had succeed i should not now be talk to a mere 
imperfect simulacrum, to the outward illusion of a passing likeness 
to the man, but to sabathier himself!’ his eyes move slow round and 
dwelt for a moment with a dark, quiet scrutiny on his visitor. 

‘you say a passing likeness; do you mean that?’ 

herbert smile indulgently. ‘if one can mean what is purely a 
speculation. i am only try to look at the thing dispassionately, you 
see. we are so much the slave of mere repetition. here is life--yours 
and mine--a kind of plenum in vacuo. it is only when we begin to play 
the eavesdropper; when something go askew; when one of the sentry on 
the frontier of the unexpected shout a hoarse “qui vive?”--it is only 
then we begin to question; to prick our aldermen and pinch the calves 
of our kings. why, who is there can answer to anybody’s but his own 
satisfaction just that one fundamental question--are we the prisoners, 
the slaves, the inheritors, the creatures, or the creator of our 
bodies? fallen angel or horrific dust? as for identity or likeness 
or personality, we have only our neighbours’ nod for them, and just a 
fade memory. no, the old fairy tale knew better; and witchcraft’s 
witchcraft to the end of the chapter. honestly, and just of course on 
that one theory, lawford, i can’t help thinking that sabathier’s raid 
only just so far succeed as to leave his impression in the wax. 
it doesn’t, of course, follow that it will necessarily end there. it 
might--it may be even now just gradual fade away. it may, you know, 
need driving out--with whip and scorpions. it might, perhaps, work in.’ 

lawford sat cold and still. ‘it’s no good, no good,’ he said, ‘i don’t 
understand; i can’t follow you. i was always stupid, always bigoted and 
cocksure. these things have never seem anything but old women’s tale 
to me. and now i must pay for it. and this nichola sabathier; you say 
he was a blackguard?’ 

‘well,’ said herbert with a faint smile, ‘that depend on your 
definition of the word. he wasn’t a flunkey, a fool, or a prig, if 
that’s what you mean. he wasn’t perhaps on mrs grundy’s visiting 
list. he wasn’t exactly gregarious. and yet in a sense that kind of 
temperament is so rare that sappho, nelson, and shelley share it. to 
the stodgy, suety world of course it’s little else than sheer moonshine, 
midsummer madness. naturally, in its own charming and stodgy way 
the world kept flicker cold water in his direction. naturally it 
hissed.... i shall find the book. you shall have the book; oh yes.’ 

‘there’s only one more question,’ said lawford in a dull, slow voice, 
stoop and covering his face with his hands. ‘i know it’s impossible 
for you to realise--but to me time seem like that water there, to be 
heap up about me. i wait, just as one waits when the conductor of an 
orchestra lift his hand and in a moment the whole surge of brass and 
wood, cymbal and drum will crash out--and sweep me under. i can’t tell 
you herbert, how it all is, with just these grope stirring of that 
mole in my mind’s dark. you say it may be this face, working in! god 
knows. i find it easy to speak to you--this cold, clear sense, you know. 
the other feel too much, or are afraid, or--let me think--yes, i 
was go to ask you a question. but no one can answer it.’ he peer 
darkly, with white face sudden reveal between his hands. ‘what 
remains now? where do i come in? what is there left for me to do?’ 

and at that moment there sounded, even above the monotonous roar of 
the water beyond the window--there fell the sound of a light footfall 
approach along the corridor. 

‘listen,’ said herbert; ‘here’s my sister coming; we’ll ask her.’ 




chapter thirteen 

the door opened. lawford rose, and into the further ray of the 
candlelight enter a rather slim figure in a light summer gown. 

‘just home?’ said herbert. 

‘we’ve been for a walk--’ 

‘my sister always forget everything,’ said herbert, turning to lawford; 
‘even tea-time. this is mr lawford, grisel. we’ve been argue no end. 
and we want you to give a decision. it’s just this: supposing if by some 
impossible trick you had come in now, not the charming familiar sister 
you are, but shorter, fatter, fair and round-faced, quite different, 
physically, you know--what would you do?’ 

‘what nonsense you talk, herbert!’ 

‘yes, but supposing: a complete transmogrification--by some unimaginable 
ingress or enchantment, by nibble a bunch of roses, or whatever you 
like to call it?’ 

‘only physically?’ 

‘well, yes, actually; but potentially, why--that’s another matter.’ 

the dark eyes pass slow from her brother’s face and rest grave 
on their visitor’s. 

‘is he making fun of me?’ 

lawford almost imperceptible shook his head. 

‘but what a question! and i’ve had no tea.’ she drew her glove slow 
through her hand. ‘the thing, of course, isn’t possible, i know. but 
shouldn’t i go mad, don’t you think?’ 

lawford gaze quiet back into the clear, grave, deliberate eyes. 
‘suppose, suppose, just for the sake of argument--not,’ he suggested. 

she turn her head and reflected, glancing from one to the other of the 
pure, steady candle-flames. 

‘and what was your answer?’ she said, look over her shoulder at her 
brother. 

‘my dear child, you know what my answer are like!’ 

‘and yours?’ 

lawford took a deep breath, gaze mutely, forlornly, into the lovely 
untroubled peace of her eyes, and without the least warning tear swept 
up into his own. with an immense effort he turned, and choke back 
every sound, beating hack every thought, grope his way towards the 
square black dark of the open door. 

‘i must think, i must think,’ he manage to whisper, lift his hand 
and steady himself. he caught over his shoulder the glimpse of a 
curious distort vision, a lift candle, and a still face gaze 
after him with infinite grieve eyes, then found himself grope and 
stumble down the steep, uneven staircase into the dark of the 
queer old wooden and hush and lonely house. the night air cold on his 
face calm his mind. he turn and held out his hand. 

‘you’ll come again?’ herbert was saying, with a hint of anxiety, even of 
apology in his voice. 

lawford nodded, with eyes fixed blank on the candle, and turning once 
more, made his way slow down the narrow green-bordered path upon which 
the stars rain a scattered light so feeble it seem but as a haze 
that blur the darkness. he pushed open the little white wicket 
and turn his face towards the soundless, leaf-crowned hill. he had 
advanced hardly a score of steps in the thick dust when almost as if 
its very silence had struck upon his ear he remember the black broken 
grave with its sightless head that lay beyond the leaves. and fear, 
vast and menacing, fear such as only children know, broke like a sea of 
dark on his heart. he stop dead--cold, helpless, trembling. 
and, in the silence he heard a faint cry behind him and light footstep 
pursue him. he turn again. in the thick close gloom beneath the 
enormous elm-boughs the grey eyes shone clearly visible in the face 
upturned to him. ‘my brother,’ she began breathlessly--‘the little 
france book. it was i who--who mislaid it.’ 

the set, stricken face listen unmoved. 

‘you are ill. come back! i am afraid you are very ill.’ 

‘it’s not that, not that,’ lawford muttered; ‘don’t leave me; i am 
alone. don’t question me,’ he said strangely, look down into her 
face, clutch her hand; ‘only understand that i can’t, i can’t go on.’ 
he swept a lean arm towards the unseen churchyard. ‘i am afraid.’ 

the cold hand clasp his closer. ‘hush, don’t speak! come back; come 
back. i am with you, a friend, you see; come back.’ 

lawford clutch her hand as a blind man in sudden peril might clutch 
the hand of a child. he saw nothing clearly; spoke almost without 
understanding his words. 

‘oh, but it’s must,’ he said; ‘i must go on. you see--why, everything 
depend on struggle through: the future! but if you only knew--there!’ 
again his arm swept out, and the lean terrify face turn shudder 
from the dark. 

‘i do know; believe me, believe me! i can guess. see, i am coming with 
you; we will go together. as if, as if i did not know what it is to be 
afraid. oh, believe me; no one is near; we go on; and see! it gradually, 
gradual lightens. how thankful i am i came.’ 

she had turn and they were steady ascend as if push their way, 
battle on through some obstacle of the mind rather than of the senses 
beneath the star-powdered callous vault of night. and it seem to 
lawford as if, as they pressed on together, some obscure detest 
presence as slowly, as dogged had drawn worsted aside. he could 
see again the peaceful outspread branch of the trees, the lych-gate 
standing in clear-cut silhouette against the liquid dusk of the sky. 
a strange calm stole over his mind. the very meaning and memory of his 
fear fade out and vanished, as the passed-away cloud of a storm that 
leave a purer, serene sky. 

they stop and stood together on the brow of the little hill, and 
lawford, still tremble from head to foot, look back across the 
hush and lightless countryside. ‘it’s all gone now,’ he said 
wearily, ‘and now there’s nothing left. you see, i cannot even ask your 
forgiveness--and a stranger!’ 

‘please don’t say that--unless--unless--a “pilgrim” too. i think, 
surely, you must own we did have the best of it that time. yes--and i 
don’t care who may be listening--but we did win through.’ 

‘what can i say? how shall i explain? how shall i make you understand?’ 

the clear grey eyes show not the faintest perturbation. ‘but i do; i 
do indeed, in part; i do understand, ever so faintly.’ 

‘and now i will come back with you.’ 

they pause in the dark face to face, the silence of the sky, 
arch in its vastness above the little hill, the only witness of their 
triumph. 

she turn unquestioningly. and laugh soft almost as children 
do, the stalk shadow of a twilight wood behind them--they trod in 
silence back to the house. they said good-bye at the gate, and lawford 
start once more for home. he walk slowly, conscious of an almost 
intolerable weariness, as if his strength had sudden been wrest away 
from him. and at some distance beyond the top of the hill he sat down on 
the bank beside a nettle ditch, and with his book pressed down upon 
the wayside grass struck a match, and holding it low in the scented, 
windless air turn slow the cockle leaf. 

few of them were alike except for the dingy of the print and the 
sinister smudge of the portraits. all were sewn roughly together into 
a mould-stained, marbled cover. he lit a second match, and as he did so 
glance as if inquiring over his shoulder. and a score or so of page 
before the end he came at last upon the name he was seeking, and turn 
the page. 

it was a likeness even more striking in its crude of ink and line 
and paper than the most finished of portrait could have been. it 
repelled, and yet it fascinate him. he had not for a moment doubt 
herbert’s calm conviction. and yet as he stoop in the grass, close 
scrutinise the blur obscure features, he felt the faintest surprise 
not so much at the significant resemblance but at his own composure, his 
own steady, unflinching confrontation with this sinister and intangible 
adversary. the match burn down to his fingers. it hiss faint in 
the grass. 

he stuff the book into his pocket, and stare into the pale dial of 
his watch. it was a few minutes after eleven. midnight, then, would 
just see him in. he rose stiff and yawn in sheer exhaustion. then, 
hesitating, he turn his head and look back towards the hollow. but 
a vague foreboding held him back. a sour and vacuous incredulity swept 
over him. what was the use of all this struggle and vexation. what 
gain in living on? once dead his sluggish spirit at least would find 
its rest. dust to dust it would indeed be for him. what else, in sober 
earnest, had he been all his daily stolid life but half dead, scarce 
conscious, without a living thought, or desire, in head or heart? 

and while he was still gloomy debate within himself he had turn 
towards home, and soon was walking in a kind of reverie, even his 
extreme tired in part forgotten, and only a far-away dogged 
recollection in his mind that in spite of shame, in spite of all his 
miserable weakness, the words had been utter once for all, and in all 
sincerity, ‘we did win through.’ 

yet a desolate and odd air of strange seem to drape his unlighted 
house as he stood look up in a kind of furtive communion with its 
windows. it affected him with that discomfort air of extreme and 
meaningless novelty that things very familiar sometimes take upon 
themselves. in this leaden tired no impression could be trustworthy. 
his lid shut of themselves as he soft mount the steps. it seem a 
needlessly wide door that soundless admitted him. but however hard he 
pressed the key his bedroom door remain stubborn shut until he 
found that it was already unlock and he had only to turn the handle. 
a night-light burn in a little basin on the washstand. the room was 
hung, as it were, with the still of night. and half lie on the 
bed in her dressing-gown, her head leaning on the rail at the foot, was 
alice, just as sleep had overtaken her. 

lawford return to the door and listened. it seem he heard a voice 
talk downstairs, and yet not talking, for it ran on and on in an 
incessant slightly argumentative monotony that had neither break nor 
interruption. he closed the door, and stoop laid his hand soft on 
alice’s narrow, still childish hand that lay half-folded on her knee. 
her eyes open instantly and gaze widely into his face. a slow vacant 
smile of sleep came and went and her finger tighten gently over his 
as again her lid droop down over the drowsy blue eyes. 

‘at last, at last, dear,’ she said; ‘i have been wait such a time. 
but we mustn’t talk much. mother is wait up, reading.’ 

faint through the close-shut door came the sound of that distant 
expressionless voice monotonous rising and falling. 

‘why didn’t you tell me, dear?’ alice still sleepy whispered. ‘would 
i have ask a single question? how could i? oh, if you had only trust 
me!’ 

‘but the change--the change, alice! you must have seen that. you spoke 
to me, you did think i was only a stranger; and even when you knew, it 
was only fear on your face, dearest, and aversion; and you turn to 
your mother first. don’t think, alice, that i am...god only knows--i’m 
not complaining. but truth is best whatever it is. i do feel that. you 
mustn’t be afraid of hurt me, my dear.’ 

her very hand seem to quicken in his as now, with sleep quite gone, 
the fret of memory returned, and she must reassure both herself and him. 
‘but you see, dear, mother had told me that you--besides, i did know 
you at once, really; quite inside, you know, deep down. i know i was 
perplexed; i didn’t understand; but that was all. why, even when you 
came up in the dark, and we talked--if you only knew how miserable i had 
been--though i knew even then there was something different, still i 
was not a bit afraid. was i? and shouldn’t i have been afraid, horrible 
afraid, if you had not been you?’ she repressed a little shudder, and 
clasp his hand more closely. ‘don’t let us say anything more about it, 
she implore him; ‘we are just together again, you and i; that is all 
that matters.’ but her words were like brave soldier who have fought 
their way through an ambuscade but have left all confidence behind them. 

lawford listened; and that was enough just now--that she still, in spite 
of doubt, believe in him, and thought and care for him. he was too 
tired to have refuse the least kindness. he made no answer, but leant 
his head on the cool, slender finger in gratitude and peace. and, just 
as he was, he almost instantly fell asleep. he woke in the dark to 
find himself alone. he grope his way heavy to the door and turn 
the handle. but now it was really locked. energy fail him. ‘i 
suppose--sheila...’ he muttered. 



chapter fourteen 

sheila, calm, alert, reserved, was sitting at the open window when he 
awoke again. his breakfast tray stood on a little table beside the bed. 
he raise himself on his elbow and look at his wife. the morning 
light shone full on her features as she turn quick at sound of his 
stirring. 

‘you have slept late,’ she said, in a low, mellow voice. 

‘have i, sheila? i suppose i was tired out. it is very kind of you to 
have got everything ready like this.’ 

‘i am afraid, arthur, i was thinking rather of the maids. i like to 
inconvenience them as little as possible; in their usual routine, i 
mean. how are you feeling, do you think, this morning?’ 

‘i--i haven’t seen the glass, sheila.’ 

she pause to place a little pencil tick at the foot of the page of her 
butcher’s book. ‘and did you--did you try?’ 

‘did i try? try what?’ 

‘i understood,’ she said, turning slow in her chair, ‘you gave me to 
understand that you went out with the specific intention of try to 
regain.... but there, forgive me, arthur; i think i must be get a 
little bit harden to the position, so far at least as any hope is in 
my mind of rather amateurish experiment being of much help. i may seem 
unsympathetic in saying frankly what i feel. but amateurish or no, you 
are curious erratic. why, if you really were the dr ferguson whose 
part you play so admirable you could scarcely spend a more active life.’ 

‘all you mean, sheila, i suppose, is that i have failed.’ 

‘“failed” did not enter my mind. i thought, look at you just now 
in your clothes on the bed, one might for the moment be deceive into 
thinking there was a slight--quite the slightest improvement. there 
was not quite that’--she hover for the right word--‘that tenseness. 
whether or not, whether you desire any such change or didn’t, i should 
have supposed in any case it would have been better to act as far 
as possible like any ordinary person. you were certainly in an 
extraordinarily sound sleep. i was almost alarmed; until i remember 
that it was a little after two when i look up from reading aloud to 
keep myself awake and discover that you had only just come home. i had 
no fire. you know how easily late hour bring on my headaches; a little 
thought might possibly have suggest that i should be anxious to hear. 
but no; it seem i cannot profit by experience, arthur. and even now you 
have not answer surely a very natural question. you do not recollect, 
perhaps, exactly what did happen last night? did you go in the direction 
even of widderstone?’ 

‘yes, sheila, i went to widderstone.’ 

‘it was of course absurd to suppose that sitting on a seat beside 
the broken-down grave of a suicide would have the slightest effect on 
one’s--one’s physical condition; though possibly it might affect one’s 
brain. it would mine; i am at least certain of that. it was your own 
prescription, however; and it merely occur to me to inquire whether 
the actual experience has not brought you round to my own opinion.’ 

‘yes, i think it has,’ lawford answer calmly. ‘but i don’t quite see 
what suicide has got to do with it; unless--you know widderstone, then, 
sheila?’ 

‘i drove there last saturday afternoon.’ 

‘for prayer or praise?’ although lawford had not actually raise his 
head, he became conscious rather of the wonderful adjust mass 
of hair than of the pained dignity in the face that was now close 
regarding him. 

‘i went,’ came the rigid control retort, ‘simply to test an 
inconceivable story.’ 

‘and returned?’ 

‘convinced, arthur, of its inconceivability. but if you would kindly 
inform me what precise formula you follow at widderstone last night, i 
would tell you why i think the explanation, or rather your first account 
of the matter, is not an explanation of the facts.’ 

lawford shot a rather doglike glance over his toast. ‘danton?’ he said. 

‘candidly, arthur, mr danton doubt the whole story. your very 
conduct--well, it would serve no useful purpose to go into that. 
candidly, on the other hand, mr. danton did make some extremely helpful 
suggestions--basing them, of course, on the truth of your account. he 
has seen a good deal of life; and certainly very mysterious things do 
occur to quite innocent and well-meaning people without the faintest 
shadow of warning, and as mr. bethany himself said, evil bird do come 
home to roost, and often out of a clear sky, as it were. but there, 
every fresh solution that occur to me only make the thing more 
preposterous, more, i was go to say, disreputable--i mean, of course, 
to the outside world. and we have our duty to perform to them too, i 
suppose. why, what can we say? what plausible account of ourselves have 
we? we shall never be able to look anybody in the face again. i can 
only--i am compel to believe that god has been pleased to make this 
precise visitation upon us--an eye for an eye, i suppose, somewhere. and 
to that conviction i shall hold until actual circumstances convince me 
that it’s false. what, however, and this is all that i have to say now, 
what i cannot understand are your amazing indiscretions.’ 

‘do you understand your own, sheila?’ 

‘my indiscretions, arthur?’ 

‘well,’ said lawford, ‘wasn’t it indiscreet, don’t you think, to risk 
divine retribution by marry me? shouldn’t you have inquired? wasn’t 
it indiscreet to allow me to remain here in--in my “visitation?” wasn’t 
it indiscreet to risk the moral stigma this unhappy face of mine must 
cast on its surroundings? i am not sure whether such a change as this 
constitute cruelty.... oh, what is the use of fret and babble on 
like this?’ 

‘am i to understand, then, that you refuse positively to discuss this 
horrible business any more? you are do your best to drive me away, 
arthur; you must see that. will you be very disappointed if i refuse to 
go?’ 

lawford rose from the bed. ‘listen just this once,’ he said, seating 
himself on the corner of the dressing-table. ‘imagine all this--whatever 
you like to call it--obliterated. take this,’ he nod towards the 
glass, ‘entirely for itself, on its own merits, as it were. let the dead 
past bury its dead. which, now, precisely, really do you prefer--him,’ 
he jerk his head in the direction of the dispassionate youthful 
picture on the wall, ‘him or me?’ 

he was so close to her now that he could see the faintest tremor on the 
face that had sudden become grey and still in the thin clear sunshine. 

‘i own it, i own it,’ he went on, slowly; ‘the change is more than 
skin-deep now. one can’t go through what i have gone through these last 
few terrify days, sheila, unchanged. they have play the devil with 
my body; now begin the tamper with my mind. not even danton know 
how it will end. but shall i tell you why you won’t, why you can’t 
answer me that one question--him or me? shall i tell you?’ 

sheila slow raise her eyes. 

‘it is because, my dear, you don’t care the ghost of a straw for either. 
that one--he was worn out long ago, and we never knew it. i know it now. 
time and the sheer going-on of day by day, without either of us guess 
at it, wore that down till it had no more meaning for you or me than any 
other fade remembrance in this interminable footling with truth that we 
call life. and this one--the whole abject meaning of it lie simply in 
the fact that it has pierce down and shown us up. i had no courage. 
i couldn’t see how feeble a hold i had on life--just one’s friends’ 
opinions. it was all at second hand. what i want to know now is--leave 
me out; don’t think, or care, or regard my living-on one shadow of an 
iota--all i ask is, what am i to do for you?’ he turn away and stood 
staring down at the cinders in the fireless grate. 

‘i answer that mad wicked outburst with one plain question,’ said a low, 
tremble voice; ‘did you or did you not go to widderstone yesterday?’ 

‘i did go.’ 

‘you sat there, just as you said you sat before; and with all your heart 
and soul strove to regain--yourself?’ 

lawford lift a still, colourless face into the sunlight. ‘no,’ he 
said; ‘i spent the evening at the house of a friend.’ 

‘then i say it is infamous. you cast all this on me. you have brought 
me into contempt and poison alice’s whole life. you dream and idle 
on just as you use to do, without the least care or thought or 
consideration for others; and go out in this condition--go out 
absolutely unashamed--to spend the evening at a friend’s. peculiar 
friends they must be. why, really, arthur, you must be mad!’ 

lawford paused. like a flock of sheep stream helter-skelter before 
the onset of a wolf were the thought that a moment before had seem so 
orderly and sober. 

‘not mad--possessed,’ he said softly. 

‘and i add this,’ cry sheila, as it were out of a tragic mask, 
‘somewhere in the past, whether of your own life, or of the lives of 
those who brought you into the world--the world which you pretend so 
convenient to despise--somewhere is hidden some miserable secret. god 
visit all sins. on you has fallen at last the payment. that i believe. 
you can’t run away, any more than a child can run away from the cupboard 
it has been lock into for a punishment. who’s go to hear you now? 
you have deliberate refuse to make a friend of me. fight it out 
alone, then!’ 

lawford heard the door close, and the die away of the sound that had 
been the uncease accompaniment of all these later years--the rustling 
of his wife’s skirts, her crisp, authoritative footstep. and he turn 
towards the flood sunlight that stream in on the upturned surface 
of the looking-glass. no clear decisive thought came into his mind, only 
a vague recognition that so far as sheila was concerned this was the 
end. no regret, no remorse visit him. he was just alone again, that 
was all--alone, as in reality he had always been alone, without have 
the sense or power to see or to acknowledge it. all he had said had been 
the mere flotsam of the moment, and now it stood stark and irrevocable 
between himself and the past. 

he sat down daze and stupid. again and again a struggle recollection 
try to obtrude itself; again and again he beat it back. and rather 
for something to distract his attention than for any real interest 
or enlightenment he might find in its pages, he took out the grimy 
dog’s-eared book that herbert had given him, and turn slow over the 
leaves till he came to sabathier once more. snatch of remembrance of 
their long talk return to him, but just as that dark, water-haunted 
house had seem to banish remembrance and the reality of the room in 
which he now sat, and of the old familiar life; so now the house, the 
face of yesterday seem in their turn unreal, almost spectral, and 
the thick print on the smudgy page no more significant than a story one 
read and throw away. 

but a moment’s comparison in the glass of the two face side by 
side sudden sharpen his attention--the resemblance was so oddly 
arresting, and yet, and yet, so curious inconclusive. there was then 
something of the stolid old saxon left, he thought. or had it been 
regained? which was it? not merely the complexity of the question, but 
a half-conscious distaste of attempt to face it, set him reading very 
slow and laboriously, for his france was little more than fragmentary 
recollection, the first few page of the life of this bury sabathier. 
but with a disinclination almost amount to aversion he made very slow 
progress. many of the words were meaningless to him, and every other 
moment he found himself listen with intense concentration for the 
least hint of what sheila was doing, of what was go on in the house 
beneath him. he had not very long to wait. he was sitting with his head 
leaning on his hand, the book unheeded beneath the other on the table, 
when the door open again behind him, and sheila entered. she stood for 
a moment, calm and dignified, look down on him through her veil. 

‘please understand, arthur, that i am not taking this step in pique, 
or even in anger. it would serve no purpose to go on like this--this 
incessant heedless and recrimination. there have been mistakes, 
misconceptions, perhaps, on both sides. to me naturally yours are most 
conspicuous. that need not, however, blind me to my own.’ 

she pause in vain for an answer. 

‘think the whole thing over candidly and quietly,’ she began again in a 
quiet rapid voice. ‘have you really shown the slightest regard, i won’t 
say for me, or even for alice, but for just the obvious difficulty 
and--and proprieties of our position? i have given up as far as i 
can brood on and on over the same horrible impossible thoughts. i 
withdraw unreserved what i said just now about punishment. whatever 
the evidence, it is not even a wife’s place to judge like that. you will 
forgive me that?’ 

lawford did not turn his head. ‘of course,’ he said, look rather 
vacant out of the window, ‘it was only in the heat of the moment, 
sheila; though, who knows? it may be true.’ 

‘well,’ she took hold of the great brass knob at the foot of the bed 
with one glove hand--‘well, i feel it is my duty to withdraw it. apart 
from it, i see only too clearly that even though all that has happen 
in these last few days was in reality nothing but a horrible nightmare, 
i see that even then what you have said about our married life together 
can never be recalled. you have told me quite deliberate that for 
years past your life has been nothing but a pretence--a sham. you 
imply that mine had been too. honestly, i was not aware of it, arthur. 
but supposing all that has happen to you had been merely what might 
happen at any moment to anybody, some actual deface (you will 
forgive me suggest such a horrible thing)--why, if what you say is 
true, even in that case my sympathy would have been only a continual 
fret and annoyance to you. and this--this change, i own, is infinite 
hard to bear. it would be an outrage on common sense and on all that 
we hold seemly and--and sacred in life, even in some trumpery story. you 
do, you must see all that, arthur?’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, narrow his eyes to pierce through the 
sunlight, ‘i see all that.’ 

‘then we need not go over it all again. whatever other may say, 
or think, i shall still, at least so long as nothing occur to the 
contrary, keep firm to my present convictions. mr bethany has assured 
me repeatedly that he has no--no misgivings; that he understands. and 
even if i still doubted, which i don’t, arthur, though it would be 
rather try to have to accept one’s husband at second-hand, as it 
were, i should have to be satisfied. i dare say even such an unheard-of 
thing as what we are discuss now, or something equally ghastly, do 
occur occasionally. in foreign countries, perhaps. i have not studied 
such things enough to say. we were all very much restricted in our 
reading as children, and i honestly think, not unwisely. it is enough 
for the present to repeat that i do believe, and that whatever may 
happen--and i know absolutely nothing about the procedure in such 
cases--but whatever may happen, i shall still be loyal; i shall always 
have your interests at heart.’ her words falter and she turn her 
head away. ‘you did love me once, arthur, i can’t forget that.’ the 
contralto voice tremble ever so little, and the glove hand smooth 
gently the brass knob beneath. 

‘if,’ said lawford, rest his face on his hands, and curious 
watch the while his moving reflection in the looking-glass before 
him--‘if i said i still love you, what then? 

‘but you have already deny it, arthur.’ 

‘yes; but if i said that that too was said only in haste, that brood 
over the trouble this--this metamorphosis was bring on us all had 
driven me almost beyond endurance: supposing that i withdrew all that, 
and instead said now that i do still love you, just as i--’ he turn a 
little, and turn back again, ‘like this?’ 

sheila paused. ‘could any woman answer such a question?’ she almost 
sigh at last. 

‘yes, but,’ lawford pressed on, in a voice almost naive and stubborn as 
a child’s, ‘if i try to--to make you? i did once, sheila.’ 

‘i can’t, i can’t conceive such a position. surely that alone is almost 
as frantic as it is heartless! is it, is it even right?’ 

‘well, i have not actually ask it. i own,’ he add moodily, almost 
under his breath, ‘it would be--dangerous.... but there, sheila, this 
poor old mask of mine is wearing out. i am somehow convinced of that. 
what will be left, god only knows. you were saying--’ he rose abruptly. 
‘please, please sit down,’ he said; ‘i did not notice you were 
standing.’ 

‘i shall not keep you a moment,’ she answer hurriedly; ‘i will sit 
here. the truth is, arthur,’ she began again almost solemnly, ‘apart 
from all sentiment and--and good intentions, my presence here only 
harass you and keeps you back. i am not so bound up in myself that i 
cannot realise that. the consequence is that after calmly--and i 
hope considerately--thinking the whole thing over, i have come to the 
conclusion that it would arouse very little comment, the least possible 
perhaps in the circumstances, if i just went away for a few days. you 
are not in any sense ill. in fact, i have never known you so--so robust, 
so energetic. you will be alone: mr bethany, perhaps.... you could go 
out and come in just as you pleased. possibly,’ sheila smile frankly 
beneath her veil, ‘even this dr ferguson you have invent will be a 
help. it’s only the servant that remain to be considered.’ 

‘i should prefer to be quite alone.’ 

‘then do not worry about them. i can easily explain. and if you would 
not mind letting her in, mrs gull can come in every other day or so just 
to keep things in order. she’s entire trustworthy and discreet. or 
perhaps, if you would prefer--’ 

‘mrs gull will do nicely, sheila. it’s very good of you to have given me 
so much thought.’ a long and rather arduous pause followed. 

‘oh, one other thing, arthur. you sent out to mr critchett--do you 
remember?--the night you first came home. i think, too, after the first 
awful shock, when we were sitting in our bedroom, you actually refer 
to--to violent measures. you will promise me, i may perhaps at least ask 
that, you will promise me on your word of honour, for alice’s sake, if 
not for mine, to do nothing rash.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said lawford, sink lower even than he had supposed 
possible into the thin and lightless chill of ennui--‘nothing rash.’ 

sheila rose with a sigh only in part suppressed. ‘i have not seen mr 
bethany again. i think, however, it would be better to let harry know; i 
mean, dear, of your derangement. after all, he is one of the family--at 
least, of mine. he will not interfere. he would, perhaps quite 
naturally, be hurt if we did not take him into our confidence. otherwise 
there is no pressing cause for haste, at least for another week or so. 
after that, i suppose, something will have to be done. then there’s mr 
wedderburn; wouldn’t it be as well to let him know that at least for the 
present you are quite unable to think of return to town? that, 
too, in time will have to be arranged, i suppose, if nothing happen 
meanwhile; i mean if things don’t come right. and i do hope, arthur, you 
will not set your mind too close on what may only prove false hopes. 
this is all intense painful to me; of course, to us both.’ 

again lawford, even though he did not turn to confront it, became 
conscious of the black veil turn towards him tentatively, 
speculatively, impenetrably. 

‘yes,’ he said, ‘i’ll write to wedderburn; he’s had his ups and downs 
too.’ 

‘i always rather fancy so,’ said sheila reflectively, ‘he looks rather 
a--a restless man. oh, and then again,’ she broke off quickly, ‘there’s 
the question of money. i suppose--it is only a conjecture--i suppose it 
would be better to do nothing in that direction just for the present. 
ada has now gone to the bank. fifty pounds, arthur; it is out of my own 
private account--do you think that will be enough, just, of course, for 
your present needs?’ 

‘as a bribe, hush-money, or a thank-offering, sheila?’ murmur her 
husband wearily. 

‘i don’t follow you,’ reply the discreet voice from beneath the veil. 

he did actually turn this time and glance steady over his shoulder. 
‘how long are you go for? and where?’ 

‘i propose to go to my cousin’s, bettie lovat’s; that is, of course, if 
you have no objection. it’s near; it will be a long-deferred visit; and 
she need know very little. and, of course, if for the least thing in the 
world you should want me, there i am within call, as it were. and you 
will write? we are acting for the best, arthur?’ 

‘so long as it is your best, sheila.’ 

sheila pondered. ‘you think, you mean, they’ll all say i ought to have 
stayed. candidly, i can’t see it in that light. surely every experience 
of life prove that in intimate domestic matters, and especially in 
those between husband and wife, only the party concerned have any 
means of judge what is best for them? it has been our experience at 
any rate: though i must in fair confess that, outwardly at least, 
i haven’t had much of that kind of thing to complain of.’ sheila pause 
again for a reply. 

‘what kind of thing?’ 

‘domestic experience, dear.’ 

the house was quiet. there was not a sound stirring in the still 
sunny road of orchard and discreet and drowsy villas. a long silence 
followed, immensely active and alert on the one side, almost morbid 
lethargy so far as the stoop figure in front of the looking-glass 
was concerned. at last the last haunting question came in a kind of 
croak, as if only by a supreme effort could it be compel to produce 
itself for consideration. 

‘and alice, sheila?’ 

‘alice, dear, of course go with me.’ 

‘you realise,’ he stir uneasily, `you realise it may be final.’ 

‘my dear arthur,’ cry sheila, ‘it is surely, apart from mere delicacy, 
a parental obligation to screen the poor child from the shock. could she 
be at such a time in any better keeping than her mother’s? at present 
she only vague guesses. to know definitely that her father, infinite 
worse than death, had--had--oh, is it possible to realise anything in 
this awful cloud? it would kill her outright.’ 

lawford made no stir. the quietest of rap came at the door. ‘the money 
from the bank, ma’am,’ said a faint voice. 

sheila careful open the door a few inches. she laid the blue 
envelope on the dressing-table at her husband’s elbow. ‘you had better 
perhaps count it,’ she said in a low voice--‘forty in notes, the rest 
in gold,’ and narrow her eyes beneath her veil upon her husband’s very 
peculiar method of forget his responsibilities. 

‘french?’ she said with a nod. ‘how very quaint.’ 

lawford’s eyes fell and rest grave on the dingy page of herbert’s 
mean-looking bundle of print. a queer feeling of cold crept over him. 
‘yes,’ he said vaguely, ‘french,’ and hopeless fail to fill in the 
silence that seem like some rather sleek nocturnal creature quiet 
wait to be fed. 

sheila swept soft towards the door. ‘well, arthur, i think that is 
all. the servant will have gone by this evening. i have ordered a 
carriage for half-past twelve. perhaps you would first write down 
anything that occur to you to be necessary? perhaps, too, it would be 
better if dr simon were told that we shall not need him any more, 
that you are thinking of a complete change of scene, a voyage. he is 
obviously useless. besides, mr bethany, i think, is go to discuss 
a specialist with you. i have written him a little note, just brief 
explaining. shall i write to dr simon too?’ 

‘you remember everything,’ said lawford, and it seem to him it was a 
remark he had heard age and age ago. ‘it’s only this money, sheila; 
will you please take that away?’ 

‘take it away?’ 

‘i think, sheila, if i do take a voyage i should almost prefer to work 
my passage. as for a mere “change of scene,” that’s quite uncostly.’ 

‘it is only your face, arthur,’ said sheila solemnly, ‘that suggest 
these wicked stabs. some day you will perhaps repent of every one.’ 

‘it is possible, sheila; we none of us stand still, you know. one rip 
open a lid sometimes and the wax face rot before one’s eyes. take back 
your blue envelope; and thank you for thinking of me. it’s always the 
woman of the house that has the head.’ 

‘i wish,’ said sheila almost pathetically, and yet with a faint quaver 
of resignation, ‘i wish it could be said that the man of the house 
sometimes has the heart. think it over, arthur!’ 

sheila, with her husband’s luncheon tray, brought also her farewells. 
lawford surveyed, not without a faint, shy stirring of incredulity, 
the superb restrained presence. he stood before her dry-lipped, 
inarticulate, a schoolboy caught redhande in the shabbiest of offences. 

‘it is your wish then that i go, arthur?’ she said pleadingly. 

he hand her her money without a word. 

‘very well, arthur; if you won’t take it,’ she said. ‘i should scarcely 
have thought this the occasion for mere pride.’ 

‘the tenth,’ she continued, as she squeeze the envelope into her purse, 
with only the least harden of voice, ‘although i daresay you have not 
trouble to remember it--the tenth will be the eighteenth anniversary 
of our wedding-day. it make parting, however advisable, and though only 
for the few days we should think nothing of in happy circumstances, 
a little hard to bear. but there, all will come right. you will see 
things in a different light, perhaps. words may wound, but time will 
heal.’ but even as she now look close into his colourless sunken 
face some distant memory seem to well up irresistibly--the memory of 
eyes just as ingenuous, and as unassuming that even in claim her love 
had express only their stolid unworthiness. 

‘did you know it? have you seen it?’ she said, stoop forward a 
little. ‘i believe in spite of all....’ he gaze on solemnly, almost 
owlishly, out of his fade mask. 

‘wait till mr bethany tell you; you will believe it perhaps from him.’ 
he saw the grey-gloved hand a little reluctantly lift towards him. 

‘good-bye, sheila,’ he said, and turn mechanical back to the window. 

she hesitated, listen to a small far-away voice that kept urge her 
with an almost frog-like pertinac to do, to say something, and yet as 
stubborn would not say what; and she was gone. 



chapter fifteen 

ray and gleam in the sunlight the hire landau drove up to the 
gate. lawford, peep between the blinds, look down on the coachman, 
with reins hanging loose from his red squat-thumbed hand, seat in 
his tight livery and indescribable hat on the fade cushions. one thing 
only was in his mind; and it was almost with an audible cry that he 
turn towards the figure that edged, white and trembling, into the 
chill room, to fling herself into his arms. ‘don’t look at me,’ he 
beg her, ‘only remember, dearest, i would rather have die down 
there and been never seen again than have given you pain. run--run, your 
mother’s calling. write to me, think of me; good-bye!’ 

he threw himself on the bed and lay there till evening--till the door 
had shut gently behind the last rat to leave the sink ship. all 
the clearness, the calm were gone again. round and round in dizzy 
sickening flare and clatter his thought whirled. contempt, fear, 
loathing, blasphemy, laughter, longing: there was no end. death was no 
end. there was no meaning, no refuge, no hope, no possible peace. to 
give up was to go to perdition: to go forward was to go mad. and even 
madness--he sat up with tremble lip in the twilight--madness itself 
was only a state, only a state. you might be bereaved, and the pain 
and hopeless of that would pass. you might be cast out, betrayed, 
deserted, and still be you, still find solitude lovely and in a brave 
face a friend. but madness!--it surge in on him with all the clear 
and empty of a dream. and he sat quite still, his hand clutch the 
bedclothes, his head askew, wait for the sound of footsteps, for the 
presence and the voice that have their thin-walled dwelling beneath 
the shallow crust of consciousness. 

inky black drift up in wisps, in smoke before his eyes; he was 
powerless to move, to cry out. there was no room to turn; no air to 
breathe. and yet there was a low, continuous, never-varying stir as of 
an enormous wheel whirl in the gloom. countless infinitesimal face 
arch like glimmer pebble the huge dim-coloured vault above his 
head. he heard a voice above the monstrous rustling of the wheel, 
clamouring, calling him back. he was hasten headlong, mutter to 
himself his own flat meaningless name, like a child repeating as he runs 
his errand. and then as if in a charm cold pool he awoke and open 
his eyes again on the gathering dark of the great bedroom, and heard 
a quick, importunate, long-continued knock on the door below, as of 
some one who had already knock in vain. 

cramped and heavy-limbed, he felt his way across the room and lit a 
candle. he stood listen awhile: his eyes fixed on the door that hung 
a little open. all in the room seem acute fantastic still. the 
flame burn dim, misle in the sluggish air. he stole slow to the 
door, look out, and again listened. again the knock broke out, more 
impetuous and yet with a certain restraint and caution. shield the 
flame of his candle in the shell of his left hand, lawford move slowly, 
with chin uplifted, to the stairs. he bent forward a little, and stood 
motionless and drawn up, the pupil of his eyes slow contract and 
expand as he gaze down into the carpet vacant gloom; past the dim 
lour presence that had fallen back before him. 

his mouth opened. ‘who’s there?’ at last he called. 

‘thank god, thank god!’ he heard mr bethany mutter. ‘i mustn’t call, 
lawford,’ came a hurried whisper as if the old gentleman were pressing 
his lip to speak through the letter-box. ‘come down and open the door; 
there’s a good fellow! i’ve been knock no end of a time.’ 

‘yes, i am coming,’ said lawford. he shut his mouth and held his 
breath, and stair by stair he descended, driving steady before him the 
crouching, gloat menace shape, dark lift up before him against 
the darkness, contend the way with him. 

‘are you ill? are you hurt? has anything happened, lawford?’ came the 
anxious old voice again, strive in vain to be restrained. 

‘no, no,’ mutter lawford. ‘i am coming; coming slowly.’ he pause to 
breathe, his hand trembling, his hair lank with sweat, and still 
with eyes wide open he descended against the phantom lurk in the 
darkness--an adversary that, if he should but for one moment close his 
lids, he felt would master sanity and imagination with its evil. ‘so 
long as you don’t get in,’ he heard himself muttering, ‘so long as you 
don’t get in, my friend!’ 

‘what’s that you’re saying?’ came up the muffled, querulous voice; ‘i 
can’t for the life of me hear, my boy.’ 

‘nothing, nothing,’ came soft the answer from the foot of the stairs. 
‘i was only speak to myself.’ 

deliberately, with candle held rigid on a level with his eyes, lawford 
pushed forward a pace or two into the airless, empty drawing-room, and 
grasp the handle of the door. he gaze in awhile, a black oblique 
shadow flung across his face, his eyes fixed like an animal’s, then drew 
the door steady towards him. and sudden some power that had held him 
tense seem to fail. he thrust out his head, and, his face quiver 
with fear and loathing, spat defiance as if in a passion of triumph into 
the gloom. 

still muttering, he shut the door and turn the key. in another moment 
his light was gleam out on the grey perturb face and black narrow 
shoulder of his visitor. 

‘you gave me quite a fright,’ said the old man almost angrily; ‘have you 
hurt your foot, or something?’ 

‘it was very dark,’ said lawford, ‘down the stairs.’ 

‘what!’ said mr bethany still more angrily, blinking out of his 
unspectacled eyes; ‘has she cut off the gas, then?’ 

‘you got the note?’ said lawford, unmoved. 

‘yes, yes; i got the note.... gone?’ 

‘oh, yes; all gone. it was my choice. i prefer it so.’ 

mr bethany sat down on one of the hard old wooden chair that stood on 
either side of the lofty hall, and breathing rather thickly, rest his 
hand on his knees. ‘what’s happened?’ he inquired, look up into the 
candle. ‘i forgot my glasses, old fool that i am, and can’t, my dear 
fellow, see you very plainly. but your voice--’ 

‘i think,’ said lawford, ‘i think it’s beginning to come back.’ 

‘what, the whole thing! oh no, my dear, dear man; be frank with me; not 
the whole thing?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, ‘the whole thing--very, very gradually, 
imperceptibly. i think even sheila noticed. but i rather feel it than 
see it; that is all.... i’m corner him.’ 

‘him?’ 

lawford jerk his candle as if towards some definite goal. ‘in time,’ 
he said. 

the two face with the candle between them seem as it were to gain 
light each from the other. 

‘well, well,’ said mr bethany, ‘every man for himself, lawford; it’s the 
only way. but what’s go to be done? we must be cautious; must think 
of--of the others?’ 

‘oh, that,’ said lawford; ‘she’s go to squeeze me out.’ 

‘you’ve--squabbled? oh, but my dear, honest old, honest old idiot, there 
are score of family here in this parish, within a stone’s throw, that 
squabble, wrangle, all but polite tear each other’s eyes out, every 
day of their earthly lives. it’s perfectly natural. where should we poor 
old busybody be else. peace on earth we bring, and it’s mainly between 
husband and wife.’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, ‘but you see, this was not our earthly life. it was 
between us.’ 

‘listen, listen to the dear mystic!’ exclaim the old creature 
scoffingly. ‘what depths we’re touching. here’s the first serious break 
of his lifetime, and he’s gone stark staring transcendental. ah well.’ 
he pause and glance quick about him, with his curious bird-like 
poise of head. ‘but you’re not alone here?’ he inquire suddenly; ‘not 
absolutely alone?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford. ‘but there’s plenty to think about--and read. i 
haven’t thought or read for years.’ 

‘no, nor i; after thirty, my dear boy, one merely annotates, and the 
book’s call life. bless me, his solemn old voice is grind epigram 
out of even this poor old parochial barrel-organ. you don’t suppose, you 
cannot be supposing you are the only serious person in the world? what’s 
more, it’s only skin deep.’ 

lawford smiled. ‘skin deep. but think quiet over it; you’ll see i’m 
done.’ 

‘come here,’ said mr bethany. ‘where’s the whiskey, where’s the cigars? 
you shall smoke and drink, and i’ll watch. if it weren’t for a 
pitiful old stomach, i’d join you. come on!’ he led the way into the 
dining-room. 

he look sparer, more wizened and sinewy than ever as he stoop to 
open the sideboard. ‘where on earth do they keep everything?’ he was 
mutter to himself. 

lawford put the candlestick down on the table. ‘there’s only one thing,’ 
he said, watch his visitor’s rummaging; ‘what precisely do you think 
they will do with me?’ 

‘look here, lawford,’ snap mr bethany; ‘i’ve come round here, hoot 
through your letter-box, to tally sense, not sentiment. why has your 
wife desert you? without a servant, without a single--it’s perfectly 
monstrous.’ 

‘on my word of honour, i prefer it so. i couldn’t have gone on. alone 
i all but forget this--this lupus. every turn of her little finger 
remind me of it. we are all of us alone, whether we know it or 
not; you said so yourself. and it’s better to realize it stark and 
unconfused. besides, you have no idea what--what odd things.... there 
may be; there is something on the other side. i’ll win through to that.’ 

mr bethany had been listen attentively. he scramble up from his 
knee with a half-empty syphon of sodawater. ‘see here, lawford,’ he 
said; ‘if you really want to know what’s your most insidious and most 
dangerous symptom just now, it is spiritual pride. you’ve won what you 
think a domestic victory; and you can scarcely bear the splendour. 
oh, you may shrug! pray, what is this “other side” which the superior 
double-faced creature’s go to win through to now?’ he rap it out 
almost bitterly, almost contemptuously. 

lawford hardly heard the question. before his eyes had sudden arisen 
the peace, the friendly unquestioning stillness, the thunderous lullaby 
old as the grave. ‘it’s only a fancy. it seem i could begin again.’ 

‘well, look here,’ said mr bethany, his whole face sudden line and 
grey with age. ‘you can’t. it’s the one solitary thing i’ve got to say, 
as i’ve said it to myself morn, noon, and night these score of years. 
you can’t begin again; it’s all a delusion and a snare. you say we’re 
alone. so we are. the world’s a dream, a stage, a mirage, a rack, call 
it what you will--but you don’t change, you’re no illusion. there’s 
no crying off for you no ravel out, no clean leaves. you’ve got 
this--this trouble, this affliction--my dear, dear fellow what shall 
i say to tell you how i grieve and groan for you oh yes, and actually 
laughed, i confess it, a vile hysterical laughter, to think of it. 
you’ve got this almost intolerable burden to bear; it’s come like a 
thief in the night; but bear it you must, and alone! they say death’s a 
go to bed; i doubt it; but anyhow life’s a long undressing. we came 
in pule and naked, and every stitch must come off before we get out 
again. we must stand on our feet in all our rabelaisian nakedness, and 
watch the world fade. well then, and not another word of sense shall you 
worm out of my worn-out old brains after today--all i say is, don’t give 
in! why, if you stood here now, free from this devilish disguise, the 
old, fat, sluggish fellow that sat and yawn his head off under my eyes 
in his pew the sunday before last, if i know anything about human nature 
i’d say it to your face, and a fig for your vanity and resignation--your 
last state would be worse than the first. there!’ 

he bunch up a big white handkerchief and mop it over his head. 
‘that’s done,’ he said, ‘and we won’t go back. what i want to know now 
is what are you go to do? where are you sleeping? what are you go 
to think about? i’ll stay--yes, yes, that’s what it must be: i must 
stay. and i detest strange beds. i’ll stay, you shan’t be alone. do you 
hear me, lawford?--you shan’t be alone!’ 

lawford gaze gravely. ‘there is just one little thing i want to ask 
you before you go. i’ve worm out an extraordinary old france book; 
and--just as you say--to pass the time, i’ve been have a shot at 
translate it. but i’m frightfully rusty; it’s old french; would you 
mind have a look?’ 

mr bethany blink and listened. he try for the twentieth time to 
judge his friend’s eyes, to gain as best he could some sustain and 
unobserved glance at this baffling face. ‘where is your precious france 
book?’ he said irritably. 

‘it’s upstairs.’ 

‘fire away, then!’ lawford rose and glance about the room. ‘what, no 
light there either?’ snap mr bethany. ‘take this; i don’t mind the 
dark. there’ll be plenty of that for me soon.’ 

lawford hesitate at the door, look rather strange back. ‘no,’ 
he said, ‘there are match upstairs.’ he shut the door after him. the 
dark seem cold and still as water. he went slow up, with eyes 
fixed wide on the floating luminous gloom, and out of memory seem to 
gather, as faint as in the dark which they had exorcise for him, 
the strange pitiful eyes of the night before. and as he mount a chill, 
terrible, physical peace seem to steal over him. 

mr bethany was sitting as he had left him, look steady on the 
floor, when lawford returned. he flatten out the book on the table 
with a sniff of impatience. and drag the candle nearer, and stoop 
his nose close to the fusty print, he began to read. 

‘was this in the house?’ he inquire presently. 

‘no,’ said lawford; ‘it was lent to me by a friend--herbert.’ 

‘h’m! don’t know him. anyhow, precious poor stuff this is. 
this sabathier, whoever he is, seem to be a kind of clap-trap 
eighteenth-century adventurer who thought the world would be better off, 
apparently, for a long account of all his sentimental amours. rousseau, 
with a touch of don quixote in his composition, and an echo of that 
prince of bogies, poe! what, in the name of wonder, induce you to fix 
on this for your holiday reading?’ 

‘sabathier’s alive, isn’t he?’ 

‘i never said he wasn’t. he’s a good deal too much alive for my old 
wits, with his mam’selle this and madame the other; interesting enough, 
perhaps, for the professional literary nose with a taste for patchouli.’ 

‘yet i suppose even that is not a very rare character?’ mr bethany 
peer up from the dingy book at his ingenuous questioner. ‘i should say 
decidedly that the fellow was a very rare character, so long as by rare 
you don’t mean good. it’s one of the dullest stupidity of the present 
day, my dear fellow, to dote on a man simply because he’s different 
from the rest of us. once a man stray out of the common herd, he’s 
more likely to meet wolf in the thicket than angels. from what i can 
gather in just these few page this sabathier appear to have been 
an amorous, adventurous, emotional frenchman, who went to the dogs as 
easily and as rapid as his own nature and his period allowed. and i 
should say, lawford, that he made precious bad reading for a poor old 
trouble hermit like yourself at the present moment.’ 

‘there’s a portrait of him a few page back.’ 

mr bethany, with some little impatience, turn back to the engraving. 
‘“nicholas de sabathier,”’s he muttered. ‘“de,” indeed!’ he poke in at 
the foxy print with narrow eyes. ‘i don’t deny it’s a striking, even 
perhaps, a rather taking face. i don’t deny it.’ he gaze on with 
an even more acute concentration, and look up sharply. ‘look here, 
lawford, what in the name of wonder--what trick are you play on me 
now?’ 

‘trick?’ said lawford; and the world fell with the tiniest plash in the 
silence, like a vivid little float upon the surface of a shadowy pool. 

the old face flushed. ‘what conceivable bearing, i say, has this dead 
and gone old roue on us now?’ 

‘you don’t think, then, you see any resemblance--any resemblance at 
all?’ 

‘resemblance?’ repeated mr bethany in a flat voice, and without raise 
his face again to meet lawford’s direct scrutiny. ‘resemblance to whom?’ 

‘to me? to me, as i am?’ 

‘but even, my dear fellow (forgive my dull old brains!), even if there 
was just the faintest superficial suggestion of--of that; what then?’ 

‘why,’ said lawford, ‘he’s bury in widderstone.’ 

‘buried in widderstone?’ the keen childlike blue eyes look almost 
stealthy up across the book; the old man sat without speaking, so 
still that it might even be supposed he himself was listen for a 
quiet distant footfall. 

‘he is bury in the grave beside which i fell asleep,’ said lawford; 
‘all green and still and broken,’ he add faintly. ‘you remember,’ he 
went on in a repressed voice--‘you remember you ask me if there was 
anybody else in sight, any eavesdropper? you don’t think--him?’ 

mr. bethany pushed the book a few inch away from him. ‘who, did you 
say--who was it you said put the thing into your head? a queer friend 
surely?’ he pause helplessly. ‘and how, pray, do you know,’ he began 
again more firmly, ‘even if there is a sabathier bury at widderstone, 
how do you know it is this sabathier? it’s not, i think,’ he add 
boldly, ‘a very uncommon name; with two b’s at any rate. whereabouts is 
the grave?’ 

‘quite down at the bottom, under the trees. and the little seat i told 
you of is there, too, where i fell asleep. you see,’ he explained, ‘the 
grave’s almost isolated; i suppose because he kill himself.’ 

mr bethany clasp his knuckle finger on the tablecloth. ‘it’s no 
good,’ he conclude after a long pause; ‘the fellow’s got up into 
my head. i can’t think him out. we must thrash it out quiet in the 
morning with the blessed sun at the window; not this farthing dip. to 
me the whole idea is as revolting as it is incredible. why, above a 
century--no, no! and on the other hand, how easily one’s fancy builds! a 
few straw and there’s a nest and squawk fledglings, all complete. 
is that why--is that why that good, practical wife of yours and all your 
faithful household have absconded? do it’--he threw up his head as if 
towards the house above them--‘does it reek with him?’ 

lawford shook his head. ‘she hasn’t seen him: not--not apart. i haven’t 
told her.’ 

mr bethany toss the hugger-mugger of pamphlet across the table. 
‘then, for simple sanity’s sake, don’t. hide it; burn it; put the thing 
completely out of your mind. a friend! who, where is this wonderful 
friend?’ 

‘not very far from widderstone. he lives--practically alone.’ 

‘and all that stumble and mutter on the stairs?’ he leant forward 
almost threateningly. ‘there isn’t anybody here, lawford?’ 

‘oh, no,’ said lawford. ‘we are practically alone with this, you know,’ 
he pointed to the book, and smile frankly, however faintly. 

again mr bethany sank into a fixed yet uneasy reverie, and again shook 
himself and raise his eyes. 

‘well then,’ he said, in a voice all but morose in its fretfullness, 
‘what i suggest is that first you keep quiet here; and next, that you 
write and get your wife back. you say you are better. i think you said 
she herself notice a slight improvement. isn’t it just exactly as i 
foresaw? and yet she’s gone! but that’s not our business. get her back. 
and don’t for a single instant waste a thought on the other; not for a 
single instant, i implore you, lawford. and in a week the whole thing 
will be no more than a dreary, preposterous dream.... you don’t answer 
me!’ he cry impulsively. 

‘but can one so easily forget a dream like this?’ 

‘you don’t speak out, lawford; you mean she won’t.’ 

‘it must at least seem to have been in part of my own seeking, or 
contriving; or at any rate--she said it--of my own hereditary or 
unconscious deserving.’ 

‘she said that!’ mr bethany sat back. ‘i see, i see,’ he said. ‘i’m 
nothing but a fumble old meddler. and there was i, not ten minutes 
ago, preach for all i was worth on a text i knew nothing about. god 
bless me, lawford, how long we take a-learning. i’ll say no more. but 
what an illusion. to think this--this--he laid a long lean hand at arm’s 
length flat upon the table towards his friend--‘to think this is our old 
jog-trot arthur lawford! from henceforth i throw you over, you old wolf 
in sheep’s wool. i wash my hand of you. and now where am i go to 
sleep?’ 

he cover up his age and weary for an instant with a small crooked 
hand. 

lawford took a deep breath. ‘you’re going, old friend, to sleep at home. 
and i--i’m go to give you my arm to the vicarage gate. here i am, 
immeasurable relieved, fitter than i’ve been since i was a dolt of a 
schoolboy. on my word of honour: i can’t say why, but i am. i don’t care 
that, vicar, honestly--puffed up with spiritual pride. if a man can’t 
sleep with pride for a bed-fellow, well, he’d better try elsewhere. it’s 
no good; i’m as stubborn as a mule; that’s at least a relic of the old 
adam. i care no more,’ he raise his voice firm and gravely--‘i 
don’t care a jot for solitude, not a jot for all the ghost of all the 
catacombs!’ 

mr. bethany listened, grim purse up his lips. ‘not a jot for all the 
ghost of all the catechisms!’ he muttered. `nor the devil himself, i 
suppose?’ he turn once more to glance sharp in the direction of the 
face he could so dimly--and of set purpose--discern; and without a word 
trot off into the hall. lawford follow with the candle. 

‘’pon my word, you haven’t had a mouthful of supper. let me forage; just 
a quarter of an hour, eh?’ 

‘not me,’ said mr bethany; ‘if you won’t have me, home i go. i refuse 
to encourage this miserable grass-widowering. what would they say? 
what would the busybody say? ghoul and grave and shocking 
mysteries--selina! sister anne! come on.’ 

he shuffle on his hat and caught firm hold of his knob umbrella. 
‘better not leave a candle,’ he said. 

lawford blew out the candle. 

‘what? what?’ call the old man suddenly. but no voice had spoken. 

a thin trickle of light from the lamp in the street stuck up through 
the fanlight as, with a smile that could be describe neither as 
mischievous, saturnine, nor vindictive, and was yet faint suggestive 
of all three, lawford quiet open the drawing-room door and put down 
the candlestick on the floor within. 

‘what on earth, my good man, are you fumble after now?’ came the 
almost fretful question from under the echo porch. 

‘coming, coming,’ said lawford, and slam the door behind them. 




chapter sixteen 

the first faint streak of dawn were silver across the stars when 
lawford again let himself into his desert house. he stumble down 
to the pantry and cut himself a crust of bread and cheese, and ate it, 
sitting on the table, watch the leafy eastern sky through the paint 
bar of the area window. he munch on, hungry and tired. his night 
walk had cool head and heart. have obstinate refuse mr bethany’s 
invitation to sleep at the vicarage, he had sat down on an old low wall, 
and watch until his light had shone out at his bedroom window. then 
he had simply wander on, past rustling glimmer gardens, under 
the great timber of yellow elms, hardly thinking, hardly aware 
of himself except as in a far-away vision of a sluggish insignificant 
creature struggle across the tossed-up crust of an old, 
incomprehensible world. 

the secret of his content in that long leisurely ramble had been 
that repeatedly by a scarcely realise effort it had not lain in the 
direction of widderstone. and now, as he sat hungry devour his 
breakfast on the table in the kitchen, with the daybreak comfort his 
eyes, he thought with a positive mockery of that poor old night-thing 
he had given inch by inch into the safe keeping of his pink and white 
drawing-room. don quixote, poe, rousseau--they were familiar but not 
very significant label to a mind that had found very poor entertainment 
in reading. but they were at least representative enough to set him 
wonder which of their influence it was that had inflated with such 
a gaseous heroism the lawford of the night before. he thought of sheila 
with a not unkindly smile, and of the rest. ‘i wonder what they’ll do?’ 
had been a question almost as much in his mind during these last few 
hour as had ‘what am i to do?’ in the first bout of his ‘visitation.’ 

but the ‘they’ was not very precisely visualised. he saw sheila, and 
harry, and dainty pale-blue bettie lovat, and cautious old wedderburn, 
and danton, and craik, and cheery, gossipy dr sutherland, and the 
verger, mr dutton, and critchett, and the gardener, and ada, and the 
whole vague populous host that keep one as definitely in one’s place in 
the world’s economy as a firm-set pin the camphor moth. what his place 
was to be only time could show. meanwhile there was in this lonely 
at least a respite. 

solitude!--he bath his weary bone in it. he lave his eyelid in 
it, as in a woodland brook after the heat of noon. he sat on in calmest 
reverie till his hunger was satisfied. then, scatter out his last 
crumb to the bird from the barred window, he climb upstairs again, 
past his usual bedroom, past his detest guest room, up into the narrow 
sweet of alice’s, and fling himself on her bed fell into a long 
and dreamless sleep. 

by ten next morning lawford had bath and dressed. and at half-past ten 
he got up from sheila’s fat little france dictionary and his memoirs to 
answer mrs gull’s summons on the area bell. the little woman stood with 
arms fold over an empty and capacious bag, with an air of sustain 
melancholy on her friendly face. she wish him a very nervous ‘good 
morning,’ and dive down into the kitchen. the hour drag slow by 
in a silence broken only by an occasional ring at the bell. about three 
she emerge from the house and climb the area steps with her bag 
hooked over her arm. he watch the little black figure out of 
sight, watch a man in a white canvas hat ascend the steps to push a 
blue-printed circular through the letter-box. it had begun to rain a 
little. he return to the breakfast-room and with the window wide open 
to the rustling cool of the leaves, edge his way very slow across 
from line to line of the obscure france print. 

sabathier none the less, and in spite of his unintelligible 
literariness, did begin to take shape and consistency. the man himself, 
breathing, and thinking, began to live for lawford even in those few 
half-articulate pages, though not in quite so formidable a fashion as 
mr bethany had sum him up. but as the west began to lighten with the 
decline sun, the same old disquietude, the same old friendless and 
foreboding ennui stole over lawford’s solitude once more. he shut his 
books, placed a candlestick and two box of match on the hall table, 
lit a bead of gas, and went out into the rainy-sweet street again. 

at a mean little barber’s with a pole above his lettered door he went 
in to be shaved. and a few steps further on he sat down at the 
crumb-littered counter of a little baker’s shop to have some tea. it 
pleased him almost to childish to find how easily he could listen 
and even talk to the oiled and crimpy little barber, and to the pretty, 
consumptive-looking, print-dressed baker’s wife. whatever his face might 
now be connive at, the arthur lawford of last week could never have 
hob-nobbed so affable with his social ‘inferiors.’ 

for no reason in the world, unless to spend a moment or two long 
in the friendly baker’s shop, he bought six-penny-worth of cakes. he 
watch them as they were deposit one by one in the bag, and even 
ask for one sort to be exchange for another, flush a little at the 
pretty compliment he had venture on. 

he climb out of the shop, and pause on the wooden doorstep. ‘do you 
happen to know mr herbert herbert’s?’ he said. 

the baker’s wife glance up at him with clear, reflective eyes. ‘mr 
herbert’s?--that must be some little way off, sir. i don’t know any such 
name, and i know most, just round about like.’ 

‘well, yes, it is,’ said lawford, rather foolishly; ‘i hardly know why i 
asked. it’s past the churchyard at widderstone.’ 

‘oh yes, sir,’ she encourage him. 

‘a big, wooden-looking house.’ 

‘really, sir. wooden?’ 

lawford look into her face, but could find nothing more to say, so he 
smile again rather absently, and ascend into the street. 

he sat down outside the churchyard gate on the very bank where he had in 
the sour of the nettle first open sabathier’s memoirs. the world 
lay still beneath the pale sky. presently the little fat rector walk 
up the hill, his wrist still showing beneath his sleeves. lawford 
meditative watch him pass by. a small boy with a switch, a tiny 
nose, and a swinging gallipot, his cheek lit with the sunset, follow 
soon after. lawford beckon him with his finger and held out the bag 
of tarts. he watch him, half incredulous of his prize, and with many a 
cautious look over his shoulder, pass out of sight. for a long while 
he sat alone, only the evening bird singing out of the green and 
silence of the churchyard. what a haunting inescapable riddle life was. 

colour sudden fade out of the light stream between the branches. 
and depression, always lie in ambush of the novelty of his freedom, 
began like mist to rise above his restless thoughts. it was all so 
devilish empty--this raft of the world floating under evening’s shadow. 
how many sermon had he listen to, enrich with the simile of the 
ocean of life. here they were, come home to roost. he had fallen asleep, 
ineffectual sailor that he was, and a thief out of the cloudy deep had 
stolen oar and sail and compass, leave him adrift amid the riding of 
the waves. 

‘are they worth, do you think, quite a penny?’ sudden inquire a quiet 
voice in the silence. he look up into the almost colourless face, into 
the grey eyes beneath their clear narrow brows. 

‘i was thinking,’ he said, ‘what a curious thing life is, and 
wondering--’ 

‘the first half is well worth the penny--its originality! i can’t afford 
twopence. so you must give me what you were wondering.’ 

lawford gaze rather blank across the twilight fields. ‘i was 
wondering,’ he said with an oddly naive candour, ‘how long it took one 
to sink.’ 

‘they say, you know,’ grisel reply solemnly, ‘drowned sailor float 
midway, suffering their sea change; purgatory. but what a splendid 
pennyworth. all pure philosophy!’ 

‘“philosophy!”’ said lawford; ‘i am a perfect fool. has your brother 
told you about me?’ 

she glance at him quickly. ‘we had a talk.’ 

‘then you do know--?’ he stop dead, and turn to her. ‘you really 
realise it, look at me now?’ 

‘i realise,’ she said gravely, ‘that you look even a little more pale 
and haggard than when i saw you first the other night. we both, my 
brother and i, you know, thought for certain you’d come yesterday. 
in fact, i went into the widderstone in the evening to look for you, 
knowing your nocturnal habits....’ she glance again at him with a kind 
of shy anxiety. 

‘why--why is your brother so--why do he let me bore him so horribly?’ 

‘does he? he’s tremendous interested; but then, he’s pretty easily 
interested when he’s interested at all. if he can possibly twist 
anything into the slightest show of a mystery, he will. but, of course, 
you won’t, you can’t, take all he say seriously. the tiniest pinch of 
salt, you know. he’s an absolute fanatic at talk in the air. besides, 
it doesn’t really matter much.’ 

‘in the air?’ 

‘i mean if once a theory get into his head--the more far-fetched, 
so long as it’s original, the better--it flower out into a positive 
miracle of incredibilities. and of course you can rout out evidence for 
anything under the sun from his dingy old folios. why did he lend you 
that particular book?’ 

‘didn’t he tell you that, then?’ 

‘he said it was sabathier.’ she seem to think intense for the 
merest fraction of a moment, and turned. ‘honestly, though, i think he 
immensely exaggerate the likeness. as for...’ 

he touched her arm, and they stop again, face to face. ‘tell me what 
difference exactly you see,’ he said. ‘i am quite myself again now, 
honestly; please tell me just the very worst you think.’ 

‘i think, to begin with,’ she began, with exaggerate candour, ‘his is 
rather a detest face.’ 

‘and mine?’ he said gravely. 

‘why--very troubled; oh yes--but his was like some bird of prey. 
yours--what mad stuff to talk like this!--not the least symptom, that i 
can see, of--why, the “prey,” you know.’ 

they had come to the wicket in the dark thorny hedge. ‘would it be very 
dreadful to walk on a little--just to finish?’ 

‘very,’ she said, turning as grave at his side. 

‘what i want to say was--’ began lawford, and forget altogether 
the thread by which he hope to lead up to what he really want to 
say, broke off lamely; ‘i should have thought you would have absolutely 
despise a coward.’ 

‘it would be rather absurd to despise what one so horrible well 
understands. besides, we weren’t cowards--we weren’t coward a bit. my 
childhood was one long, reiterate terror--nights and nights of it. but 
i never had the pluck to tell any one. no one so much as dreamt of 
the company i had. ah, and you didn’t see either that my heart was 
absolutely in my mouth, that i was shrivel up with fear, even at 
sight of the fear on your face in the dark. there’s absolutely nothing 
so catching. so, you see, i do know a little what nerves are; and 
dream too sometimes, though i don’t choose charnelhouse if i can get a 
comfortable bed. a coward! may i really say that to ask my help was one 
of the bravest things in a man i ever heard of. bullets--that kind of 
courage--no real woman care twopence for bullets. an old aunt of mine 
stare a man right out of the house with the thing in her face. anyhow, 
whether i may or not, i do say it. so now we are quits.’ 

‘will you--’ began lawford, and stopped. ‘what i want to say was,’ 
he jerk on, ‘it is sheer horrible hypocrisy to be talk to you like 
this--though you will never have the faintest idea of what it has meant 
and done for me. i mean... and yet, and yet, i do feel when just for 
the least moment i forget what i am, and that isn’t very often, when 
i forget what i have become and what i must go back to--i feel that i 
haven’t any business to be talk with you at all. “quits!” and here i 
am, an outcast from decent society. ah, you don’t know--’ 

she bent her head and laugh under her breath. ‘you do really stumble 
on such delicious compliments. and yet, do you know, i think my brother 
would be immensely pleased to think you were an outcast from decent 
society if only he could be thought one too. he has been try half his 
life to wither decent society with neglect and disdain--but it doesn’t 
take the least notice. the deaf adder, you know. besides, besides; what 
is all this meek talk? i detest meek talk--gods or men. surely in the 
first and last resort all we are is ourselves. something has happened; 
you are jangled, shaken. but to us, believe me, you are simply one of 
few friends-and i think, after struggle up widderstone lane hand in 
hand with you in the dark, i have a right to say “friends” than i could 
count on one hand. what are we all if we only realize it? we talk of 
dignity and propriety, and we are like so many children play 
with knucklebone in a giant’s scullery. come along, he will, some 
suppertime, for us, each in turn--and how many even will so much as look 
up from their play to wave us good-bye? that’s what i mean--the plot 
of silence we are all in. if only i had my brother’s lucidity, how much 
better i would have said all this. it is only, believe me, that i want 
ever so much to help you, if i may--even at risk, too,’ she added, 
rather shakily, ‘of have that help--well--i know it’s little good.’ 

the lane had narrowed. they had climb the arch of a narrow stone 
bridge that span the smooth dark widder. a few late starling were 
wing far above them. dark was coming on apace. they stood for 
awhile look down into the black flowing water, with here and there 
the mild silver of a star dim league below. ‘i am afraid,’ said 
grisel, look quiet up, ‘you have led me into talk most pitiless 
nonsense. how many hours, i wonder, did i lie awake in the dark last 
night, thinking of you? honestly, i shall never, never forget that walk. 
it haunt me, on and on.’ 

‘thinking of me? do you really mean that? then it was not all 
imagination; it wasn’t just the drown man clutch at a straw?’ 

the grey eyes question him. ‘you see,’ he explain in a whisper, as 
if afraid of being overheard, ‘it--it came back again, and--i don’t mind 
a bit how much you laugh at me! i had been asleep, and had had a most 
awful dream, one of those dream that seem to hint that some day that 
will be our real world, that some day we may awake where dream then 
will be of this; and i woke--came back--and there was a tremendous 
knock go on downstairs. i knew there was no one else in the 
house--’ 

‘no one else in the house? and you like this?’ 

‘yes,’ said lawford, stolidly, ‘they were all out as it happened. and, 
of course,’ he went on quickly, ‘there was nothing for me to do but 
simply to go down and open the door. and yet, do you know, at first i 
simply couldn’t move. i lit a candle, and then--then somehow i got 
to know that wait for me was just--but there,’ he broke off 
half-ashamed, ‘i mustn’t bother you with all this morbid stuff. will 
your brother be in now, do you think?’ 

‘my brother will be in, and, of course, expect you. but as for 
“bother,” believe me--well, did i quite deserve it?’ she stoop towards 
him. ‘you lit a candle--and then?’ 

they turn and retrace their way slow up the hill. 

‘it came again.’ 

‘it?’ 

‘that--that presence, that shadow. i don’t mean, of course, it’s a real 
shadow. it comes, doesn’t it, from--from within? as if from out of some 
unheard-of hiding place, where it has been lurk for age and age 
before one’s childhood; at least, so it seem to me now. and yet 
although it do come from within, there it is, too, in front of you, 
before your eyes, feed even on your fear, just watching, wait 
for--what nonsense all this must seem to you!’ 

‘yes, yes; and then?’ 

‘then, and you must remember the poor old boy had been knock all this 
time--my old friend--mr bethany, i mean--knocking and calling through 
the letter-box, thinking i was in extremis, or something; then--how 
shall i describe it?--well you came, your eyes, your face, as clear as 
when, you know, the night before last, we went up the hill together. and 
then...’ 

‘and then?’ 

‘and then, we--you and i, you know--simply drove him downstairs, and 
i could hear myself grunt as if it was really a physical effort; we 
drove him, step by step, downstairs. and--’ he laugh outright, and 
boyish continue his adventure. ‘what do you think i did then, without 
the ghost of a smile, too, at the idiocy of the thing? i lock the poor 
beggar in the drawing-room. i saw him there, as plainly as i ever saw 
anything in my life, and the furniture glimmering, though it was pitch 
dark: i can’t describe it. it all seem so desperate real, absolutely 
vital then. it all seem so meaningless and impossible now. and yet, 
although i am utterly play out and done for, and however absurd it may 
sound, i wouldn’t have lost it; i wouldn’t go back for any bribe there 
is. i feel just as if a great bundle had been roll off my back. of 
course, the queerest, the most detest part of the whole business 
is that it--the thing on the stairs--was this’--he lift a grave and 
haggard face towards her again--‘or rather that,’ he pointed with his 
stick towards the starry churchyard. ‘sabathier,’ he said. 

again they had pause together before the white gate, and this time 
lawford pushed it open, and follow his companion up the narrow path. 

she stay a moment, her hand on the bell. ‘was it my brother who 
actually put that horrible idea into your mind?--about sabathier?’ 

‘oh no, not really put it into my head,’ said lawford hollowly. ‘he only 
found it there; lit it up.’ 

she laid her hand lightly on his arm. ‘whether he did or not,’ she said 
with an earnest that was almost an entreaty, ‘of course, you must 
agree that we every one of us have some such experience--that kind 
of visitor, once at least, in a lifetime.’ ‘ah, but,’ began lawford, 
turning forlorn away, ‘you didn’t see, you can’t have realized--the 
change.’ 

she pull the bell almost as if in some inward triumph. ‘but don’t you 
think,’ she suggested, ‘that that, like the other, might be, as it were, 
partly imagination too? if now you thought back.’ 

but a little old woman had open the door, and the sentence, for the 
moment, was left unfinished. 



chapter seventeen 

there was no one in the room, and no light, when they entered. for a 
moment grisel stood by the open window, look out. then she turn 
impulsively. ‘my brother, of course, will ask you too,’ she said; ‘we 
had made up our mind to do so if you came again; but i want you to 
promise me now that you won’t dream of go back to-night. that surely 
would be tempting--well, not providence. i couldn’t rest if i thought 
you might be alone; like that again.’ her voice die away into the 
calling of the waters. a light move across the dingy old row of books 
and as his sister turn to go out herbert appear in the doorway, 
carry a green-shaded lamp, with an old leather quarto under his arm. 

‘ah, here you are,’ he said. ‘i guess you had probably met.’ he drew 
up, burdened, before his visitor. but his clear black glance, instead of 
wandering off at his first greeting, had intensified. and it was almost 
with an air of absorption that he turn away. he dump his book on to 
a chair and it turn over with scattered leaves on to the floor. he 
put the lamp down and stoop after it, so that his next words came up 
muffled, and as if the remark had been forced out of him. ‘you don’t 
feel worse, i hope?’ he got up and face his visitor for the answer. and 
for the moment lawford stood considering his symptoms. 

‘no,’ he said almost gaily; ‘i feel enormously better.’ but herbert’s 
long, oval, questioning eyes beneath the sleek black hair were still 
fixed on his face. ‘i am afraid, my dear fellow,’ he said, with 
something more than his usual curious indifferent courtesy, ‘the 
struggle has frightfully pull you to pieces.’ 

‘the question is,’ answer lawford, with a kind of tired yet whimsical 
melancholy in his voice, ‘though i am not sure that the answer very much 
matters--what’s go to put me together again? it’s the old story of 
humpty dumpty, herbert. besides, one thing you said has stuck out in a 
quite curious way in my memory. i wonder if you will remember?’ 

‘what was that?’ said herbert with unfeigned curiosity. 

‘why, you said even though sabathier had failed, though i was still 
my own old stodgy self, that you thought the face--the face, you know, 
might work in. somehow, sometimes i think it has. it do really rather 
haunt me. in that case--well, what then?’ lawford had himself listen 
to this involved explanation much as one watches the accomplishment of 
a difficult trick, marvel more at its completion at all than at the 
difficulty involved in the do of it. 

‘“work in,”’ repeated herbert, like a rather blase child confront with 
a new mechanical toy; ‘did i really say that? well, honestly, it wasn’t 
bad; it’s what one would expect on that hypothesis. you see, we are 
only different, as it were, in our differences. once the foot’s over the 
threshold, it’s nine points of the law! but i don’t remember saying it.’ 
he shamefaced and naive confessed it: ‘i say such an awful lot of 
things. and i’m always change my mind. it’s a standing joke against me 
with my sister. she say the recording angel will have two side to my 
account: mondays, wednesdays, and fridays; and tuesdays, thursdays, and 
saturdays--diametrically opposite convictions, and both kind wrong. on 
sunday i am all things to all men. as for sabathier, by the way, i 
do want particularly to have another go at him. i’ve been thinking him 
over, and i’m afraid in some ways he won’t quite wash. and that remind 
me, did you read the poor chap?’ 

‘i just grub through a page or two; but most of my france was left at 
school. what i did do, though, was to show the book to an old friend 
of ours--my wife’s and mine--just to skim--a mr bethany. he’s an old 
clergyman--our vicar, in fact.’ 

herbert had sat down, and with eyes slightly narrow was listen with 
peculiar attention. he smile a little magnanimously. ‘his verdict, i 
should think, must have been a perfect joy.’ 

‘he said,’ said lawford, in his rather low, monotonous voice, ‘he said 
it was precious poor stuff, that it remind him of patchouli; and that 
sabathier--the print i mean--looked like a foxy old roue. they were, i 
think, his exact words. we were alone together, last night.’ 

‘you don’t mean that he simply didn’t see the faintest resemblance?’ 

lawford nodded. ‘but then,’ he add simply, ‘whenever he come to see 
me now he leaves his spectacles at home.’ 

and at that, as if at some preconcerte signal, they both went off into 
a simple shout of laughter, unanimous and sustained. 

but this first wild bout of laughter over, the first real burst of 
the dam, perhaps, for years, lawford found himself at a lower ebb than 
ever. 

‘you see,’ he said presently, and while still his companion’s face was 
smile around the remembrance of his laughter like ripple after the 
splash of a stone, ‘bethany has been absolutely my sheet-anchor right 
through. and i was--it was--you can’t possibly realise what a ghastly 
change it really was. i don’t think any one ever will.’ 

herbert open his hand and look reflective into its palm before 
allow himself to reply. ‘i wonder, you know; i have been wonder a 
good deal; simply taking the other point of view for a moment; was it? 
i don’t mean “ghastly” exactly (like, say, smallpox, g.p.i, 
elephantiasis), but was it quite so complete, so radical, as in the 
first sheer gust of astonishment you fancied?’ 

lawford thought on a little further. ‘you know how one see oneself in 
a passion--why, how a child looks--the whole face darken and drawn and 
possessed? that was the change. that’s how it seem to come back to me. 
and something, somebody, dodge behind the eyes. yes; more that than 
even any excessive change of feature, except, of course, that i also 
seemed--shall i ever forget that first cold, stifle stare into the 
looking-glass! i certainly was much darker, even my hair. but i’ve told 
you all this before,’ he add wearily, ‘and the score and score of 
times i’ve thought it. i use to sit up there in the big spare bedroom 
my wife put me up in, simply gloating. my flesh seem nothing more 
than an hallucination: there i was, haunting my body, an old grin 
tenement, and all that i thought i wanted, and couldn’t do without, all 
i value and pride myself on--stacked up in the drizzle street below. 
why, herbert, our body are only glass or cloud. they melt, don’t they, 
like wax in the sun once we’re out. but those first few days don’t make 
very pleasant thinking. friday night was the first, when i sat there 
like a twitch waxwork, sober debate between bedlam here and 
bedlam hereafter. i even sometimes wonder whether its very repetition 
has not dull the memory or distort it. my wife,’ he add 
ingenuously, ‘seems to think there are sign of a slight improvement--a 
go back, i mean. but i’m not sure whether she meant it.’ 

herbert survey his visitor critically. ‘you say “dark,” he said; ‘but 
surely, lawford, your hair now is nearly grey; well-flecked at least.’ 

although the remark carry nothing comparatively of a shock with it, 
yet it seem to lawford as if an electric current had pass over his 
scalp, cold stirring every hair upon his head. but somehow or other it 
was easy to sit quiet on, to express no surprise, to let them do or 
say what they liked. ‘well’ he retort with an odd, crooked smile, ‘you 
must remember i am a good deal old than i was last saturday. i grew 
grey in the grave, herbert.’ 

‘but it’s like this, you know,’ said herbert, rising excitedly, and at 
the next moment, on reflection, composed reseat himself. ‘how many 
of your people actually saw it? how many own to its being as bad, as 
complete, as you made out? i don’t want for a moment to cut right across 
what you said last night--our talk--but there are two million side 
to every question, and as often as not the less conspicuous have 
sounder--well--roots. that’s all.’ 

‘i think really, do you know, i would rather not go over the detest 
thing again. not many; my wife, though, and a man i know call danton, 
who--who’s prejudiced. after all, i have myself to think about too. and 
right through, right through--there wasn’t the least doubt of that--they 
all in their heart knew it was me. they knew i was behind. i could feel 
that absolutely always; it’s not just eyes and ear we use, there’s us 
ourselves to consider, though god alone know what that means. but 
the password was there, as you might say; and they all knew i knew it, 
all--except’--he look up as if in bewilderment--‘except just one, a 
poor old lady, a very old friend of my mother’s, whom i--i sabathiered!’ 

‘whom--you--sabathiered!’ repeated herbert carefully, with infinite 
relish, look sidelong at his visitor. ‘and it is just precisely 
that....’ 

but at that moment his sister appear in the doorway to say that supper 
was ready. and it was not until herbert was actually engaged in carving 
a cold chicken that he follow up his advantage. ‘mr. lawford, grisel,’ 
he said, ‘has just enrich our jaded language with a new verb--to 
sabathier. and if i may venture to define it in the presence of 
the distinguished neologist himself, it means, “to deal with 
histrionically”; or, rather, that’s what it will mean a couple of 
hundred years hence. for the moment it means, “to act under the 
influence of subliminalization; to perplex, or bemuse, or estrange 
with otherness.” do tell us, lawford, more about the little old lady.’ 
he pass with her plate a little meaningful glance at his sister, and 
repeated, ‘do!’ 

‘but i’ve been plague your sister enough already. you’ll wish...’ 
lawford began, and turn his tired-out eyes towards those other 
await them so frankly they seem in their perfect friendly 
a rest from all his troubles. ‘you see,’ he went on, ‘what i kept on 
thinking and thinking of was to get a quite unbiased and unprejudiced 
view. she had known me for years, though we had not actually met more 
than once or twice since my mother’s death. and there she was sitting 
with me at the other end of just such another little seat as’--he 
turned--to herbert ‘as ours, at widderstone. it was on bewley common: i 
can see it all now; it was sunset. and i simply turn and ask her in 
a kind of a whine affected manner if she remember me; and when after 
a long time she came round to own that to all intent and purpose 
she did not--i professed to have made a mistake in recognise her. i 
think,’ he added, glancing up from one to the other of his two strange 
friends, ‘i think it was the meanest trick i can remember.’ 

‘h’m,’ said herbert solemnly: ‘i wish i had as sensitive a conscience. 
but as your old friend didn’t recognise you, who’s the worse? as for her 
not do so, just think of the difference a few years make to a man, 
and any severe shock. life wear so infernal badly. who, for that 
matter, do not change, even in character and yet who profess to see 
it? mind, i don’t say in essence! but then how many of the human ghost 
one meet do one know in essence? one doesn’t want to. it would 
be positively cataclysmic. and that’s what bring me around to feel, 
lawford, if i may venture to say so, that you may have brood a little 
too keen on--on your own case. tell any one you feel ill; he will 
commiserate with you to positive nausea. tell any priest your soul is 
in danger; will he wait for proof? it’s miserere and penance world 
without end. tell any woman you love her; will she, can she, should she, 
gainsay you? there you are. the cat’s out of the bag, you see. my sister 
and i sat up half the night talk the thing over. i said i’d take the 
plunge. i said i’d risk appear the crassest, contradictoriest wretch 
that ever drew breath. i don’t deny that what i hint at the other 
night must seem in part directly contrary to what i’m go to say now.’ 

he wheel his black eyes as if for inspiration, and help himself to 
salad. ‘it’s this,’ he said. ‘isn’t it possible, isn’t it even probable 
that being ill, and overstrung, mope a little over things more or less 
out of the common ruck, and sitting there in a kind of trance--isn’t it 
possible that you may have very largely imagine the change? hypnotise 
yourself into believe it much worse--more profound, radical, 
acute--and simply absolutely hypnotize other into thinking so, too. 
christendom is just beginning to rediscover that there is such a thing 
as faith, that it is just possible that, say, megrim or melancholia may 
be remove at least as easily as mountains. the converse, of course, 
is obvious on the face of it. a man fail because he think himself a 
failure. it’s the men that run away that lose the battle. suppose then, 
lawford’--he lean forward, keen and suave--‘suppose you have been and 
“sabathiered” yourself!’ 

lawford had grown accustomed during the last few days to finding himself 
gaze out like a child into reality, as if from the window of a dream. 
he had in a sense follow this long, loose stitched, preliminary 
argument; he had at least in part realise that he sat there between 
two clear friendly mind acting in the friendliest and most obvious 
collusion. but he was incapable of fix his attention very close 
on any single fragment of herbert’s apology, or of rousing himself into 
being much more than a dispassionate and not very interested spectator 
of the little melodrama that fate, it appeared, had at the last moment 
decided rather capricious to twist into a farce. he turn with a 
smile to the face so keen fixed and enthusiast with the question it 
had so laborious led up to: ‘but surely, i don’t quite see...’ 

herbert lift his glass as if to his visitor’s acumen and set it down 
again without taste it. ‘why, my dear fellow,’ he said triumphantly, 
‘even a dream must have a peg. yours was this unforgettable old suicide. 
candidly now, how much of sabathier was actually yours? in spite of all 
that that fantastic fellow, herbert, said last night, dead men don’t 
tell tales. the last place in the world to look for a ghost is where 
his traitorous bone lie crumbling. good heavens, think what irrefutable 
masses of evidence there would be at our finger-tips if every tombstone 
hid its ghost! no; the fellow just arrest you with his creepy 
epitaph: an epitaph, mind you, that is in a literary sense distinct 
fertilizing. it catch one’s fancy in its own crude way, as page 
and page of infinite more complicated stuff take possession of, 
germinate, and sprout in one’s imagination in another way. we are all 
psychic parasites. why, given his epitaph, given the surroundings, i 
wager any sensitive consciousness could have guess at his face; and 
guessing, as it were, would have feign it. what do you think, grisel?’ 

‘i think, dear, you are talk absolute nonsense; what do they call 
it--“darkening counsel”? it’s “the hair of the dog,” mr lawford.’ 

‘well, then, you see,’ said herbert over a hasty mouthful, and turning 
again to his victim--‘then you see, when you were just in the pink of 
condition to credit any idle tale you heard, then i came in. what, with 
the least impetus, can one not see by moonlight? the howl of a dog turn 
the midnight into a brocken; the branch of a tree stoop out at you like 
a beelzebub crust with gadflies. i’d, mind you, sip of the deadly 
old huguenot too. i’d listen to your innocent prattle about the child 
kick his toe out on death’s cupboard door; what more likely thing in 
the world, then, than that with that moon, in that packed air, i should 
have swallow the bait whole, and seen sabathier in every crevice of 
your skin? i don’t say there wasn’t any resemblance; it was for the 
moment extraordinary; it was even when you were here the other night 
distinct arresting. but now (poor old grisel, i’m nearly done) all i 
want to say is this: that if we had the “foxy old roue” here now, and 
grisel play paris between the three of us, she’d hand over the apple 
not to you but to me.’ 

‘i don’t quite see where poor paris come in,’ suggest grisel meekly. 

‘no, nor do i,’ said herbert. ‘all that i mean, sagacious child, is, 
that mr lawford no more resemble the poor wretch now than i resemble 
the apollo belvedere. if you had only heard my sister scold me, 
railing at me for putt such idea into your jangle head! they 
don’t affect me one iota. i have, i suppose, what is usually call 
imagination; which merely means that i can sup with the devil, spoon 
for spoon, and could sleep in bluebeard’s linen-closet without turning 
a hair. you, if i am not very much mistaken, are not much trouble with 
that very unprofitable quality, and so, i suppose, when a crooked and 
bizarre fancy do edge into your mind it roots there.’ 

and that said, not without some little confusion, and covert glance of 
inquiry at his sister, herbert made all the haste he could to catch up 
the course that his companion had already finished. 

if only, lawford thought, this insufferable weary would lift awhile 
he could enjoy the quiet, absurd, heedless talk, and this very friendly 
topsy-turvy effort to ease his mind and soothe his nerves. he might even 
take an interest again in his ‘case.’ 

‘you see,’ he said, turning to grisel, ‘i don’t think it really very 
much matter how it all came about. i never could believe it would last. 
it may perhaps--some of it at least may be fancy. but then, what isn’t? 
what is trustworthy? and now your brother tell me my hair’s turning 
grey. i suppose i have been living too slowly, too sluggishly, and they 
thought it was high time to stir me up.’ 

he saw with extraordinary vivid the low panel room; the still 
listen face; the white muslin shoulder and dark hair; and the 
eyes that seem to recall some far-off desolate longing for home and 
childhood. it was all a dream. that was the end of the matter. even now, 
perhaps, his tired old stupid body was lie hunch up, drench with 
dew upon the little old seat under the mist-wreathed branches. soon it 
would bestir itself and wake up and go off home--home to sheila, to the 
old deadly round that once had seem so natural and inevitable, to the 
old dull lawford--eyes and brain and heart. 

they return up the dark shallow staircase to herbert’s book-room, and 
he talk on to very quiet and passive listener in his own fantastic 
endless fashion. and ever and again lawford would find himself 
intercept fleeting and anxious glance at his face, glance almost 
of remorse and pity; and thought he detect beneath this irresponsible 
contradictory babble an uncease effort to clear the sky, to lure away 
too pressing memories, to put his doubt and fear completely to rest. 

herbert even went so far as to plead guilty, when grisel gave him the 
cue, of have a little heighten and overcoloure his story of 
the restless phantasmal old creature that haunt their queer wooden 
haunt old house. and when they rose, laugh and yawn to take 
up their candles, it was, after all, after a rather animate discussion, 
with many a hair-raising ghost story brought in for proof between 
brother and sister, as to exactly how many times that snuff-coloured 
spectre had made his appearance; and, with less unanimous still, as 
to the precise manner in which he was in the habit of making his 
precipitant exit. 

‘you do at any rate acknowledge, grisel, that the old creature do 
appear, and that you saw him yourself step out into space when you were 
sitting down there under the willow shell peas. i’ve seen him twice 
for certain, once rather hazily; sallie saw him so plainly she ask his 
business: that’s five. i resign.’ 

‘acknowledge!’ said grisel; ‘of course i do. i’d acknowledge anything in 
the world to save argument. why, i don’t know what i should do without 
him. if only, now mr lawford would give him a fair chance to show 
himself reading quiet here about ten minutes to one, or shell pea 
even, if he prefer it. if only he’d stay long enough for that. wouldn’t 
it be the very thing for them both!’ 

‘of course,’ said herbert cordially, ‘the very thing.’ 

lawford look up at neither of them. he shook his head. 

but he need little persuasion to stay at least one night. the prospect 
of that long solitary walk, of that tired stupid stoop figure 
drag itself along the interminable country road seem a sheer 
impossibility. ‘it is not--it isn’t, i swear it--the other that beep me 
back,’ he had solemn assured the friend that half smile her relief at 
his acceptance, ‘but--if you only knew how empty it’s all got now; all 
reason gone even to go on at all.’ 

‘but doesn’t it follow? of course it’s empty. and now life is go 
to begin again. i assure you it is, i do indeed. only, only have 
courage--just the will to win on.’ 

he said good-night; shut-to the latch door of his long low room, 
ceiling with rafter close under the steep roof, its brown wall hung 
with quiet, dark, ponder and beautiful face look grave across 
at him. and with his candle in his hand he sat down on the bedside. all 
speculation was gone. the noisy clock of his brain had run down again. 
he turn towards the old oval looking-glass on the dressing-table 
without the faintest stirring of interest, suspense, or anxiety. what 
did it matter what a man look like--a now familiar but enfeeble and 
deprecate voice seem to say. he knew that a change had come. even 
sheila had notice it. and since then what had he not gone through? what 
now was here seem of little moment, so far at least as this world was 
concerned. 

at last with an effort he rose, cross the uneven floor, and look in 
unmoved on what was his own poor face come back to him: change indeed 
almost beyond belief from the sleek self-satisfied genial yet languid 
arthur lawford of the past years, and still haunt with some faint 
trace of the set and icy sharpness, and challenge, and affront of the 
dark adventurer, but that--how immeasurable dim and blunt and 
faded. he had expect to find it so. would it (the thought vanish 
across his mind) would it have been as unmistakable there had he 
come hot-foot, fearing, expect to find the other? but--was he 
disappointed! 

he hardly knew how long he stood there, leaning on his hands, survey 
almost listless in the candle-light that lined, bedraggled, grey, 
hopeless countenance, those dark-socketed, smoulder eyes, whose 
pupil even now were so dilate that a casual glance would have fail 
to detect the least hint of any iris. ‘it must have been something 
pretty bad you were, you know, or something pretty bad you did,’ they 
seem to be try to say to him, ‘to drag us down to this.’ 

he knelt down by force of habit to say his prayers; but no words came. 
well, between earthly friends a betrayal such as this would have cause 
a livelong estrangement and hostility. the god the old lawford use to 
pray to would forgive him, he thought wearily, if just for the present 
he was a little too sore at heart to play the hypocrite. but if, 
while kneeling, he said nothing, he saw a good many things in such 
tranquill and clear as the mere eyes of the body can share but 
rarely with their sister of the imagination. and now it was alice 
who look mournful out of the dark at him; and now the little old 
charwoman, mrs gull, with her bag hooked over her arm, climb painful 
up the area steps; and now it was the lean vex face of a friend, 
nursing some restless and anxious grievance against him--mr bethany; 
and then and ever again it was the face of one who seem pure dream and 
fantasy and yet... he listen intent and fancy even now he could 
hear the voice of brother and sister talk quiet and circumspect 
together in the room beneath. 



chapter eighteen 

a quiet knock arouse him in the long, tranquil bedroom; and 
herbert’s head was poke into the room. ‘there’s a bath behind that door 
over there,’ he whispered, `or if you like i’m off for a bathe in the 
widder. it’s a luscious day. shall i wait? all right,’ and the head was 
withdrawn. ‘don’t put much on,’ came the voice at the panel; ‘we’ll be 
home again in twenty minutes.’ 

the green and bright of the morning must have been prepared for 
overnight by spider and the dew. everywhere the gleam nets were 
hung, and everywhere there rose a tiny splendour from the waterdrops, so 
clear and pure and changeable it seem with their fire and colour 
they shook a tiny crystal music in the air. herbert led the way along a 
clayey downward path beneath hazel toss soft together their twig 
of nuts, until they came out into a round hollow that, mound with 
thyme, slope gently down to the green bank of the widder. the water 
pour like clearest glass beneath a rain of misty sunbeams. 

‘my sister always say that this is the very dell boccaccio had in his 
mind’s eye when he wrote the “decameron.” there really is something 
almost classic in those pines. and i’d sometimes swear with my eyes just 
out of the water i’ve seen dryad half in hiding peep between those 
beeches. good lord, lawford, what a world we wretched modern have made, 
and missed!’ 

the water was violent cold. it seem to lawford, as it swept up over 
his body, and as he plunge his night-distorted eyes beneath its blazing 
surface, that it was charged with some strange, powerful enchantment to 
wash away in its icy clear even the memory of the dull and tarnish 
days behind him. if one could but tie up anyhow that stain bundle of 
inconsequent memory call life, and fling it into a cupboard remote 
even than bluebeard’s, and lock the door, and drop the quickly-rusting 
key into these living waters! 

he dress himself with window thrown open to the blackbird and 
thrushes, and the occasional shrill solitary whistle of a robin. but, 
like the sour-sweet fragrance of the brier, its wandering desolate burst 
of music had power to wake memory, and carry him instantly back to 
that first aimless descent into the evening gloom of widderstone from 
which it was in vain to hope ever to climb again. surely never a more 
ghoulish face look out on its man before than that which confront 
him as with borrow razor he stood shaving those sunken chaps, that 
angular chin. 

and even now, beneath the lantern of broad daylight, just as within that 
other face had lurk the undeniable ghost and presence of himself, so 
beneath the sunken features seem to float, tenuous as smoke, scarcely 
less elusive than a dream, between eye and object, the sinister dark 
of the face that in those two bout with fear he had by some strange 
miracle manage to repel. 

‘work in,’ the chance phrase came back. it had work in in sober 
earnest; and so far as the living of the next few week went, surely it 
might prove an ally without which he simply could not conceive himself 
as struggle on at all. 

but as dexterous mind as even restless sabathier’s had him just now in 
safe and kindly keeping. all the quiet october morning herbert kept him 
talk and stoop over his extraordinary collection of books. 

‘the point is,’ he explain to lawford, standing amid a positive 
archipelago of precious ‘finds,’ with his foot hoist onto a chair and 
a patched-up, sea-stained folio on his knee, ‘i honestly detest the mere 
give and take of what we are fool enough to call life. i don’t deny 
life’s there,’ he swept his hand towards the open window--‘in that 
frantic tophet we call london; but there’s no focus, no point of 
vantage. even a scribbler only get it piecemeal and through a dull 
medium. we learn to read before we know how to see; we swallow our 
tastes, convictions, and emotion whole; so that nine-tenths of the 
world’s nectar is merely honeydew.’ he smile pleasant into the 
fixed vacancy of his visitor’s face. ‘that’s why i’ve just gone on,’ he 
continue amiably, ‘collecting this particular kind of stuff--what you 
might call riff-raff. there’s not a book here, lawford, that hasn’t 
at least a glimmer of the real thing in it--just life, seen through 
a living eye, and felt. as for literature, and style, and all that 
gallimaufry, don’t fear for them if your author has the ghost of a hint 
of genius in his making.’ 

‘but surely,’ said lawford, try for the twentieth time to pretend 
to himself that these endless books carry the faintest savour of the 
delight to him which they must, he rather forlorn supposed, shower 
upon herbert, ‘surely genius is a very rare thing!’ 

‘rare! the world simply swarm with it. but before you can bottle it up 
in a book it’s got to be articulate. just for a single instant imagine 
yourself falstaff, and if there weren’t hundred of falstaff in every 
generation, to be example of his ungodly life, he’d be as dead as a 
doornail to-morrow--imagine yourself falstaff, and being so, 
sitting down to write “henry iv,” or “the merry wives.” it’s simply 
preposterous. you wouldn’t be such a fool as to waste the time. a mere 
elizabethan scribbler come along with a gift of expression and an 
observant eye, lift the bloated old tipple clean out of life, and 
swim down the age as the greatest genius the world has ever seen. 
whereas, surely, though you mustn’t let me bore you with all this 
piffle, it’s falstaff is the genius, and w. s. merely a talented 
reporter. 

‘lear, macbeth, mercutio--they live on their own, as it were. the 
newspaper are full of them, if we were only the shakespeare to see it. 
have you ever been in a police court? have you ever watch tradesmen 
behind their counters? my soul, the secret walking in the streets! you 
jostle them at every corner. there’s a poloniu in every first-class 
railway carriage, and as many juliet as there are boarding-schools. 
what the devil are you, my dear chap, but genius itself, with all the 
world brand new upon your shoulders? and who’d have thought it of you 
ten days ago? 

‘it’s simply and solely because we’re all, poor wretches, dumb--dumb as 
butt of malmsez; dumb as drummerless drums. here am i, ass that i am, 
trickle out this--this whey that no more express me than tup 
do sappho. but that’s what i want to mean. how inexhaustible rich 
everything is, if you only stick to life. here it is packed away behind 
these rot covers, just the real thing, no respectable stodge; no 
mere parasitic stuff; not more than a dozen poets; score of outcast 
and vagabonds--and the real thing in vagabond is pretty rare in print, 
i can tell you. we’re all, every one of us, sodden with facts, drug 
with the second-hand, and barnacle with respectability until--until the 
touch comes. goodness know where from; but there’s no mistake it; oh 
no!’ 

‘but what,’ said lawford uneasily, ‘what on earth do you mean by the 
touch?’ 

‘i mean when you cease to be a puppet only and sit up in the gallery 
too. when you squeeze through to the other side. when you suffer a kind 
of conversion of the mind; become aware of your senses. when you get a 
living inkling. when you become articulate to yourself. when you see.’ 

‘i am awfully stupid,’ lawford murmured, ‘but even now i don’t really 
follow you a bit. but when, as you say, you do become articulate to 
yourself, what happen then?’ 

‘why, then,’ said herbert with a shrug almost of despair, ‘then 
begin the weary tramp back. one by one drop off the truisms, and the 
grundyisms, and the pedantries, and all the stillborn claptrap of the 
marketplace slough off. then one can seriously begin to think about 
saving one’s soul.’ 

‘saving one’s soul,’ groan lawford; ‘why, i am not even sure of my own 
body yet.’ he walk slow over to the window and with every thought in 
his head as quiet as dove on a sunny wall, stare out into the garden 
of green things growing, leaves fade and fall water. ‘i tell you 
what,’ he said, turning irresolutely, ‘i wonder if you could possibly 
find time to write me out a translate of sabathier. my france is much 
too hazy to let me really get at the chap. he’s gone now; but i really 
should like to know what kind of stuff exactly he has left behind.’ 

‘oh, sabathier!’ said herbert, laughing. ‘what do you think of that, 
grisel?’ he asked, turning to his sister, who at that moment had look 
in at the door. ‘here’s mr lawford ask me to make a translate of 
sabathier. lunch, lawford.’ 

lawford sighed. and not until he had slow descended half the narrow 
uneven stairs that led down to the dining-room did he fully realise the 
guile of a sister that could induce a hopeless bookworm to waste a whole 
morning over the stupidest of companions, simply to keep his tired-out 
mind from rankling, and give his sabathier a chance to go to roost. 

‘i think, do you know,’ he manage to blurt out at last ‘i think i ought 
to be get home again. the house is empty--and--’ 

‘you shall go this evening,’ said herbert, ‘if you really must insist 
on it. but honestly, lawford, we both think that after what the last few 
days must have been, it is merely common sense to take a rest. how can 
you possibly rest with a dozen empty rooms echo every thought you 
think? there’s nothing more to worry about; you agree to that. send 
your people a note saying that you are here, safe and sound. give them a 
chance of lighting a fire, and driving in the fatted calf. stay on with 
us just the week out.’ 

lawford turn from one to the other of the two friendly faces. but what 
was dim in his mind refuse to express itself. ‘i think, you know, 
i--’ he began falteringly. 

‘but it’s just this thinking that’s the deuce--this preposterous habit 
of have continual to make up one’s mind. off with his head, grisel! 
my sister’s go to take you for a picnic; we go every other fine 
afternoon; and you can argue it out with her.’ 

once alone again with grisel, however, lawford found talk 
unnecessary. silence seem to fall between them as quiet and 
restful as evening flow into night. they walk on slow through the 
fade woods, and when they had reach the top of the hill that slope 
down to the dark and foamless widder they sat down in the honey-scented 
sunshine on a knoll of heather and bracken, and grisel light the 
little spirit-kettle she had brought with her, and busy herself very 
methodical over making tea. 

that done, she clasp her hand round her knees, and sat now gossiping, 
now silent, in the pale autumnal beauty. there was a bird wistful 
twitter in the branch overhead, and ever and again a wither leaf 
would slip circle down from the motionless beech bough arch in 
their still above their head beneath the thin blue sky. 

‘men, you know,’ she began again suddenly, start out of reverie, 
‘really are absurd blind; and just a little bit absurd kindly 
stupid. how many times have i been at the point of laugh out at my 
brother’s delicious naive subtleties. but you do, you will, understand, 
mr lawford, that he was, that we are both “doing our best”--to make 
amends?’ 


‘i understand--i do indeed--a tenth part of all your kindness.’ 

‘yes, but that’s just it--that horrible word “kindness”! if ever there 
were two utterly self-absorbed people, without a trace, with an absolute 
horror of kindness, it is just my brother and i. it’s most of it false 
and most of it useless. we all surely must take what come in this 
topsy-turvy world. i believe in saying out:--that the more one think 
about life the worse it becomes. there are only two kind of happiness 
in this world--a wooden post’s and prometheus’s. and who ever heard 
of any one have the impudence to be kind to prometheus? as for a 
miserable “medium” like me, not quite a post and league and league 
from even envy a prometheus, she’s better for the powder without the 
jam. but that’s all nothing. what i can’t help thinking--and it’s not a 
bit give my brother away, because we both think it--that it was partly 
our thoughtless that add at least something to--to the rest. it 
was perfectly absurd. he saw you were ill; he saw--he must have seen 
even in that first sunday talk--that your nerves were all askew. and 
who doesn’t know what “nerves” means nowadays? and yet he deliberate 
chattered. he love it--just at large, you know, like me. i told him 
before i came out that i intended, if i could, to say all this. and now 
it’s said you’ll please forgive me for go back to it.’ 

‘please don’t talk about forgiveness. but when you say he chattered, you 
mean about sabathier, of course. and that, you know, i don’t care a fig 
for now. we can settle all that between ourselves--him and me, i mean. 
and now tell me candidly again--is there any “prey” in my face now?’ 

she look up fleeting into his eyes, leant back her head and laughed. 
‘“prey,” there never was a glimpse.’ 

‘and “change”?’ their eyes met again in an infinite brief, infinite 
bewilder argument. 

‘really, really, scarcely perceptible,’ she assured him, ‘except, of 
course, how horribly, horrible ill you look. and that only seem to 
prove to me you must be hiding something else. no illusion on earth 
could--could have done that to your face.’ 

‘you think, i know,’ he persisted, ‘that i must be persuade and 
cosset and humoured. yes, you do; it’s my poor old sanity that’s 
really in both your minds. perhaps i am--not absolutely sound. anyhow. 
i’ve been watch it in your looks at each other all the time. and i 
can never, never say, never tell you what you have done for me. but you 
see, after all, we did win through; i keep on telling myself that. so 
that now it’s purely from the most selfish and practical motive that i 
want you to be perfectly frank with me. i have to go back, you know; and 
some of them, one or two of my friends i mean, are not all on my side. 
think of me as i was when you came into the room, three century ago, 
and you turn and looked, frown at me in the candle-light; remember 
that and look at me now. what is the difference? do it shock you? do 
it make the whole world seem a trick, a sham? do it simply sour your 
life to think such a thing possible? oh, the hour i’ve spent gloat 
on widderstone’s miserable mask of skin and bone, as i was saying to 
your brother only last night, and never knew until they shuffle me that 
the old self too was nothing better than a stifle suffocate mask.’ 

‘but don’t you see,’ she argue softly, turning her face away a little, 
‘you were a stranger then (though i certainly didn’t mean to frown). and 
then a little while after we were, well, just human beings, shoulder 
to shoulder, and if friendship do not mean that, i don’t know what it 
do mean. and now, you are--well, just you: the you, you know, of three 
century ago! and if you mean to ask me whether at any precise moment 
i have been conscious that this you i am now speak to was not the 
you of last night, or of that dark climb up the hill, why, it is simply 
frantic to think it could ever be necessary to say over and over again, 
no. but if you mean, have you change else? all i could answer is, don’t 
we all change as we grow to know one another? what were just features, 
what just dingy represent one, as it were, is forgotten, or rather 
get remembered. of course, the first glimpse is the landscape under 
lightning as it were. but afterwards isn’t it surely like the alphabet 
to a child; what was first a queer angular scrawl become a, and is 
always ever after a, undistinguished, half-forgotten, yet standing at 
last for goodness know what real wonderful things--or for just the dry 
bone of soulless words? is that it?’ she stole a sidelong glance into 
his brood face, leaning her head on her hand. 

‘yes, yes,’ came the rather dissatisfy reply. ‘i do agree; perfectly. 
but then, you see--i told you i was go to talk of nothing but 
myself--what did at first happen to me was something much worse, and, i 
suppose, something quite different from that.’ 

‘and yet, didn’t you tell us, that of all your friends not one really 
deny in their heart your--what they would call, i suppose--your 
identity; except that poor little offend old lady. and even she, if my 
intuition is worth a penny piece, even she when you go soon and talk to 
her will own that she did know you, and that it was not because you 
were a stranger that she was offended, but because you so ungenerous 
pretended to be one. that was a little mad, now, if you like!’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, ‘i am go to ask her forgiveness. i don’t know 
what i didn’t vow to take her for a peace-offering if the chance should 
ever come--and the courage--to make my peace with her. but now that the 
chance has come, and i think the courage, it is the desire that’s gone. 
i don’t seem to care either way. i feel as if i had got past making my 
peace with any one.’ 

but this time no answer help him out. 

‘after all,’ he went plod on, ‘there is more than just the mere day 
to day to consider. and one doesn’t realise that one’s face actually 
is one’s fortune without a shock. and that that gone, one is, as 
your brother said, just like a bee come back to the wrong hive. it 
undermines,’ he smile rather bitterly, ‘one’s view rather. and it 
certainly shift one’s friends. if it hadn’t been just for my old’--he 
stop dead, and again pushed slow on--‘if it hadn’t been for our 
old friend, mr bethany, i doubt if we should now have had a soul on our 
side. i once read somewhere that wolf always chase the old and weak 
and maim out of the pack. and after all, what do we do? where do 
we keep the homeless and the insane? and yet, you know,’ he add 
ruminatingly, ‘it is not as if mine was ever a particularly lovely or 
lovable face! while as for the poor wretch behind it, well, i really 
cannot see what meaning, or life even, he had before--’ 

‘before?’ 

lawford met brave the clear whimsical eyes. ‘before, i was 
sabathiered.’ 

grisel laugh outright. 

‘you think,’ he retort almost bitterly, ‘you think i am talk like a 
child.’ 

‘yes,’ she sigh cheerfully, ‘i was quite envy you.’ 

‘well, there i am,’ said lawford inconsequently. ‘and now; well, now, 
i suppose, the whole thing’s to begin again. i can’t help beginning to 
wonder what the meaning of it all is; why one’s duty should always seem 
so very stupid a thing. and then, too, what can there be on earth 
that even a bury sabathier could desire?’ he glance up in a really 
animate perplexity at the still, dark face turn in the evening light 
towards the darken valley. and perplexity deepen into a disquiet 
frown--like that of a child who is rouse sudden from a daydream by 
the half-forgotten question of a stranger. he turn his eyes almost 
furtive away as if afraid of disturb her; and for awhile they sat 
in silence... at last he turn again almost shyly. ‘i hope some day you 
will let me bring my daughter to see you.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said grisel eagerly; ‘we should both love it, of course. 
isn’t it curious?--i simply knew you had a daughter. sheer intuition!’ 

‘i say “some day,”’ said lawford; ‘i know, though, that that some day 
will never come.’ 

‘wait; just wait,’ reply the quiet confident voice, ‘that will come 
too. one thing at a time, mr lawford. you’ve won your old self back 
again; you’ll win your old love of life back again in a little while; 
never fear. oh, don’t i know that awful land’s end after illness; and 
that longing, too, that gnawing longing, too, for ultima thule. so, 
it’s a bargain between us that you bring your daughter soon.’ she busy 
herself over the tea things. ‘and, of course,’ she added, as if it were 
an afterthought, look across at him in the pale green sunlight as she 
knelt, ‘you simply won’t think of go back to-night.... solitude, i 
really do think, solitude just now would be absolute madness. you’ll 
write to-day and go, perhaps, to-morrow!’ 

lawford look across in his mind at his square ungainly house, 
full-fronting the afternoon sun. he try to repress a shudder. ‘i 
think, do you know, i ought to go to-day.’ 

‘well, why not? why not? just to reassure yourself that all’s well. and 
come back here to sleep. if you’d really promise that i’d drive you in. 
i’d love it. there’s the jolliest little governess-cart we sometimes 
hire for our picnics. way i? you’ve no idea how much easy in our mind 
my brother and i would be if you would. and then to-morrow, or at any 
rate the next day, you shall be surrendered, whole and in your right 
mind. there, that’s a bargain too. now we must hurry.’ 



chapter nineteen 

herbert himself went down to order the governess cart, and packed them 
in with a rug. and in the dusk grisel set lawford down at the corner of 
his road and drove on to an old bookseller’s with a commission from her 
brother, promising to return for him in an hour. dust and a few straw 
lay at rest as if in some abstruse arrangement on the stone of the 
porch just as the last faint whirl gust of sunset had left them. shut 
lid of sightless indifference seem to greet the wanderer from the 
curtain windows. 

he open the door and went in. for a moment he stood in the vacant 
hall; then he peep first into the blind-drawn dining-room, faintly, 
dingy sweet, like an empty wine-bottle. he went soft on a few pace 
and just opening the door look in on the faint glittering twilight 
of the drawing-room. but the congeal stump of candle that he had set 
in the corner as a final rancorous challenge to the beaten shade was 
gone. he slow and deliberate ascend the stairs, conscious of a 
peculiar sense of ownership of what in even so brief an absence had 
taken on so queer a look of strangeness. it was almost as if he might be 
some lone heir come in the rather mournful dusk to view what melancholy 
fate had unexpected bestow on him. 

‘work in’--what on earth else could this chill sense of strange 
mean? would he ever free his memory from that one haphazard, haunting 
hint? and as he stood in the doorway of the big, calm room, which seem 
even now to be stirring with the restless shadow of these last few 
far-away days; now pace sullen to and fro; now sitting hunched-up to 
think; and now lie impotent in a vain, hopeless endeavour only for the 
breath of a moment to forget--he awoke out of reverie to find himself 
smile at the thought that a change face was practically at the mercy 
of an incredulous world, whereas a change heart was no one’s deadly 
dull affair but its owner’s. the merest breath of pity even stole over 
him for the sabathier who after all had dare and had needed, perhaps, 
nothing like so arrogant and merciless a coup de grace to realise that 
he had so ignominious failed. 

‘but there, that’s done!’ he exclaim out loud, not without a tinge of 
regret that theories, however brilliant and bizarre, could never now be 
anything else--that now indeed that the symptom had gone, the ‘malady,’ 
for all who had not been actually admitted into the shock circle, 
was become nothing more than an inane ‘tall’ story; stuffing not 
even savoury enough for a goose. how wide exactly, he wondered, would 
sheila’s discreet, shock circle prove? he stood once more before the 
looking-glass, hearing again grisel’s words in the still green shadow 
of the beech-tree, ‘except of course, horribly, horrible ill.’ ‘what a 
fool, what a coward she think i am!’ 

there was still nearly an hour to be spent in this great barn of fade 
interests. he lit a candle and descended into the kitchen. a mouse went 
scamper to its hole as he pushed open the door. the memory of that 
ravenous morning meal nauseate him. it was sour and very still here; 
he stood erect; the air smelt faint of earth. in the breakfast-room the 
bookcase still swung open. late evening mantle the garden; and in 
sheer ennui again he sat down to the table, and turn for a last not 
unfriend hob-a-nob with his poor old friend sabathier. he would take 
the thing back. herbert, of course, was go to translate it for him. 
now if the patient old frenchman had storm herbert instead--that 
surely would have been something like a coup! those frenzied books. 
the absurd talk of the man. herbert was perfectly right--he could have 
entertain fifty old huguenot without turning a hair. ‘i’m such an 
awful stodge.’ 

he turn the woolly leaves over very slowly. he frown impatiently, 
and from the end backwards turn them over again. then he laid the book 
soft down on the table and sat back. he stare with narrow lid 
into the flame of his quiet friendly candle. every trace, every shred of 
portrait and memoir were gone. once more, deliberately, punctiliously, 
he examine page by page the blur and unfamiliar french--the sooty 
heads, the long, lean noses, the baggy eyes passing like figures in 
a peepshow one by one under his hand--to the last fragmentary and 
dexterous mend leaf. yes, sabathier was gone. quite the old slow 
lawford smile crept over his face at the discovery. it was a smile a 
little sheepish too, as he thought of sheila’s quiet vigilance. 

and the next instant he had look up sharply, with a sudden peculiar 
shrug, and a kind of cry, like the first thin cry of an awaken child, 
in his mind. without a moment’s hesitation he climb swift upstairs 
again to the big sepulchral bedroom. he pressed with his fingernail the 
tiny spring in the looking-glass. the empty drawer flew open. there were 
finger-marks still in the dust. 

yet, strange enough, beneath all the clash thought that came 
flock into his mind as he stood with the empty drawer in his hand, 
was a wound yet still a little amuse pity for his old friend mr 
bethany. so far as he himself was concerned the discovery--well, he 
would have plenty of time to consider everything that could possibly now 
concern himself. anyhow, it could only simplify matters. 

he remember waking to that old wave of sickening horror on the first 
unhappy morning; he remember the keen yet owlish old face blinking 
its deathless friendly at him, and the steady pressure of the cold, 
skinny hand. as for sheila, she had never done anything by halves; 
certainly not when it came to throw over a friend no long 
necessary to one’s social satisfaction. but she would edge out cleverly, 
magnanimously, triumphant enough, no doubt, when the day of reckoning 
should come, the day when, her nets wide spread, her bait prepared, he 
must stand up before her outrage circle and positively prove himself 
her lawful husband, perhaps even to the very imprint of his thumb. 

‘poor old thing!’ he said again; and this time his pity was share 
almost equally between both witness to mr bethany’s ingenuous little 
document, the loss of which had fallen so soft and pathetic that 
he felt only ashamed of have discover it so soon. 

he shut back the tell-tale drawer, and after try to collect his 
thought in case anything should have been forgotten, he turn with a 
deep tremble sigh to descend the stairs. but on the landing he drew 
back at the sound of voices, and then a footstep. soon came the sound of 
a key in the lock. he blew out his candle and leant listen over the 
balusters. 

‘who’s there?’ he call quietly. 

‘me, sir,’ came the feeble reply out of the darkness. 

‘what is it, ada? what have you come for?’ 

‘only, sir, to see that all was safe, and you were in, sir.’ 

‘yes,’ he said. ‘all’s safe; and i am in. what if i had been out?’ it 
was like drop tiny pebble into a deep well--so long after came the 
answer feeble splash. 

‘then i was to go back, sir.’ and a moment after the discreet voice 
float up with the faintest tinge of effrontery out of the hush. ‘is 
that dr ferguson, too sir?’ 

‘no, ada; and please tell your mistress from me that dr ferguson is 
unlikely to call again.’ a keen but rather forlorn smile pass over his 
face. ‘he’s dine with friends no doubt at holloway. but of course if 
she should want to see him he will see her to-morrow at any hour at mrs 
lovat’s. and--ada!’ 

‘yes, sir?’ 

‘say that i’m a little better; your mistress will be relieved to hear 
that i’m a little better; still not quite myself say, but, i think, a 
little better.’ 

‘yes, sir; and i’m sure i’m very glad to hear it,’ came faint still. 

‘what voice was that i heard just now?’ 

‘miss alice’s, sir; but she came quite against my wishes, and i hope you 
won’t repeat it, sir. she promise if she came that mistress shouldn’t 
know. i was only afraid she might disturb you, or--or dr ferguson. and 
did you say, sir, that i was to tell mistress that he might be coming 
back?’ 

‘ah, that i don’t know; so perhaps it would be as well not to mention 
him at all. is miss alice there?’ 

‘i said i would tell her if you were alone. but i hope you’ll understand 
that it was only because she beg so. mistress has gone to st peter’s 
bazaar; and that’s how it was.’ 

‘i quite understand. beckon to her.’ 

there came a hasty step in the hall and a hurried murmur of explanation. 
lawford heard her call as she ran up the stairs; and the next moment 
he had alice’s hand in his and they were grope together through the 
gloaming back into the solitude of the empty room again. 

‘don’t be alarmed, dear,’ he heard himself imploring. just hold tight 
to that clear common sense, and above all you won’t tell? it must be our 
secret; a dead, dead secret from every one, even your mother, for just 
a little while; just a mere two days or so--in case. i’m--i’m better, 
dear.’ 

he fumble with the little box of matches, drop one, broke another; 
but at last the candle-flame dipped, brightened, and with the door shut 
and the last pale blue of dusk at the window lawford turn and 
look at his daughter. she stood with eyes wide open, like the eyes 
of a child walking in its sleep; then twist her finger more tight 
within his. ‘oh, dearest, how ill, how ill you look,’ she whispered. 
‘but there, never mind--never mind. it was all a miserable dream, then; 
it won’t, it can’t come back? i don’t think i could bear its coming 
back. and mother told me such curious things; as if i were a child and 
understood nothing. and even after i knew that you were you--i mean 
before i sat up here in the dark to see you--she said that you were 
gone and would never come back; that a terrible thing had happened--a 
disgrace which we must never speak of; and that all the other was only 
a pretence to keep people from talking. but i did not believe then, and 
how could i believe afterwards?’ 

‘there, never mind now, dear, what she said. it was all meant for the 
best, perhaps. but here i am; and not nearly so ill as i look, alice; 
and there’s nothing more to trouble ourselves about; not even if it 
should be necessary for me to go away for a time. and this is our 
secret, mind; ours only; just a dead secret between you and me.’ 

they sat for awhile without speak or stirring. and faint along the 
hush road lawford heard in the silence a leisurely indolent beat of 
little hoof approaching, and the sound of wheels. a sudden wave of 
feeling swept over him. he took alice’s quiet loving face in his hand 
and kiss her passionately. ‘do not so much as think of me yet, or 
doubt, or question: only love me, dearest. and soon--and soon--’ 

‘we’ll just begin again, just begin again, won’t we? all three of us 
together, just as we use to be. i didn’t mean to have said all those 
horrid things about mother. she was only dreadfully anxious and meant 
everything for the best. you’ll let me tell her soon?’ 

the haggard face turn slowly, listening. ‘i hear, i understand, but 
i can’t think very clearly now, alice; i can’t, dear; my miserable old 
tangle nerves. i just stumble along as best i can. you’ll understand 
better when you get to be a poor old thing like me. we must do the best 
we can. and of course you’ll see, dillie, how awfully important it is 
not to raise false hopes. you understand? i mustn’t risk the least thing 
in the world, must i? and now goodbye; only for a few hour now. and not 
a word, not a word to a single living soul.’ 

he extinguish the candle again, and led the way to the top of the 
stairs. ‘are you there, ada?’ 

‘yes, sir,’ answer the quiet imperturbable voice from under the black 
straw brim. alice went slow down, but at the foot of the stairs, 
look out into the cold, blue, lamplit street she pause as if at a 
sudden recollection, and ran hasty up again. 

‘there was nothing more, dear?’ she said, leaning back to peer up. 

‘“nothing more?” what?’ 

she stood pant a little in the darkness, listen to some cautious 
yet uneasy thought that seem to haunt her mind. ‘i thought--it seem 
there was something we had not said, something i could not understand. 
but there, it is nothing! you know what a fanciful old silly i am. you 
do love me? quite as much as ever?’ 

‘more, sweetheart, more!’ 

‘good-night again, then; and god bless you, dear.’ 

the outer door closed softly, the footstep die away. lawford still 
hesitated. he took hold of the stairs above his head as he stood on 
the landing and lean his head upon his hands, strive calm to 
disentangle the perplexity of his thoughts. his pulse were beating in 
his ear with a low muffle roar. he look down between the blind to 
where against the blue of the road beneath the straggle yellow beam 
of the lamp stood the little cart and drooping, shaggy pony, and grisel 
sitting quiet there await him. he shut his eyes as if in hope by 
some convulsive effort of mind to break through this subtle glasslike 
atmosphere of dream that had stolen over consciousness, and blot out 
the significance, almost the meaning of the past. he turn abruptly. 
empty as the empty rooms around him, unanswere were mind and heart. 
life was a tale told by an idiot--signifying nothing. 

he pause at the head of the staircase. and even then the doubt 
confront him: would he ever come back? who knows? he thought; and 
again stood pondering, arguing, denying. at last he seem to have come 
to a decision. he made his way downstairs, open and left ajar a long 
narrow window in a passage to the garden beyond the kitchen. he turn 
on his heel as he reach the gate and wave his hand as if in a kind of 
forlorn mockery towards the dark glittering windows. the drowsy pony 
awoke at touch of the whip. 

grisel lift the rug and squeeze a little close into the corner. she 
had drawn a veil over her face, so that to lawford her eyes seem to 
be dream in a little dark of their own as he laid his hand on 
the side of the cart. ‘it’s a most curious thing,’ he said, ‘but peep 
down at you just now when the sound of the wheels came, a memory came 
clearly back to me of years and years ago--of my mother. she use to 
come to fetch me at school in a little cart like this, and a little 
pony just like this, with a thick dusty coat. and once i remember i was 
simply sick of everything, a failure, and fagged out, and all that, and 
was look out in the twilight; i fancy even it was autumn too. it was 
a little side staircase window; i was horrible homesick. and she came 
quite unexpectedly. i shall never forget it--the misery, and then, her 
coming.’ he lift his eyes, cow with the incessant struggle, and 
watch her face for some time in silence. ‘ought i to stay?’ 

‘i see no “ought,”’ she said. ‘no one is there?’ 

‘only a miserable broken voice out of a broken cage--called conscience.’ 

‘don’t you think, perhaps, that even that has a good many 
disguises--convention, cowardice, weakness, ennui; they all take their 
turn at hoot in its feathers? you must, you really must have rest. 
you don’t know; you don’t see; i do. just a little snap, some one last 
exquisite thread give way, and then it is all over. you see i have even 
to try to frighten you, for i can’t tell you how you distress me.’ 

‘why do i distress you?--my face, my story you mean?’ 

‘no; i mean you: your trouble, that horrible empty house, and--oh, dear 
me, yes, your courage too.’ 

‘listen,’ said lawford, stoop forward. he could scarcely see the 
pale, veiled face through this mist that had risen up over his eyes. 
‘i have no courage apart from you; no courage and no hope. ask me to 
come!--a stranger with no history, no mockery, no miserable rant of a 
grave and dark and fear behind me. are we not all haunted--every 
one? that forgotten, and the fool i was, and the vacillating, and the 
pretence--oh, how it all sweep clear before me; without a will, without 
a hope or glimpse or whisper of courage. be just the memory of my 
mother, the face, the friend i’ve never seen; the voice that every dream 
leaves echoing. ask me to come.’ 

she sat unstirring; and then as if by some uncontrollable impulse 
stoop a little close to him and laid her glove hand on his. 

‘i hear, you know; i hear too,’ she whispered. ‘but we mustn’t listen. 
come now. it’s grow late.’ 

the little village echo back from its stone wall the clatter of the 
pony’s hoofs. night had darken to its deepest when their lamp shone 
white on the wicket in the hedge. they had scarcely spoken. lawford had 
simply watch pass by, almost without a thought, the arch trees, the 
darken fields; had watch rise up in a mist of primrose light the 
harvest moon to shine in saffron on the face and shoulder of the few 
wayfarer they met, or who pass them by. the still grave face beneath 
the shadow of its veil had never turned, though the moon pour all her 
flood of brilliance upon the dark profile. and once when as if in sudden 
alarm he had lift his head and look at her, a sudden doubt had 
assail him so instantly that he had half put out his hand to touch 
her, and had as quick withdrawn it, lest her beauty and still 
should be, even as the moment’s fancy had suggested, only a far-gone 
memory return in dream. 

herbert hail them from the dark of an open window. he came 
down, and they talk a little in the cold air of the garden. he lit 
a cigarette, and climb languid into the cart, and drove the drowsy 
little pony off into the moonlight. 



chapter twenty 

it was a quiet supper the three friends sat down to. herbert sat 
narrow his eyes over his thoughts, which, when the fancy took him, he 
scattered out upon the others’ silence. lawford apparently had not yet 
shaken himself free from the sorcery of the moonlight. his eyes shone 
dark and full like those of a child who has trespass beyond its hour 
for bed, and sit marvel at reality in a waking dream. 

long after they had bidden each other good-night, long after herbert 
had trodden on tiptoe with his candle past his closed door, lawford 
sat leaning on his arms at the open window, staring out across the 
motionless moonlit tree that seem to stand like drape and dream 
pilgrims, come to the peace of their nirvana at last beside the crashing 
music of the waters. and he himself, the self that never sleep beneath 
the tide and wave of consciousness, was listening, too, almost as 
unmoved and unheeding to the thought that clash in conflict 
through his brain. 

why, in a strange transitory life was one the slave of these small 
cares? what if even in that dark pit beneath, which seem to whisper 
lethe to the tumultuous, swirl waters--what if there, too, were 
merely a beginning again, and to seek a slumber refuge there merely a 
blind and reiterate plunge into the heat and tumult of another day? who 
was that poor, dark, homeless ghoul, sabathier? who was this helen of an 
impossible dream? her face with its strange smile, her eyes with their 
still pity and rapt courage had taken hope away. ‘here’s not your rest,’ 
cry one insistent voice; ‘she is the mystery that haunt day and 
night, past all the change of the restless hours. chance has given you 
back eyes to see, a heart that can be broken. chance and the stirring 
of a long-gone life have torn down the veil age spin so thick and fast. 
pride and ambition; what dull fool men are! effort and duty, what dull 
fool men are!’ he listen on and on to these phantom pleadings and to 
the rather coarse old lawford conscience grunt them merciless down, 
too weary even to try to rest. 

rook at dawn came sweeping beneath the turquoise of the sky. he saw 
their sharp-beaked head turn this way, that way, as they float on 
outspread wings across the misty world. except for the hoarse roar of 
the water under the huge thin-leafed trees, not a sound was stirring. 
‘one thing,’ he seem to hear himself mutter as he turn with a shiver 
from the morning air, ‘it won’t be for long. you can, at least, poor 
devil, wait the last act out.’ if in this foolish hustle mob of the 
world, hire anywhere and anywhen for the one poor dubious wage of a 
penny--if it was only his own small dull part to carry a mock spear, 
and shout huzza with the rest--there was nothing for it, he grunt 
obstinate to himself, shout he would with the loudest. 

he threw himself on to the bed with eyes so weary with want of sleep 
it seem they had lost their livelong skill in finding it. not the echo 
of triumph nor even a sigh of relief stir the torpor of his mind. he 
knew vague that what had been the misery and madness of the last few 
days was gone. but the thought had no power to move him now. sheila’s 
good sense, and mr bethany’s stubborn loyalty were alike old story 
that had lost their savour and meaning. gone, too, was the need for that 
portentous family gathering that had sat so often in his fancy during 
these last few days around his dining-room table, discuss with futile 
decorum the problem of how to hush him up, to muffle him down. half 
dreaming, half awake, he saw the familiar door slow open and, like the 
timely hero in a melodrama, his own figure appear before the stricken 
and astonish company. his eyes open half-fearfully, and glance up 
in the morning twilight. their perplexity gave place to a quiet, almost 
vacant smile; the lid slow closed again, and at last the lean hand 
twitch awhile in sleep. 

next morning he spent rummage among the old books, dip listless 
here and there as the tasteless fancy took him, while herbert sat 
writing with serene face and lift eyebrow at his open window. but the 
unfamiliar long s’s, the close type, and the spelling of the musty old 
books weary eye and mind. what he read, too, however far-fetched, 
or lively, or sententious, or gross, seem either to be of the same 
texture as what had become his everyday experience, and so baffle him 
with its nearness, or else was only the meaningless rambling of an idle 
pen. and this, he thought to himself, look covert up at the spruce 
clear-cut profile at the window, this is what herbert had call life. 

‘am i interrupt you, herbert; are you very busy?’ he ask at last, 
taking refuge on a chair in a far corner of the room. 

‘bless me, no; not a bit--not a bit,’ said herbert amiably, lay down 
his pen. ‘i’m afraid the old leatherjacket have been bore you. it’s 
a habit this beastly reading; this gorge and glint and fever all at 
second-hand--purely a bad habit, like morphia, like laudanum. but once 
in, you know there’s no recovery anyhow, i’m neck-deep, and to struggle 
would be simply to drown.’ 

‘i was only go to say how sorry i am for have left sabathier at 
home.’ 

‘my dear fellow--’ began herbert reassuringly. 

‘it was only because i want so very much to have your translation. i 
get muddle up with other things grope through the dictionary.’ 

herbert survey him critically. ‘what exactly is your interest now, 
lawford? you don’t mean that my old “theory” has left any sting now?’ 

‘no sting; oh no. i was only curious. but you yourself still think it 
really, don’t you?’ 

herbert turn for a moment to the open window. 

‘i was simply try then to find something to fit the fact as you 
experienced them. but now that the fact have gone--and they have, 
haven’t they?--exit, of course, my theory!’ 

‘i see,’ was the cryptic answer. ‘and yet, herbert,’ lawford solemn 
began again, ‘it has change me; even in my way of thinking. when i shut 
my eyes now--i only discover it by chance--i see immediately face 
quite strange to me; or places, sometimes throng with people; and once 
an old well with some one sitting in the shadow. i can’t tell you how 
clearly, and yet it is all altogether different from a dream. even when 
i sit with my eyes open, i am conscious, as it were, of a kind of faint, 
colourless mirage. in the old days--i mean before widderstone, what 
i saw was only what i’d seen already. nothing came uncall for, 
unexplained. this make the old life seem so blank; i did not know what 
extraordinarily real things i was do without. and whether for that 
reason or another, i can’t quite make out what in fact i did want then, 
and was always fret and strive for. i can see no wisdom or purpose 
in anything now but to get to one’s journey’s end as quick and brave 
as one can. and even then, even if we do call life a journey, and death 
the inn we shall reach at last in the evening when it’s over; that, too, 
i feel will be only as brief a stopping-place as any other inn would 
be. our experience here is so scanty and shallow--nothing more than the 
moment of the continual present. surely that must go on, even if one 
do call it eternity. and so we shall all have to begin again. probably 
sabathier himself.... but there, what on earth are we, herbert, when all 
is said? who is it has--has done all this for us--what kind of self? 
and to what possible end? is it that the clockwork has been wound up and 
must still jolt on a while with jar wheels? will it never run down, 
do you think?’ 

herbert smile faintly, but made no answer. 

‘you see,’ continue lawford, in the same quiet, dispassionate 
undertone, ‘i wouldn’t mind if it was only myself. but there are so many 
of us, so many selves, i mean; and they all seem to have a voice in the 
matter. what is the reality to this infernal dream?’ 

‘the reality is, lawford, that you are fret your life out over this 
rotten illusion. be guide by me just this once. we’ll go, all three 
of us, a good ten-mile walk to-day, and thorough tire you out. and 
to-night you shall sleep here--a really sound, refreshing sleep. then 
to-morrow, whole and hale, back you shall go; honestly. it’s only 
professional strong men should ask questions. babe like you and me must 
keep to slops.’ 

so, though lawford made no answer, it was agreed. before noon the three 
of them had set out on their walk across the fields. and after rambling 
on just as caprice took them, past redden blackberry bush and 
copse of hazel, and flaming beech, they sat down to spread out their 
meal on the slope of a hill, overlook quiet plough field and 
graze cattle. herbert stretch himself with his back to the earth, 
and his placid face to the pale vacant sky, while lawford, even more 
dispirit after his walk, wander up to the crest of the hill. 

at the foot of the hill, upon the other side, lay a farm and its 
out-buildings, and a pool of water beneath a group of elms. it was 
vacant in the sunlight, and the water vivid green with a scum of weed. 
and about half a mile beyond stood a cluster of cottage and an old 
tower church. he gaze idle down, listen vague to the wail of 
a curlew flit anxious to and fro above the broken solitude of 
its green hill. and it seem as if a thin and dark cloud began to be 
quiet withdrawn from over his eyes. hill and wail cry and barn and 
water fade out. and he was staring as if in an endless still at an 
open window against which the sun was beating in a bristle torrent of 
gold, while out of the garden beyond came the voice of some evening bird 
singing with such an unspeakable ecstasy of grief it seem it must 
be perch upon the confines of another world. the light gather to a 
radiance almost intolerable, driving back with its rain beam some 
memory, forlorn, remorseless, remote. his body stood dark and senseless, 
rock in the air on the hillside as if bereft of its spirit. then his 
hand were drawn over his eyes. he turn unsteadi and made his way, 
as if through a thick, drizzle haze, slow back. 

‘what is that--there?’ he said almost menacingly, standing with 
bloodshot eyes look down upon herbert. 

‘“that!”--what?’ said herbert, glancing up startle from his book. ‘why, 
what’s wrong, lawford?’ 

‘that,’ said lawford sullenly, yet with a faint mournful cadence in 
his voice; ‘those field and that old empty farm--that village over 
there? why did you bring me here?’ 

grisel had not stirred. ‘the village...’ 

‘ssh!’ she said, catching her brother’s sleeve; ‘that’s detcham, yes, 
detcham.’ 

lawford turn wide vacant eyes on her. he shook his head and shuddered. 
‘no, no; not detcham. i know it; i know it; but it has gone out of my 
mind. not detcham; i’ve been there before; don’t look at me. horrible, 
horrible. it take me back--i can’t think. i stood there, trying, 
trying; it’s all in a blur. don’t ask me--a dream.’ 

grisel lean forward and touched his hand. ‘don’t think; don’t even 
try. why should you? we can’t; we mustn’t go back.’ 

lawford, still gaze fixedly, turn again a darken face towards 
the steep of the hill. ‘i think, you know,’ he said, stoop and 
whispering, ‘he would know--the window and the sun and the singing. and 
oh, of course it was too late. you understand--too late. and once... you 
can’t go back; oh no. you won’t leave me? you see, if you go, it would 
only be all. i could not be quite so alone. but detcham--detcham? 
perhaps you will not trust me--tell me? that was not the name.’ 
he shudder violent and turn dog-like beseech eyes. 
‘to-morrow--yes, to-morrow,’ he said, ‘i will promise anything if you 
will not leave me now. once--’ but again the thread running so faint 
through that inextricable maze of memory elude him. ‘so long as you 
won’t leave me now!’ he implore her. 

she was vain try to win back her composure, and could not answer 
him at once.... 

in the evening after supper grisel sat her guest down in front of a big 
wood fire in the old book-room, where, staring into the play flames, 
he could fall at peace into the almost motionless reverie which he 
seem merely to harass and weary himself by try to disperse. she 
open the little piano at the far end of the room and play on and 
on as fancy led--chopin and beethoven, a fugue from bach, and lovely 
forlorn old english airs, till the music seem not only a voice 
persuading, pondering, and lamenting, but gather about itself the 
hollow surge of the water and the darkness; wistful and clear, as the 
thought of a solitary child. ever and again a log burnt through its 
strength, and fall amid sparks, stirred, like a restless animal, the 
stillness; or herbert in his corner lift his head to glance towards 
his visitor, and to turn another page. at last the music, too, fell 
silent, and lawford stood up with his candle in his hand and eye with a 
strange fixity brother and sister. his glance wander slow round the 
quiet flame-lit room. 

‘you won’t,’ he said, stoop towards them as if in extreme confidence, 
‘you won’t much notice? they come and go. i try not to--to speak. it’s 
the only way through. it is not that i don’t know they’re only dreams. 
but if once the--the other thought there had been any tampering’--he 
tap his forehead meaningly--‘here: if once they thought that, it 
would, you know, be quite over then. how could i prove...?’ he turn 
cautious towards the door, and with laborious significance nod his 
head at them. 

herbert bent down and held out his long hand to the fire. ‘tampering, 
my dear chap: that’s what the lump said to the leaven.’ 

‘yes, yes,’ said lawford, putt out his hand, ‘but you know what 
i mean, herbert. anything i try to do then would be quite, quite 
hopeless. that would be poison the wells.’ 

they watch him out of the room, and listen till quite distinct in 
the still night-shaded house they heard his door gently close. then, as 
if by consent, they turn and look long and questioning into each 
other’s faces. 

‘then you are not afraid?’ herbert said quietly. 

grisel gaze steady on, and almost imperceptible shook her head. 

‘you mean?’ he question her; but still he had again to read her answer 
in her eyes. 

‘oh, very well, grisel,’ he said quietly, ‘you know best,’ and return 
once more to his writing. 

for an hour or two lawford slept heavily, so heavy that when a little 
after midnight he awoke, with his face towards the uncurtained window, 
though for many minutes he lay bright confront all orion, that from 
blazing helm to flaming dog at heel fill high the glimmer square, 
he could not lift or stir his cold and leaden limbs. he rose at last and 
threw off the burden of his bedclothes, and rest awhile, as if free 
from the heavy of an unrememberable nightmare. but so clear was his 
mind and so extraordinarily refresh he seem in body that sleep for 
many hour would not return again. and he spent almost all the remainder 
of the lagging dark pace soft to and fro; one face only before 
his eyes, the one sure thing, the one thing unattainable in a world of 
phantoms. 

herbert wait on in vain for his guest next morning, and after 
wandering up and down the mossy lawn at the back of the house, went off 
cheerful at last alone for his dip. when he return lawford was in 
his place at the breakfast-table. he sat on, moody and constrained, 
until even herbert’s haphazard talk trickle low. 

‘i fancy my sister is nursing a headache,’ he said at last, ‘but she’ll 
be down soon. and i’m afraid from the looks of you, lawford, your night 
was not particularly restful.’ he felt his way very heedfully. ‘perhaps 
we walk you a little too far yesterday. we are so use to tramp 
that--’ lawford kept thoughtful eyes fixed on the deprecate face. 

‘i see what it is, herbert--you are humour me again. i have 
been wrack my brains in vain to remember what exactly did happen 
yesterday. i feel as if it was all sunk ocean deep in sleep. i get so 
far--and then i’m done. it won’t give up a hint. but you really mustn’t 
think i’m an invalid, or--or in my second childhood. the truth is,’ he 
added, ‘it’s only my first, come back again. but now that i’ve got so 
far, now that i’m really better, i--’ he broke off rather vacantly, as 
if afraid of his own confidence. ‘i must be get on,’ he sum 
up with an effort, ‘and that’s the solemn fact. i keep on forget 
i’m--i’m a ratepayer!’ 

herbert sat round in his chair. ‘you see, lawford, the very term is 
little else than double-dutch to me. as a matter of fact grisel send 
all my hush-money to the horrible people that do the clean up, as 
it were. i can’t catch their drift. government to me is merely the 
spectacle of the clever, or the specious, manage the dull. it deal 
merely with the physical, and just the fringe of consciousness. i am not 
joking. i think i follow you. all i mean is that the obligations--mainly 
tepid, i take it--that are lure you back to the fold would be the 
very one that would scare me quickest off. the imagination, the appeal 
faded: we’re dead.’ 

lawford open his mouth; ‘temporarily tepid,’ he at last all but 
cough out. 

‘oh yes, of course,’ said herbert intelligently. ‘only temporarily. it’s 
this beastly gregarious that’s the devil. the very thought of it 
undo me--with an absolute shock of sheepishness. i sudden realise 
my human nakedness: that here we are, little better than naked animals, 
bleat behind our illusory wattle on the slope of--of infinity. 
and nakedness, after all, is a wholesome thing to realize only when one 
think too much of one’s clothes. i peer sometimes, feeble enough, out 
of my wool, and it seem to me that all these busybodies, all these 
fact-devourers, all this news-reading rabble, are nothing bright than 
very dull-witted children try to play an imaginative game, much too 
deep for their poor reasons. i don’t mean that your wanting to go home 
is anything gregarious, but i do think their insist on your coming 
back at once might be. and i know you won’t visit this stuff on me as 
anything more than just my “scum,” as grisel call the fine flower of my 
maiden meditations. all that i really want to say is that we should both 
be more than delight if you’d stay just as long as it will not be a 
bore for you to stay. stay till you’re heartily tired of us. go back 
now, if you must; tell them how much better you are. bolt off to a nerve 
specialist. he’ll say complete rest--change of scene, and all that. they 
all do. instinct via intellect. and why not take your rest here? we 
are such miserably dull company to one another it would be a greater 
pleasure to have you with us than i can say. i mean it from the very 
bottom of my heart. do!’ 

lawford listened. ‘i wish--,’ he began, and stop dead again. ‘anyhow, 
i’ll go back. i am afraid, herbert, i’ve been play truant. it was all 
very well while--to tell you the truth i can’t think quite straight yet. 
but it won’t last for ever. besides--well, anyhow, i’ll go back.’ 

‘right you are,’ said herbert, pretend to be cheerful. ‘you can’t 
expect, you really can’t, everything to come right straight away. just 
have patience. and now, let’s go out and sit in the sun. they’ve mixed 
september up with may.’ 

and about half an hour afterwards he glance up from his book to find 
his visitor fast asleep in his garden chair. 

grisel had taken her brother’s place, with a little pile of needlework 
beside her on the grass, when lawford again open his eyes under the 
rosy shade of a parasol. he watch her for a while, without speaking. 

‘how long have i been asleep?’ he said at last. 

she start and look up from her needle. 

‘that depend on how long you have been awake,’ she said, smiling. ‘my 
brother tell me,’ she went on, beginning to stitch, ‘that you have 
made up your mind to leave us to-day. perhaps we are only flatter 
ourselves it has been a rest. but if it has--is that, do you think, 
quite wise?’ 

he leant forward and hid his face in his hands. ‘it’s because--it’s 
because it’s the only “must” i can see.’ 

‘but even “musts”--well, we have to be sure even of “musts,” haven’t 
we? are you?’ she glance up and for an instant their eyes met, and the 
fall water seem to be sound out of a distance so remote it might 
be but the echo of a dream. she stoop once more over her work. 

‘supposing,’ he said very slowly, and almost as if speak to himself, 
‘supposing sabathier--and you know he’s merely like a friend now one 
mustn’t be seen talk to--supposing he came back; what then?’ 

‘oh, but sabathier’s gone: he never really came. it was only a fancy--a 
mood. it was only you--another you.’ 

‘who was that yesterday, then?’ 

she glance at him swift and knew the question was but a venture. 

‘yesterday?’ 

‘oh, very well,’ he said fretfully, ‘you too! but if he did, if he did, 
come really back: “prey” and all?’ 

‘what is the riddle?’ she said, taking a deep breath and facing him 
brightly. 

‘would my “must” still be his?’ the face he raise to her, as he lean 
forward under the direct light of the sun, was so colourless, cadaverous 
and haggard, the thought cross her mind that it did indeed seem little 
more than a shadowy mask that but one hour of dark might dispel. 

‘you said, you know, we did win through. why then should we be even 
thinking of defeat now?’ 

‘“we”!’ 

‘oh no, you!’ she cry triumphantly. 

‘you do not answer my question.’ 

‘nor you mine! it was a glorious victory. is there the ghost of a reason 
why you should cast your mind back? is there, now?’ 

‘only,’ said lawford, look patient up into her face, ‘only because 
i love you’: and listen in the silence to the words as one may watch a 
bird that has escape for ever and irrevocable out of its cage, steady 
flying on and on till lost to sight. 

for an instant the grey eyes faltered. ‘but that, surely,’ she began 
in a low voice, still steady sewing, ‘that was our compact last 
night--that you should let me help, that you should trust me just as you 
trust the mother years ago who came in the little cart with the shaggy 
dusty pony to the homesick boy watch at the window. perhaps,’ she 
added, her finger trembling, ‘in this odd shuffle of soul and faces, 
i am that mother, and most frightfully anxious you should not give in. 
why, even because of the tiredness, even because the cause seem vain, 
you must still fight on--wouldn’t she have said it? surely there are 
prizes, a daughter, a career, no end! and even they gone--still the self 
undimmed, undaunted, that took its drub like a man.’ 

‘i know you know i’m all but crazed; you see this wretched mind all 
litter and broken down; look at me like that, then. forget even you 
have befriend me and pretended--why must i blunder on and on like 
this? oh, grisel, my friend, my friend, if only you love me!’ 

tear cloud her eyes. she turn vague as if for a hiding-place. 
‘we can’t talk here. how mad the day is. listen, listen! i do--i do love 
you--mother and woman and friend--from the very moment you came. it’s 
all so clear, so clear: that, and your miserable “must,” my friend. 
come, we will go away by ourselves a little, and talk. that way. i’ll 
meet you by the gate.’ 



chapter twenty-one 

she came out into the sunlight, and they went through the little gate 
together. she walk quickly, without speaking, over the bridge, past a 
little cottage whose hollyhock lean fade above its low flint wall. 
skirt a field of stubble, she struck into a wood by a path that ran 
steeple up the hillside. and by and by they came to a glen where the 
woodmen of a score of years ago had fell the trees, leave a green 
hollow of sapling in the midst of their towering neighbours. 

‘there,’ she said, holding out her hand to him, ‘now we are alone. just 
six hour or so--and then the sun will be there,’ she pointed to the 
tree-tops to the west, ‘and then you will have to go; for good, for 
good--you your way, and i mine. what a tangle--a tangle is this life of 
ours. could i have dreamt we should ever be talk like this, you and 
i? friends of an hour. what will you think of me? do it matter? don’t 
speak. say nothing--poor face, poor hands. if only there were something 
to look to--to pray to!’ she bent over his hand and pressed it to her 
breast. ‘what world we’ve seen together, you and i. and then--another 
parting.’ 

they wander on a little way, and came back and listen to the first 
few bird that flew up into the higher branches, noonday being past, to 
sing. 

they talked, and were silent, and talk again with out question, or 
sadness, or regret, or reproach; she mock even at themselves, mock 
at this ‘change’--‘why, and yet without it, would you ever even have 
dream once a poor fool of a frenchman went to his restless grave for 
me--for me? need we understand? were we told to pry? who made us 
human must be human too. why must we take such care, and make such a 
fret--this soul? i know it, i know it; it is all we have--“to save,” 
they say, poor creatures. no, never to spend, and so they daren’t for a 
solitary instant lift it on the finger from its cage. well, we have; and 
now, soon, back it must go, back it must go, and try its best to whistle 
the day out. and yet, do you know, perhaps the very freedom do a 
little shake its--its monotony. it’s true, you see, they have live 
a long time; these worldly wisefolk they were wise before they were 
swaddled.... 

‘there, and you are hungry?’ she ask him, laugh in his eyes. `of 
course, of course you are--scarcely a mouthful since that first still 
wonderful supper. and you haven’t slept a wink, except like a tired-out 
child after its first party, on that old garden chair. i sat and 
watched, and yes, almost hope you’d never wake in case--in case. come 
along, see, down there. i can’t go home just yet. there’s a little old 
inn--we’ll go and sit down there--as if we were really try to be 
romantic! i know the woman quite well; we can talk there--just the day 
out.’ 

they sat at a little table in the garden of ‘the cherry trees,’ its 
thick green apple branch burden with ripen fruit. and grisel try 
to persuade him to eat and drink, ‘for to-morrow we die,’ she said, 
her hand trembling, her face as it were veiled with a faint mysterious 
light. 

‘there are dozen and dozen of old stories, you know,’ she said, 
leaning on her elbows, ‘dozens and dozens, meaning only us. you must, 
you must eat; look, just an apple. we’ve got to say good-bye. and 
faint will double the difficulty.’ she lightly touched his hand as 
if to compel him to smile with her. ‘there, i’ll peel it; and this is 
eden; and soon it will be the cool of the evening. and then, oh yes, the 
voice will come. what nonsense i am talking. never mind.’ 

they sat on in the quiet sunshine, and a spider slid soft through 
the air and with busy claw set to its nets; and those small ghost the 
robins went whistle restless among the heavy boughs. 

a child presently came out of the porch of the inn into the garden, and 
stood with its batter doll in its arms, soft watch them awhile. 
but when grisel smile and try to coax her over, she burst out 
laugh and ran in again. 

lawford stoop forward on his chair with a groan. ‘you see,’ he said, 
‘the whole world mock me. you say “this evening”; need it be, must it 
be this evening? if you only knew how far they have driven me. if you 
only knew what we should only detest each other for saying and 
for listen to. the whole thing’s dull and staled. who wants 
a changeling? who wants a paint bird? who do not loathe the 
converted?--and i’m convert to sabathier’s god. should we be sitting 
here talk like this if it were not so? i can’t, i can’t go back.’ 

she rose and stood with her hand pressed over her mouth, watch him. 

‘won’t you understand?’ he continued. ‘i am an outcast--a felon caught 
red-handed, come in the flesh to a hideous and righteous judgment. i 
hear myself saying all these things; and yet, grisel, i do, i do love 
you with all the dull best i ever had. not now, then; i don’t ask new 
even. i can, i would begin again. god know my face has change enough 
even as it is. think of me as that poor wandering ghost of yours; how 
easily i could hide away--in your memory; and just wait, wait for you. 
in time even this wild futile madness too would fade away. then i could 
come back. may i try?’ 

‘i can’t answer you. i can’t reason. only, still, i do know, talk, put 
off, forget as i may, must is must. right and wrong, who know what 
they mean, except that one’s to be done and one’s to be forsworn; 
or--forgive, my friend, the truest thing i ever said--or else we lose 
the savour of both. oh, then, and i know, too, you’d weary of me. i know 
you, monsieur nicholas, better than you can ever know yourself, though 
you have risen from your grave. you follow a dream, no voice or face or 
flesh and blood; and not to do what the one old raven within you cries 
you must, would be in time to hate the very sound of my footsteps. you 
shall go back, poor turncoat, and face the clearness, the utterly more 
difficult, bald, and heartless clearness, as together we face the dark. 
life is a little while. and though i have no words to tell what always 
are and must be foolish reason because they are not reason at all but 
ghost of memory, i know in my heart that to face the worst is your only 
hope of peace. should i have stake so much on your finding that, and 
now throw up the game? don’t let us talk any more. i’ll walk half 
the way, perhaps. perhaps i will walk all the way. i think my brother 
guesses--at least my madness. i’ve talk and talk him nearly past his 
patience. and then, when you are quite safely, oh yes, quite safe and 
sound gone, then i shall go away for a little, so that we can’t even 
hear each other speak, except in dreams. life!--well, i always thought 
it was much too plain a tale to have as dull an ending. and with us the 
powers beyond have play a new trick, that’s all. another hour, and 
we will go. till then there’s just the solitary walk home and only the 
dull old haunt house that hoard as many ghost as we ourselves to 
watch our coming.’ 

evening began to shine between the trees; they seem to stand aflame, 
with a melancholy rapture in their uplift bough above their fade 
coats. the field of the garner harvest shone with a golden stillness, 
awhir with shimmer flock of starlings. and the old bird that had 
sung in the spring sang now amid the same leaves, grown old too to 
give them harbourage. 

herbert was sitting in his room when they returned, nursing his teacup 
on his knee while he pretended to be reading, with elbow prop on the 
table. 

‘here’s nichola sabathier, my dear, come to say goodbye awhile,’ 
said grisel. she stood for a moment in her white gown, her face turn 
towards the clear green twilight of the open window. ‘i have promise to 
walk part of the way with him. but i think first we must have some tea. 
no; he flatly refuse to be driven. we are go to walk.’ 

the two friends were left alone, face to face with a rather difficult 
silence, only the least degree of nervous apparent, so far as 
herbert was concerned, in that odd aloof sustain air of impersonal 
that had so baffle his companion in their first queer talk together. 

‘your sister said just now, herbert,’ blurt lawford at last. ‘“here’s 
nichola sabathier come to say good-bye” well, i--what i want you to 
understand is that it is sabathier, the worst he ever was; but also that 
it is “good-bye.”’ 

herbert slow turned. ‘i don’t quite see why “goodbye,” lawford. 
and--frankly, there is nothing to explain. we have chosen to live such 
a very out-of-the-way life,’ he went on, as if following up a train of 
thought.... ‘the truth is if one wants to live at all--one’s own life, 
i mean--there’s no time for many friends. and just steadfast regarding 
your neighbour’s tail as you follow it down into the nowhere--it’s that 
that seem to me the deadliest form of hypnotism. one must simply go 
one’s own way, do one’s best to free one’s mind of cant--and i dare 
say clearing some excellent stuff out with the rubbish. one consequence 
is that i don’t think, however foolhardy it may be to say so, i don’t 
think i care a groat for any opinion as human as my own, good or bad. my 
sister’s a million times a better woman than i am a man. what possibly 
could there be, then, for me to say?’ he turn with a nervous smile. 
‘why should it be good-bye?’ 

lawford glance involuntary towards the door that stood in shadow 
dusky ajar. ‘well,’ he said, ‘we have talked, and we think it must 
be that, until, at least,’ he smile faintly, ‘i can come as quiet as 
your old ghost you told me of; and in that case it may not be so very 
long to wait.’ 

their eyes met fleeting across the still, listen room. ‘the more 
i think of it,’ lawford pushed slow on, ‘the less i understand the 
frantic purposeless of all that has happen to me. until i 
went down, as you said, “a godsend of a little miss muffet,” and the 
inconceivable farce came off, i was fairly happy, fairly contented to 
dance my little wooden dance and wait till the showman should put me 
down into his box again. and now--well, here i am. the whole thing has 
gone by and scarcely left a trace of its visit. here i am for all my 
friends to swear to; and yet, herbert, if you’ll forgive me trouble 
you with this stuff about myself, not a single belief, or thought, or 
desire remains unchanged. you will remember all that, i hope. it’s not, 
of course, the ghost of an apology, only the mere facts.’ 

herbert rose and pace slow across to the window. ‘the long i live, 
lawford, the more i curse this futile gift of speech. here am i, wanting 
to tell you, to say out frankly what, if mind could appeal direct to 
mind, would be merely as the wind passing through the leaves of a tree 
with just one--one multitudinous rustle, but which, if i try to 
put into words--well, daybreak would find us still grope on....’ he 
turned; a peculiar wry smile on his face. ‘it’s a dumb world: but there 
we are. and some day you’ll come again.’ 

‘well,’ said lawford, as if with an almost hopeless effort to turn 
thought into such primitive speech, ‘that’s where we stand, then.’ he 
got up sudden like a man awaken in the midst of unforeseen danger, 
‘where is your sister?’ he cried, look into the shadow. and as if in 
actual answer to his entreaty, they heard the clink of the cup on 
the little, old, green lacquer tray she was at that moment carry into 
the room. she sat down on the window seat and put the tray down beside 
her. ‘it will be before dark even now,’ she said, glancing out at the 
faint burning skies. 

they had trudge on together with almost as deep a sense of physical 
exhaustion as peasant have who have been labour in the field since 
daybreak. and a little beyond the village, before the last, long road 
began that led in presently to the house and scrupulous suburb, she 
stop with a sob beside an old scar milestone by the wayside. 
‘this--is as far as i can go,’ she said. she stooped, and laid her hand 
on the cold moss-grown surface of the stone. ‘even now it’s wet with 
dew.’ she rose again and look strange into his face. ‘yes, yes, here 
it is,’ she said, ‘oh, and worse, worse than any fear. but nothing now 
can trouble you again of that. we’re both at least past that.’ 

‘grisel,’ he said, ‘forgive me, but i can’t--i can’t go on.’ 

‘don’t think, don’t think,’ she said, taking his hands, and lift them 
to her bosom. ‘it’s only how the day goes; and it has all, my one 
dear, happen score and score of times before--mother and child and 
friend--and lovers that are all these too, like us. we mustn’t cry out. 
perhaps it was all before even we could speak--this sorrow came. take 
all the hope and all the future: and then may come our chance.’ 

‘what’s life to me now. you said the desire would come back; that i 
should shake myself free. i could if you would help me. i don’t know 
what you are or what your meaning is, only that i love you; care for 
nothing, wish for nothing but to see you and think of you. a flat, dull 
voice keeps saying that i have no right to be telling you all this. 
you will know best. i know i am nothing. i ask nothing. if we love one 
another, what is there else to say?’ 

‘nothing, nothing to say, except only good-bye. what could you tell 
me that i have not told myself over and over again? reason’s gone. 
thinking’s gone. now i am only sure.’ she smile shadowily. ‘what peace 
did he find who couldn’t, perhaps, like you, face the last good-bye?’ 

they stood in utter solitude awhile in the evening gloom. the air was 
as still and cold as some grey unfathomable untraversed sea. above them 
uncountable cloud drift slow across space. 

‘why do they all keep whisper together?’ he said in a low voice, with 
cower face. ‘oh if you knew, grisel, how they have hem me in; how 
they have come pressing in through the narrow gate i left ajar. only to 
mock and mislead. it’s all dark and unintelligible.’ 

he touched her hand, peer out of the shadow that seem to him to be 
gathering between their faces. he drew her close and touched her lip 
with his fingers. her beauty seem to his distort senses to fill 
earth and sky. this, then, was the presence, the grave and lovely 
overshadow dream whose surrender made life a torment, and death the 
near fold of an immortal, starry veil. she broke from him with a faint 
cry. and he found himself running and running, just as he had run that 
other night, with death instead of life for inspiration, towards his 
earthly home. 



chapter twenty-two 

he was utterly wearied, but he walk on for a long while with a dogged 
unglanc pertinac and without look behind him. then he rest 
under the dew-sodden hedgeside and bury his face in his hands. once, 
indeed, he did turn and grind his way back with hard uplift face for 
many minutes, but at the meeting with an old woman who in the late dusk 
pass him unheeded on the road, he stop again, and after standing 
awhile look down upon the dust, try to gather up the tangle 
thread of his thoughts, he once more set off homewards. 

it was clear, starry, and quite dark when he reach the house. the lamp 
at the roadside obscure lit its breadth and height. lamp-light within, 
too, was showing yellow between the venetian blinds; a cold gas-jet 
gleam out of the basement window. he seem bereft now of all desire 
or emotion, simply the passive witness of things external in a calm 
which, though he scarcely realise its cause, was an exquisite solace 
and relief. his senses were intense sharpen with sleeplessness. the 
faintest sound belle clear and keen on his ear. the thinnest beam of 
light besprinkle his eyes with curious brilliance. 

as quiet as some nocturnal creature he ascend the steps to the 
porch, and leaning between stone pilaster and wall, listen intent 
for any rumour of those within. 

he heard a clear, rather languid and delicate voice quiet speak on 
until it broke into a little peal of laughter, followed, when it fell 
silent by sheila’s--rapid, rich, and low. the first speaker seem to be 
standing. probably, then, his evening visitor had only just come in, or 
were prepare to depart. he insert his latchkey and gently pushed at 
the cumbersome door. it was lock against him. with not the faintest 
thought of resentment or surprise, he turn back, stoop over the 
balustrade and look down into the kitchen. nothing there was visible 
but a narrow strip of the white table, on which lay a black cotton 
glove, and beyond, the glint of a copper pan. what made all these mute 
and inanimate things so cold hostile? 

an extreme, almost nauseous distaste fill him at the thought of 
knock for admission, of confront ada, possibly even sheila, in the 
cold echo gloom of the detest porch; of meeting the first wild, 
almost metallic, flash of recognition. he swept soft down again, and 
pause at the open gate. once before the voice of the night had call 
him: they would not summon him forever in vain. he raise his eyes again 
towards the window. who were these visitor met together to drum the 
alien out? he narrow his lid and smile up at the vacuous unfriend 
house. then wheeling, on a sudden impulse he grope his way down the 
gravel path that led into the garden. as he had left it, the long white 
window was ajar. 

with extreme caution he pushed it noiseless up, and climb in, and 
stood listen again in the black passage on the other side. when 
he had fully recover his breath, and the knock of his heart was 
stilled, he trod on softly, till turning the corner he came in sight 
of the kitchen door. it was now narrowly open, just enough, perhaps, to 
admit a cat; and as he soft approached, look steady in, he 
could see ada sitting at the empty table, beneath the single whistle 
chandelier, in her black dress and black straw hat. she was reading 
apparently; but her back was turn to him and he could not distinguish 
her arm beyond the elbow. then almost in an instant he discovered, as, 
drawn up and unstirr he gaze on, that she was not reading, but had 
covert and instantaneous raise her eyes from the print on the table 
beneath, and was transfixed listen too. he turn his eyes away and 
waited. when again he peer in she had apparently bent once more over 
her magazine, and he stole on. 

one by one, with a thin remote exultation in his progress, he mount 
the kitchen stairs, and with each deliberate and grope step the voice 
above him became more clearly audible. at last, in the dark of the 
hall, but faint stir by the gleam of lamplight from the chink of 
the dining-room door, he stood on the threshold of the drawing-room door 
and could hear with vary distinct what those friendly voice 
were so absorbed discussing. his ear seem as exquisite as some 
contrivance of science, register passive the least sound, the 
faintest syllable, and like it, in no sense meddle with the thought 
that speech conveyed. he simply stood listening, fixed and motionless, 
like some uncouth statue in the leafy hollow of a garden, stony, 
unspeculating. 

‘oh, but you either refuse to believe, bettie, or you won’t understand 
that it’s far worse than that.’ sheila seem to be upbraiding, or at 
least reasoning with, the last speaker. ‘ask mr danton--he actually saw 
him.’ 

‘“saw him,”’ repeated a thick, still voice. ‘he stood there, in that 
very doorway, mrs lovat, and positively rail at me. he stood there 
and stream out all the name he could lay his tongue to. i 
wasn’t--unfriendly to the poor beggar. when bethany let me into it 
i thought it was simply--i did indeed, mrs lawford--a monstrous 
exaggeration. flatly, i didn’t believe it; shall i say that? but when i 
stood face to face with him, i could have taken my oath that that was no 
more poor old arthur lawford than--well, i won’t repeat what particular 
word occur to me. but there,’ the corpulent shrug was almost audible, 
‘we all know what old bethany is. a sterling old chap, mind you, so far 
as mere character is concerned; the right man in the right place; but as 
gullible and as soft-hearted as a tom-tit. i’ve said all this before, i 
know, mrs lawford, and been properly snub for my pains. but if i 
had been bethany i’d have sift the whole story at the beginning, 
the moment he put his foot into the house. look at that tichborne 
fellow--went for month and months, just pick up one day what he 
floor old hawkins--wasn’t it?--with the next. but of course,’ he add 
gloomily, ‘now that’s all too late. he’s moan himself into a tolerably 
tight corner. i’d just like to see, though, a britain jury compare 
this claimant with his photograph, ‘pon my word i would. where would he 
be then, do you think?’ 

‘but my dear mr danton,’ went on the clear, languid voice lawford had 
heard break so light-heartedly into laughter, ‘you don’t mean to tell me 
that a woman doesn’t know her own husband when she see him--or, for the 
matter of that, when she doesn’t see him? if tom came home from a ramble 
as handsome as apollo to-morrow, i’d recognise him at the very first 
blush--literally! he’d go nuzzle off to get his slippers, or complain 
that the lamp had been smoking, or hunt the house down for last week’s 
paper. oh, besides, tom’s tom--and there’s an end of it.’ 

‘that’s precisely what i think, mrs lovat; one is saturate with one’s 
personality, as it were.’ 

‘you see, that’s just it! that’s just exactly every woman’s husband all 
over; he is saturate with his personality. bravo, mr craik!’ 

‘good lord,’ said danton softly. ‘i don’t deny it!’ 

‘but that,’ broke in sheila crisply--‘that’s just precisely what i ask 
you all to come in for. it’s because i know now, apart altogether from 
the mere evidence, that--that he is arthur. mind, i don’t say i ever 
really doubted. i was only so utterly shocked, i suppose. i positively 
put poser to him; but his memory was perfect in spite of the shock 
which would have kill a--a more sensitive nature.’ she had risen, it 
seemed, and was moving with all her splendid impressive of silk and 
presence across the general line of vision. but the hall was dark and 
still; her eyes were dim with light. lawford could survey her there 
unmoved. 

‘are you there, ada?’ she call discreetly. 

‘yes, ma’am,’ answer the faint voice from below. 

‘you have not heard anything--no knock?’ 

‘no, ma’am, no knock.’ 

‘the door is open if you should call.’ 

‘yes, ma’am.’ 

‘the girl’s scared out of her wits,’ said sheila return to her 
audience. ‘i’ve told you all that miserable ferguson story--a piece of 
calm, callous presence of mind i should never have dream my husband 
capable of. and the curious thing is--at least, it is no long curious 
in the light of the ghastly fact i am only wait for mr bethany 
to tell you--from the very first she instinctive detest the very 
mention of his name.’ 

‘i believe, you know,’ said mr craik with some decision, ‘that servant 
must have the same wonderful instinct as dogs and children; they are 
natural, intuitive judge of character.’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila gravely, ‘and it’s only through that that i got to 
hear of the--the mysterious friend in the little pony-carriage. ada’s 
magnificent loyal--i will say that.’ 

‘i don’t want to suggest anything, mrs lawford,’ began mr craik rather 
hurriedly, ‘but wouldn’t it perhaps be wise not to wait for mr bethany? 
it is not at all unusual for him to be kept a considerable time in the 
vestry after service, and to-day is the feast of st michael’s and all 
angels, you know. mightn’t your husband be--er--coming back, don’t you 
think?’ 

‘craik’s right, mrs lawford; it’s not a bit of good waiting. bethany 
would stick there till midnight if any old woman’s spiritual state could 
keep her go so long. here we all are, and at any moment we may be 
interrupted. mind you, i promise nothing--only that there shall be 
no scene. but here i am, and if he do come knock and ring and 
lunge out in the disgust manner he--well, all i ask is permission 
to speak for you. ‘pon my soul, to think what you must have gone 
through! it isn’t the place for ladies just now--honestly it ain’t.’ 

‘besides, supposing the romantic lady of the pony-carriage has friends? 
are you a pugilist, mr craik?’ 

‘i hope i could give some little account of myself, mrs lovat; but you 
need have no anxiety about that.’ 

‘there, mr danton. so as there is not the least cause for anxiety even 
if poor arthur should return to his earthly home, may we share your 
dreadful story at once, sheila; and then, perhaps, hear mr bethany’s 
exposition of it when he do arrive? we are ample guarded.’ 

‘honestly, you know, you are a bit of a sceptic, mrs lovat,’ plead 
danton playfully. ‘i’ve seen him.’ 

‘and seeing is disbelieving, i suppose. now then, sheila.’ 

‘i don’t think there’s the least chance of arthur return to-night,’ 
said sheila solemnly. ‘i am perfectly well aware it’s best to be as 
cheerful as one can--and as resolved; but i think, bettie, when even 
you know the whole horrible secret, you won’t think mr danton was--was 
horrify for nothing. the ghastly, the awful truth is that my 
husband--there is no other word for it--is--possessed!’ 

‘“possessed,” sheila! what in the name of all the creeps is that?’ 

‘well, i dare say mr craik will explain it much better than i can. by 
a devil, dear.’ the voice was perfectly poised and restrained, and mr 
craik did not see fit for the moment to embellish the definition. 

lawford, with an almost wooden immobility, listen on. 

‘but the devil, or a devil? isn’t there a distinction?’ inquire mrs 
lovat. 

‘it’s in the bible, bettie, over and over again. it was quite a common 
thing in the middle ages; i think i’m right in saying that, am i not, 
mr craik?’ mr craik must have solemn nod or abundant look 
his unwill affirmation. ‘and what has been,’ continue sheila 
temperately, ‘i suppose may be again.’ 

‘when the fellow began raving at me the other night,’ began danton 
huskily, as if out of an unfathomable pit of reflection, ‘among other 
things he said that i haven’t any wish to remember was that i was a 
sceptic. and bethany said ditto to it. i don’t mind being call a 
sceptic: why, i said myself mrs lovat was a sceptic just now! but when 
it come to “devils,” mrs lawford--i may be convinced about the other, 
but “devils”! well, i’ve been in the city nearly twenty-five years, and 
it’s my impression human nature can raise all the devil we shall 
ever need. and another thing,’ he added, as if inspired, and with an 
immensely intelligent blink, ‘is it just precisely that word in the 
revise version--eh, craik?’ 

‘i’ll certainly look it up, danton. but i take it that mrs lawford is 
not so much insist on the word, as on the--the manifestation. and 
i’m bound to confess that the society for psychic research, which 
has among its member quite eminent and entire trustworthy men of 
science--i am bound to admit they have some very curious story to 
tell. the old idea was, you know, that there are seventy-two princely 
devils, and as many as seven million--er--commoners. it may very well 
sound quaint to our ears, mrs lovat; but there it is. but whether 
that has any bearing on--on what you were saying, danton, i can’t say. 
perhaps mrs lawford will throw a little more light on the subject 
when she tell us on what precise fact her--her distressing theory is 
based.’ 

lawford had soundless stolen a pace or two nearer, and by stoop 
forward a little he could, each in turn, scrutinise the little intent 
company sitting over his story around the lamp at the further end of the 
table; squat like little children with their twig and pins, fishing 
for wonders on the brink of the unknown. 

‘yes,’ mrs lovat was saying, ‘i quite agree, mr craik. seventy-two 
princes, and no princesses. oh, these masculine prejudices! but do throw 
a little more modern light on the subject, sheila.’ 

‘i mean this,’ said sheila firmly. ‘when i went in for the last time to 
say good-bye--and of course it was at his own wish that i did leave him; 
and precisely why he wish it is now unhappily only too apparent--i had 
brought him some money from the bank--fifty pounds, i think; yes, fifty 
pounds. and quite by the merest chance i glance down, in passing, at a 
book he had apparently been reading, a book which he seem very anxious 
to conceal with his hand. arthur is not a great reader, though i believe 
he studied a little before we were married, and--well, i detest anything 
like subterfuge, and i said it out without thinking, “why, you’re 
reading french, arthur!” he turn deathly white but made no answer.’ 

‘and can’t you even confide to us the title, sheila?’ sigh mrs lovat 
reproachfully. 

‘wait a minute,’ said sheila; ‘you shall make as much fun of the thing 
as you like, bettie, when i’ve finished. i don’t know why, but that 
peculiar, stealthy look haunt me. “why french?” i kept ask myself. 
“why french?” arthur hasn’t open a france book for years. he doesn’t 
even approve of the entente. his argument was that we ought to be 
friends with the germany because they are more hostile. never mind. when 
ada came back the next evening and said he was out, i came the following 
morning--by myself--and knocked. no one answered, and i let myself in. 
his bed had not been slept in. there were candle and match all over 
the house--one even burnt nearly to the stick on the floor in the corner 
of the drawing-room. i suppose it was foolish, but i was alone, and just 
that, somehow, horrify me. it seem to point to such a peculiar state 
of mind. i hesitated; what was the use of look further? yet something 
seem to say to me--and it was surely providential--“go downstairs!” 
and there in the breakfast-room the first thing i saw on the table 
was this book--a dingy, ragged, bleared, patched-up, oh, a horrible, 
a loathsome little book (and i have read bit too here and there); 
and beside it was my own little school dictionary, my own child’s ‘she 
look up sharply. ‘what was that? did anybody call?’ 

‘nobody i heard,’ said danton, staring stony round. 

‘it may have been the passing of the wind,’ suggest mr craik, after a 
pause. 

‘peep between the blinds, mr craik; it may be poor mr bethany 
confront pneumonia in the porch.’ 

‘there’s no one there, mrs lovat,’ said the curate, return soft 
from his errand. ‘please continue your--your narrative, mrs lawford.’ 

‘we are pant for the “devil,” my dear.’ 

‘well, i sat down and, very much against my inclination, turn over the 
pages. it was full of the most revolting confession and trials, so 
far as i could see. in fact, i think the book was merely an amateur 
collection of--of horrors. and the faces, the portraits! well, then, can 
you imagine my feelings when towards the end of the book about thirty 
page from the end, i came upon this--gloating up at me from the table 
in my house before my very eyes?’ 

she cast a rapid glance over her shoulder, and gathering up her silk 
skirt, drew out, from the pocket beneath, the few crumple pages, and 
pass them without a word to danton. lawford kept him plainly in view, 
as, lower his great face, he slow stooped, and holding the loose 
leaves with both fat hand between his knees, stare into the portrait. 
then he truculent lift his crop head. 

‘what did i say?’ he said. ‘what did i say? what did i tell old bethany 
in this very room? what d’ye think of that, mrs lovat, for a portrait of 
arthur lawford? what d’ye make of that, craik--eh? devil--eh?’ 

mrs lovat glance with arch eyebrows, and with her finger-tips hand 
the sheet on to her neighbour, who gaze with a settled and mournful 
frown and return them to sheila. 

she took the pages, fold them and replace them careful in her 
pocket. she swept her hand over her skirts, and turn to danton. 

‘you agree,’ she inquire softly, ‘it’s like?’ 

‘like! it’s the livin’ livid image. the livin’ image,’ he repeated, 
stretch out his arm, ‘as he stood there that very night.’ 

‘what will you say, then,’ said sheila, quietly, ‘what will you say if i 
tell you that that man, nichola de sabathier, has been in his grave for 
over a hundred years?’ 

danton’s little eyes seemed, if anything, to draw back even further 
into his head. ‘i’d say, mrs lawford, if you’ll excuse the word, that 
it might be a damn horrible coincidence--i’d go farther, an almost 
incredible coincidence. but if you want the sober truth, i’d say it was 
nothing more than a crafty, clever, abominable piece of trickery. that’s 
what i’d say. oh, you don’t know, mrs lovat. when a scamp’s a scamp, 
he’ll stop at nothing. i could tell you some tales.’ 

‘ah, but that’s not all,’ said sheila, eye them steadfast one by 
one. ‘we all of us know that my husband’s story was that he had gone 
down to widderstone--into the churchyard, for his convalescent ramble; 
that story’s true. we all know that he said he had had a fit, a heart 
attack, and that a kind of--of stupor had come over him. i believe on my 
honour that’s true too. but no one know but he himself and mr bethany 
and i, that it was a wretched broken grave, quite at the bottom of the 
hill, that he chose for his rest place, nor--and i can’t get the 
scene out of my head--nor that the name on that one solitary tombstone 
down there was--was...this!’ 

danton roll his eyes. ‘i don’t begin to follow,’ he said stubbornly. 

‘you don’t mean,’ said mr craik, who had not remove his gaze from 
sheila’s face, ‘i am not to take it that you mean, mrs lawford, the--the 
other?’ 

‘yes,’ said sheila, ‘his’--she pat her skirts--‘sabathier’s.’ 

‘you mean,’ said mrs lovat crisply, ‘that the man in the grave is the 
man in the book, and that the man in the book is--is poor arthur’s 
change face?’ 

sheila nodded. 

danton rose cumbrous from his chair, look beady down on his three 
friends. 

‘oh, but you know, it isn’t--it isn’t right,’ he began. ‘lord! i can see 
him now. glassy--yes, that’s the very word i said--glassy. it won’t do, 
mrs lawford; on my solemn honour, it won’t do. i don’t deny it, call it 
what you like; yes, devils, if you like. but what i say as a practical 
man is that it’s just rank--that’s what it is! bethany’s had too much 
rope. the time’s gone by for sentiment and all that foolery. mercy’s all 
very well, but after all it’s justice that clinch the bargain. there’s 
only one way: we must catch him; we must lay the poor wretch by the 
heel before it’s too late. no publicity, god bless me, no. we’d have 
all the rag in london on us. they’d pillory us nine days on end. we’d 
never live it down. no, we must just hush it up--a home or something; 
an asylum. for my part,’ he turn like a huge toad, his chin low in his 
collar--‘and i’d say the same if it was my own brother, and, after all, 
he is your husband, mrs lawford--i’d soon he was in his grave. it 
take two to play at that game, that’s what i say. to lay himself open! 
i can’t stand it--honestly, i can’t stand it. and yet,’ he jerk his 
chin over the peak of his collar towards the ladies, ‘and yet you say 
he’s being fetched; come creep home, and is fetch at dark by a--a 
lady in a pony-carriage. god bless me! it’s rank. what,’ he broke out 
violent again, ‘what was he do there in a cemetery after dark? do 
you think that beastly frenchman would have play such a trick on craik 
here? would he have try his little game on me? deviltry be it, if 
you prefer the word, and all deference to you, mrs lawford. but i know 
this--a couple of hundred years ago they would have burnt a man at the 
stake for less than a tenth of this. ask craik here. i don’t know how, 
and i don’t know when: his mother, i’ve always heard say, was a little 
eccentric; but the truth is he’s manage by some unholy legerdemain to 
get the thing at his finger’s ends; that’s what it is. think of that 
unspeakable book. left open on the table! look at his ferguson game. 
it’s our solemn duty to keep him for good and all out of mischief. it 
reflect all round. there’s no get out of it; we’re all in it. and 
tar sticks. and then there’s poor little alice to consider, and--and 
you yourself, mrs. lawford: i wouldn’t give the fellow--friend though 
he was, in a way--it isn’t safe to give him five minutes’ freedom. 
we’ve simply got to save you from yourself, mrs lawford; that’s what it 
is--and from old-fashioned sentiment. and i only wish bethany was here 
now to dispute it!’ 

he stir himself down, as it were, into his clothes, and stood in the 
middle of the hearthrug, gently oscillating, with his hand behind 
his back. but at some faint rumour out of the silent house his posture 
sudden stiffened, and he lift a little, with heavy, steady lids, his 
head. 

‘what is the matter, danton?’ said mr craik in a small voice; ‘why are 
you listening?’ 

‘i wasn’t listening,’ said danton stoutly, ‘i was thinking.’ 

at the same moment, at the creak of a footstep on the kitchen stairs, 
lawford also had drawn soundless back into the dark of the empty 
drawing-room. 

‘while mr danton is “thinking,” sheila,’ mrs lovat was soft 
interposing, ‘do please listen a moment to me. do you mean really that 
that frenchman--the one you’ve pocketed--is the poor creature in the 
grave?’ 

‘yes, mrs lawford,’ said mr craik, putt out his face a little, ‘are 
we to take it that you mean that?’ 

‘it’s the same date, dear, the same name even to the spelling; what 
possibly else can i think?’ 

‘and that the poor creature in the grave actually climb up out of the 
dark and--well, what?’ 

‘i know no more than you do now, bettie. but the two faces--you must 
remember you haven’t seen my husband since.’ you must remember you 
haven’t heard the peculiar--the most peculiar things he--arthur 
himself--has said to me. things such as a wife... and not in jest, 
bettie; i assure you....’ 

‘and mr bethany?’ interpolate mr craik modestly, feeling his way. 

‘pah, bethany, craik! he’d back old nick himself if he came with a good 
tale. we’ve got to act; we’ve got to settle his hash before he do any 
mischief.’ 

‘well,’ began mrs lovat, smile a little remorseful beneath the arch 
of her raise eyebrows, ‘i sincerely hope you’ll all forgive me; but i 
really am, heart and soul, with old nick, as mr danton seem on intimate 
terms enough to call him. dead, he is really immensely alluring; and 
alive, i think, awfully--just awfully pitiful and--and pathetic. but if 
i know anything of arthur he won’t be beaten by a frenchman. as for 
just the portrait, i think, do you know, i almost prefer dark men’--she 
glance up at the face immediately in front of the clock--‘at least,’ 
she add softly, ‘when they are not look very vindictive. i suppose 
people are fairly often possessed, mr craik? how many “deadly sins” are 
there?’ 

‘as a matter of fact, mrs lovat, there are seven. but i think in this 
case mrs lawford intend to suggest not so much that--that her husband 
is in that condition; habitual sin, you know--grave enough, of course, 
i own--but that he is actually being compelled, even to the extent of a 
more or less complete change of physiognomy, to follow the bidding of 
some atrocious spiritual influence. it is no breach of confidence to 
say that i have myself been present at a death-bed where the struggle 
against what i may call the end was perfectly awful to witness. i 
don’t profess to follow all the ramification of the affair, but though 
possibly mr danton may seem a little harsh, such harshness, if i may 
venture to intercede, is not necessarily “vindictive.” and--and personal 
security is a consideration.’ 

‘if you only knew the awful fear, the awful uncertainty i have been 
in, bettie! oh, it is worse, infinite worse, than you can possibly 
imagine. i have myself heard the voice speak out of him--a high, hard, 
nasal voice. i’ve seen what mr danton call the “glassiness” come into 
his face, and an expression so wild and so appalling depraved, as 
it were, that i have had to hurry downstairs to hide myself from the 
thought. i’m willing to sacrifice everything for my own husband and for 
alice; but can it be expect of me to go on harbouring....’ lawford 
listen on in vain for a moment; poor sheila, it seemed, had all but 
broken down. 

‘look here, mrs lawford,’ began danton huskily, ‘you really mustn’t give 
way; you really mustn’t. it’s awful, unspeakable awful, i admit. but 
here we are; friends, in the midst of friends. and there’s absolutely 
nothing--what’s that? eh? who is it?... oh, the maid!’ 

ada stood in the doorway look in. ‘all i’ve come to ask, ma’am,’ she 
said in a low voice, ‘is, am i to stay downstairs any longer? and are 
you aware there’s somebody in the house?’ 

‘what’s that? what’s that you’re saying?’ broke out the husky voice 
again. ‘control yourself! speak gently! what’s that?’ 

‘begging your pardon, sir, i’m perfectly under control. and all i say is 
that i can’t stay any long alone downstairs there. there’s somebody in 
the house.’ 

a concentrated hush seem to have fallen on the little assembly. 

‘“somebody”--but who?’ said sheila out of the silence. ‘you come up 
here, ada, with these idle fancies. who’s in the house? there has been 
no knock--no footstep.’ 

‘no knock, no footstep, ma’am, that i’ve heard. it’s dr ferguson, ma’am. 
he was here that first night; and he’s been here ever since. he was here 
when i came on tuesday; and he was here last night. and he’s here now. 
i can’t be deceive by my own feelings. it’s not right, it’s not 
out-spoken to keep me in the dark like this. and if you have no 
objection, i would like to go home.’ 

lawford in his utter weary had nearly closed the door and now sat 
bent up on a chair, wonder vague when this poor play was coming to 
an end, longing with an intensity almost beyond endurance for the keen 
night air, the open sky. but still his ear drank in every tiniest sound 
or stir. he heard danton’s lower voice mutter his arguments. he 
heard ada quiet sniff in the dark of the hall. and this was his 
world! this was his life’s panorama, creak on at every jolt. this was 
the ‘must’ grisel had sent him back to--these poor fool packed 
together in a panic at an old stale tale! well, they would all come out 
presently, and cluster; and the crested, cackle fellow would lead them 
safe away out of the haunt farmyard. 

he start out of his reverie at danton’s voice close at hand. 

‘look here, my good girl, we haven’t the least intention of keeping you 
in the dark. if you want to leave your mistress like this in the midst 
of her anxiety she say you can go and welcome. but it’s not a bit of 
good in the world coming up with these cock-and-bull stories. the truth 
is your master’s mad, that’s the sober truth of it--hopelessly insane, 
you understand; and we’ve got to find him. but nothing’s to be said, 
d’ye see? it’s got to be done without fuss or scandal. but if there’s 
any witness wanted, or anything of that kind, why, here you are; and,’ 
he drop his voice to an almost inaudible hoot, ‘and well worth your 
while! you did see him, eh? step into the trap, and all that?’ 

ada stood silent a moment. ‘i don’t know, sir,’ she began quietly, ‘by 
what right you speak to me about what you call my cock-and-bull stories. 
if the master is mad, all i can say to anybody is i’m very sorry to hear 
it. i came to my mistress, sir, if you please; and i prefer to take my 
orders from one who has a right to give them. did i understand you to 
say, ma’am, that you wouldn’t want me any more this evening?’ 

sheila had swept solemn to the door. ‘mr danton meant all that he said 
quite kindly, ada. i can perfectly understand your feelings--perfectly. 
and i’m very much oblige to you for all your kindness to me in very 
try circumstances. we are all agreed--we are forced to the terrible 
conclusion which--which mr danton has just--expressed. and i know i 
can rely on your discretion. don’t stay on a moment if you really are 
afraid. but when you say “some one” ada, do you mean--some one like you 
or me; or do you mean--the other?’ 

‘i’ve been sitting in the kitchen, ma’am, unable to move. i’m watch 
everywhere. the other evening i went into the drawing-room--i was alone 
in the house--and... i can’t describe it. it wasn’t dark; and yet it was 
all still and black, like the ruins after a fire. i don’t mean i saw it, 
only that it was like a scene. and then the watching--i am quite aware 
to some it may sound all fancy. but i’m not superstitious, never was. 
i only mean--that i can’t sit alone here. i daren’t. else, i’m quite 
myself. so if so be you don’t want me any more; if i can’t be of any 
further use to you or to--to mr. lawford, i’d prefer to go home.’ 

‘very well, ada; thank you. you can go out this way.’ 

the door was unchained and unbolted, and ‘good-night’ said. and sheila 
swept back in sombre pomp to her absorb friends. 

‘she’s quite a good creature at heart,’ she explain frankly, as if to 
disclaim any finesse, ‘and almost quixotic loyal. but what really 
did she mean, do you think? she is so obstinate. that maddening “some 
one”! how they do repeat themselves. it can’t be my husband; not dr 
ferguson, i mean. you don’t suppose--oh surely, not “some one” else!’ 
again the dark silence of the house seem to drift in on the little 
company. 

mr craik clear his throat. ‘i fail to catch quite all that the maid 
said,’ he murmur apologetically; ‘but i certainly did gather it was to 
some kind of--of emanate she was referring. and the “ruin,” you know. 
i’m not a mystic; and yet do you know, that somehow seem to me almost 
offensive suggestive of--of demonic influence. you don’t suppose, 
mrs lawford--and of course i wouldn’t for a moment venture on such a 
conjecture unsupported-but even if this restless spirit (let us call 
it) did succeed in making a footing, it might possibly be rather in 
the nature of a lodging than a permanent residence. moreover we are, i 
think, bound to remember that probably in all sphere of existence like 
attract like; even the gadarene episode seem to suggest a possible 
multiplication!’ he peer largely. ‘you don’t suppose, mrs lawford...?’ 

‘i think mr craik doesn’t quite relish have to break the news, sheila 
dear,’ explain mrs lovat soothingly, ‘that perhaps sabathier’s out. 
which really is quite a heavenly suggestion, for in that case your 
husband would be in, wouldn’t he? just our old stolid arthur again, you 
know. and next mr craik is suggesting, and it certainly do seem rather 
fascinating, that poor ada’s got mixed up with the frenchman’s friends, 
or perhaps, even, with one of the seventy-two prince royal. i know 
women can’t, or mustn’t reason, mr danton, but you do, i hope, just 
catch the drift?’ 

danton started. ‘i wasn’t really listen to the girl,’ he explain 
nonchalantly, shrug his black shoulder and purse up his eyes. 
‘personally, mrs lovat, i’d pack the baggage off to-night, box and all. 
but it’s not my business.’ 

‘you mustn’t be depressed--must he, mr craik? after all, my dear man, 
the business, as you call it, is not exactly entailed. but really, 
sheila, i think it must be get very late. mr bethany won’t come now. 
and the dear old thing ought certainly to have his say before we go any 
further; oughtn’t he, mr danton? so what’s the use of worrite poor 
ada’s ghost any longer. and as for poor arthur--i haven’t the faintest 
desire in the world to hear the little cart drive up, simply in case it 
should be to leave your unfortunate husband behind it, sheila. what 
it must be to be alone all night in this house with a dead and bury 
frenchman’s face--well, i shudder, dear!’ 

‘and yet, mrs lovat,’ said mr craik, with some little show of return 
bravado, ‘as we make our bed, you know.’ 

‘but in this case, you see,’ she reply reflectively, ‘if all account 
are true, mr craik, it’s manifest the wicked frenchman who has made 
the bed, and sheila who refu---- but look; mr danton is fret to get 
home.’ 

‘if you’ll all go to the door,’ said danton, seize a fleeting 
opportunity to raise his eyebrow more expressive even than if he had 
again shrug his shoulder at sheila, ‘i’ll put out the light.’ 

the night air flow into the dark house as danton hasty grope his 
way out of the dining-room. 

‘there’s only one thing,’ said sheila slowly. ‘when i last saw my 
husband, you know, he was, i think, the least bit better. he was always 
stubborn convinced it would all come right in time. that’s why, 
i think, he’s been spend his--his evenings away from home. but 
supposing it did?’ 

‘for my part,’ said mrs lovat, breathing the faint wind that was rising 
out of the west, ‘i’d sigh; i’d rub my eyes; i’d thank god for such an 
exciting dream; and i’d turn comfortable over and go to sleep again. i’m 
all for arthur--absolutely--back against the wall.’ 

‘for my part,’ said danton, loom in the dusk, ‘friend or no friend, 
i’d cut the--i’d cut him dead. but don’t fret, mrs lawford, devil or no 
devil, he’s gone for good.’ 

‘and for my part--’ began mr craik; but the door at that moment slammed. 

voices, however, broke out almost immediately in the porch. and after 
a hurried consultation, lawford in his stagnant retreat heard the door 
soft reopen, and the striking of a match. and mr craik, follow 
close by danton’s great body, stole circumspect across his dim 
chink, and the first adventurer went stumble down the kitchen 
staircase. 

‘i suppose,’ mutter lawford, turning his head in the darkness, ‘they 
have come back to put out the kitchen gas.’ 

danton began a busy tuneless whistle between his teeth. 

‘coming, craik?’ he call thickly, after a long pause. 

apparently no answer had been return to his inquiry: he wait a 
little longer, with leg apart, and eyeball envelop in brood 
darkness. ‘i’ll just go and tell the ladies you’re coming,’ he sudden 
bawl down the hollow. ‘do you hear, craik? they’re alone, you know.’ 
and with that he resolute wheel and rapid made his way down 
the steps into the garden. some few moments afterwards mr craik shook 
himself free of the basement, hasten at a spirited trot to rejoin his 
companions, and in his absence of mind omit to shut the front door. 



chapter twenty-three 

lawford sat on in the darkness, and now one sentence and now another of 
their talk would repeat itself in his memory, in much the same way as 
one listless turn over an antiquated diary, to read here and there a 
flatten and almost meaningless sentiment. sometimes a footstep pass 
echo along the path under the trees, then his thought would leave 
him, and he would listen and listen till it had die quite out. it was 
all so very far away. and they too--these talkers--so very far away; as 
remote and yet as clear as the character in a play when they have made 
their final bow, and have left the curtain stage, and one is standing 
uncompanioned and nearly the last of the spectators, and the lights that 
have summon back reality again are being extinguished. it was only by 
painful effort of mind that he kept recall himself to himself--why he 
was here; what it all meant; that this was indeed actuality. 

yet, after all, this by now was his customary loneliness: there was 
little else he desire for the present than the hospitality of the dark. 
he glance around him in the clear, black, stirless air. here and there, 
it seemed, a hump or spindle form held against all comer its passive 
place. here and there a tiny faint of light played. night after 
night these chair and table kept their blank vigil. why, he thought, 
pleased as an overtire child with the fancy, in a sense they were 
always alone, shut up in a kind of senselessness--just like us all. but 
what--what, he had sudden risen from his chair to ask himself--what 
on earth are they alone with? no precise answer had been forthcoming to 
that question. but as in turning in the doorway, he look out into 
the night, flash here and there in dark space of the sky above 
the withering apple leaves--the long dark wall and quiet untrodden 
road--with the tumultuous beating of the stars--one thing at least he 
was conscious of have learned in these last few days: he knew what 
kind of a place he was alone in. 

it seem to weave a spell over him, to call up a nostalgia he had lost 
all remembrance of since childhood. and that queer homesickness, at 
any rate, was all sabathier’s doing, he thought, smile in his rather 
careworn fashion. sabathier! it was this mystery, bereft now of all 
fear, and this beauty together, that made life the endless, change and 
yet changeless, thing it was. and yet mystery and lovely alike were 
only really appreciable with one’s legs, as it were, dangle down over 
into the grave. 

just with one’s lantern lit, on the edge of the whisper unknown, and 
a reiterate go back out of the solitude into the light and warmth, 
to the voice and glancing of eyes, to say good-bye:--that after all was 
this life on earth for those who watch as well as acted. what if one’s 
earthly home were empty?--still the restless fret traveller must 
tarry; ‘for the horrible worst of it is, my friend,’ he said, as if to 
some silent companion listen behind him, ‘the worst of it is, your 
way was just simply, solely suicide.’ what was it herbert had call 
it? yes, a cul-de-sac--black, lofty, immensely still and old and 
picturesque, but none the less merely a contemptible cul-de-sac; no 
abiding place, scarcely even suffice with its flagstone for a groan 
from the fugitive and delude refugee. there was no peace for the 
wicked. the question of course then came in--was there any peace 
anywhere, for anybody? 

he smile at a sudden odd remembrance of a quiet, sardonic old aunt 
whom he use to stay with as a child. ‘children should be seen and not 
heard,’ she would say, peer at him over his favourite pudding. 

his eyes rest vacant on the darkl street. he fell again into 
reverie, gigantic brood over by shape only imagination dim 
conceive of: the remote alley of his mind astir with a shadowy and 
ceaseless traffic which it wasn’t at least this life’s business to 
hearken after, or regard. and as he stood there in a mysterious 
throng peaceful solitude such as he had never known before, faint 
out of the silence broke the sound of approach hoofs. his heart 
seem to gather itself close; a momentary blind veiled his eyes, so 
wildly had his blood surge up into cheek and brain. he remained, caught 
up, with head slightly inclined, listening, as, with an interminable 
tardiness, measureless anguished hope die down into nothing in his 
mind. 

cold and heavy, his heart began to beat again, as if to catch up those 
laggard moments. he turn with an infinite revulsion of feeling to look 
out on the lamp of the old fly that had drawn up at his gate. 

he watch incurious a little old lady rather arduous alight, pause, 
and look up at his darken windows, and after a momentary hesitation, 
and a word over her shoulder to the cabman, stoop and fumble at the iron 
latch. he watch her with a kind of wonder aversion, still scarcely 
tinge with curiosity. she had succeed in lift the latch and in 
push her way through, and was even now steady advance towards 
him along the tile path. and a minute after he recognise with the 
strangest reaction the quiet old figure that had share a sunset with 
him age and age ago--his mother’s old schoolfellow, miss sinnet. 

he was already ransack the still faintly-perfumed dining-room for 
matches, and had just succeed in relight the still-warm lamp, when 
he heard her quiet step in the porch, even felt her peer in, in the 
gloom, with all her years’ trickle customary behind her, a little 
dubious of knock on a wide-open door. 

but the lamp lit lawford went out again and welcome his visitor. ‘i am 
alone,’ he was explain gravely, ‘my wife’s away and the whole house 
topsy-turvy. how very, very kind of you!’ 

the old lady was breathing a little heavy after her ascent of the 
steep steps, and seem not to have notice his outstretched hand. none 
the less she follow him in, and when she was well advanced into the 
light room, she sigh deeply, raise her veil over the front of her 
bonnet, and leisurely took out her spectacles. 

‘i suppose,’ she was explain in a little quiet voice, ‘you are mr 
arthur lawford, but as i did not catch sight of a light in any of the 
window i began to fear that the cabman might have set me down at the 
wrong house.’ 

she raise her head, and first through, and then over her spectacles she 
deliberate and steadfast regard him. 

‘yes,’ she said to herself, and turned, not as it seem entire with 
satisfaction, to look for a chair. he wheel the most comfortable up to 
the table. 

‘i have been visiting my old friend miss tucker--rev w. tucker’s 
daughter--she, i knew, could give me your address; and sure enough she 
did. your road, d’ye see, was on my way home. and i determined, in spite 
of the hour, just to inquire. you must understand, mr lawford, there 
was something that i rather particularly want to say to you. but 
there!--you’re look sadly, sadly ill; and,’ she glance round a 
little inquisitively, ‘i think my story had better wait for a more 
convenient occasion.’ 

‘not at all, miss sinnet; please not,’ lawford assured her, ‘really. i 
have been ill, but i’m now practically quite myself again. my wife and 
daughter have gone away for a few days; and i follow to-morrow, so if 
you’ll forgive such a very poor welcome, it may be my--my only chance. 
do please let me hear.’ 

the old lady leant back in her chair, placed her hand on its arms and 
soft panted, while out of the rather broad serene of her face she 
sat blinking up at her companion as if after a long talk, instead of 
at the beginning of one. ‘no,’ she repeated reflectively, ‘i don’t like 
your looks at all; yet here we are, enjoy beautiful autumn weather, 
mr lawford, why not make use of it?’ 

‘oh yes,’ said lawford, ‘i do. i have been making tremendous use of it.’ 

her eyelid flicker at his candid glance. ‘and do your business 
permit of much walking?’ 

‘well, i’ve been malinger these last few days idle at home; but i 
am usually more or less my own man, miss sinnet. i walk a little.’ 

‘h’m, but not much in my direction, mr lawford?’ she quiz him. 

‘all horrible indolence, miss sinnet. but i often--often think of you; 
and especially just lately.’ 

‘well, now,’ she wriggle round her head to get a better view of him 
rather stiff seat on his chair, ‘that’s very peculiar; because i too 
have been thinking lately a great deal of you. and yet--i fancy i 
shall succeed in mystify you presently--not precisely of you, but of 
somebody else!’ 

‘you do mystify me--“somebody else”!’ he reply gallantly. ‘and that is 
the story, i suppose?’ 

‘that’s the story,’ repeated miss sinnet with some little triumph. ‘now, 
let me see; it was on saturday last--yes, saturday evening; a wonderful 
sunset; bewley heath.’ 

‘oh yes; my daughter’s favourite walk.’ 

‘and your daughter’s age now?’ 

‘she’s nearly sixteen; alice, you know.’ 

‘ah, yes, alice; to be sure. it is a beautiful walk, and if fine, i 
generally take mine there too. it’s near; there’s shade; it’s very 
little frequented; and i can wander and muse undisturbed. and that 
i think is pretty well all that an old woman like me is fit for, mr 
lawford. “nearly sixteen!” is it possible? dear, dear me? but let me get 
on. on my way home from the heath, you may be aware, before one reach 
the road again, there’s a somewhat steep ascent. i haven’t the strength 
i had, and whether i’m fatigue or not, i have always made it a rule to 
rest awhile on a most convenient little seat at the summit, admire the 
view--what i can see of it--and then make my way quietly, quiet home. 
on saturday, however, and it most rarely occurs--once, i remember, when 
a very civil nursemaid was sitting with two charming behave little 
children in the sunshine, and i heard they were my old friend major 
loder’s son’s children--on saturday, as i was saying, my own particular 
little haunt was already occupied.’ she glance back at him from out of 
her thoughts, as it were. ‘by a gentleman. i say, gentleman; though i 
must confess that his conduct--perhaps, too, a little something even in 
his appearance, somewhat belie the term. anyhow, gentleman let us call 
him.’ 

lawford, all attention, nodded, and encouraging smiled. 

‘i’m not one of those tiresome, suspicious people, mr lawford, who 
distrust strangers. i have never been molested, and i have enjoy many 
and many a most interesting, and sometimes instructive, talk with an 
individual whom i’ve never seen in my life before, and this side of the 
grave perhaps, am never likely to see again.’ she lift her head with 
purse lips, and grave yet still flickering regard him once more. 
‘well, i made some trifling remark--the weather, the view, what-not,’ 
she explain with a little jerk of her shoulder--‘and to my extreme 
astonishment he turn and address me by name--miss sinnet. 
unmistakably--sinnet. now, perhaps, and very rightly, you won’t 
considered that a very peculiar thing to do? but you will recollect, mr 
lawford, that i had been sitting there a considerable time. surely, now, 
if you had recognise my face you would have address me at once?’ 

‘was he, do you think, miss sinnet, a little uncertain, perhaps?’ 

‘never mind, never mind; let me get on with my story first. the next 
thing my gentleman do is more mysterious still. his whole manner was 
a little peculiar, perhaps--a certain restlessness, what, in fact, one 
might be almost tempt to call a certain furtive of behaviour. 
never mind. what he do next is to ask me a riddle! perhaps you won’t 
think that was peculiar either?’ 

‘what was the riddle?’ smile lawford. 

‘why, to be sure, to guess his name! simply guided, so i surmised, 
by some very faint resemblance in his face to his mother, who was, 
he assured me, an old schoolfellow of mine at brighton. i thought 
and thought. i confess the adventure was beginning to be a little 
perplexing. but of course, very, very few of my old schoolfellow remain 
distinct in my memory now; and i fear that grow more treacherous the 
long i live. their face as girl are clear enough. but later in life 
most of them drift out of sight--many, alas, are dead; and, well, at 
last i narrow my man down to one. and who now, do you suppose that 
was?’ 

lawford sustain an expression of abysmal mystification. ‘do tell 
me--who?’ 

‘your own poor dear mother, mr lawford.’ 

‘he said so?’ 

‘no, no,’ said the old lady, with some vexation, close her eyes. ‘i 
said so. he ask me to guess. and i guess mary lawford; now do you 
see?’ 

`yes, yes. but was he like her, miss sinnet? that was really very, very 
extraordinary. did you see any likeness in his face?’ 

miss sinnet very deliberate took her spectacles out of their case 
again. ‘now, see here, sir; this is being practical, isn’t it? i’m just 
go to take a leisurely glance at yours. but you mustn’t let me forget 
the time. you must look after the time for me.’ 

‘it’s about a quarter to ten,’ said lawford, have glance first at the 
stop clock on the chimney-piece and then at his watch. he then sat 
quite still and endeavour to sit at ease, while the old lady lift 
her bonnet head and ever so grave and benign survey him. 

‘h’m,’ she said at last. ‘there’s no mistake you. it’s mary’s chin, 
and mary’s brow--with just a little something, perhaps, of her dreamy 
eye. but you haven’t all her looks, mr lawford, by any manner of means. 
she was a very beautiful girl, and so vivacious, so fanciful--it was, i 
suppose the foreign strain showing itself. even marriage did not quite 
succeed in spoil her.’ 

‘the foreign strain?’ lawford glance with a kind of fleeting fixity at 
the quiet old figure. ‘the foreign strain?’ 

your mother’s maiden name, my dear mr lawford, surely memory do not 
deceive me in that, was van der gucht. that, i believe, is a foreign 
name.’ 

‘ah, yes,’ said lawford, his rising thought sink quiet to rest 
again. ‘van der gucht, of course. i--how stupid of me!’ 

‘as a matter of fact, your mother was very proud of her dutch blood. but 
there,’ she flung out little fin-like sleeves, ‘if you don’t let me keep 
to my story i shall go back as uneasy as i came. and you didn’t,’ she 
add even more fretfully, ‘you didn’t tell me the time.’ 

lawford stare at his watch again for some few moments without replying. 
‘it’s a few minutes to ten,’ he said at last. 

‘dear me! and i’m keeping the cabman! i mast hurry on. well, now, i put 
it to you; you shall be my father confessor--though i detest the idea in 
real life--was i wrong? was i justified in profess to the poor fellow 
that i detect a likeness when there was extremely little likeness 
there?’ 

‘what! none at all!’ cry lawford; ‘not the faintest trace?’ 

‘my dear good mr lawford,’ she expostulated, pat her lap, ‘there’s 
very little more than a trace of my dear beautiful mary in you, her 
own son. how could there be--how could you expect it in him, a complete 
stranger? no, it was nothing but my own foolish kindliness. it might 
have been mary’s son for all that i could recollect. i haven’t for 
years, please remember, had the pleasure of receiving a visit from 
you. i am firm of opinionthat i was justified. my motive was entire 
benevolent. and then--to my positive amazement--well, i won’t say hard 
things of the absent; but he sudden turn round on me with a “thank 
you, miss bennett.” bennett, hark ye! perhaps you won’t agree that i had 
any justification in being vex and--and affront at that.’ 

‘i think, miss sinnet,’ said lawford solemnly, ‘that you were perfectly 
justified. oh, perfectly. i wonder even you had the patience to give 
the real arthur lawford a chance to ask your forgiveness for--or the 
stranger.’ 

‘well, candidly,’ said miss sinnett severely. ‘i was very much 
scandalised; and i shouldn’t be here now telling you my story if it 
hadn’t been for your mother.’ 

‘my mother!’ 

the old lady rather grim enjoy his confusion. ‘yes, mr lawford, 
your mother. i don’t know why--something in his manner, something in 
his face--so dejected, so unhappy, so--if it is not uncharitablnesse to 
say it--so wild: it has haunt me: i haven’t been able to put the 
matter out of my mind. i have lain awake in my bed thinking of him. why 
did he speak to me, i keep ask myself. why did he play me so very 
aimless a trick? how had he learned my name? why was he sitting there so 
solitary and so dejected? and worse even than that, what has become of 
him? a little more patience, a little more charity, perhaps--what might 
i not have done for him? the whole thing has harass and distress me 
more than i can say. would you believe it, i have actually twice, and on 
one occasion, three times in a day made my way to the seat--hoping to 
see him there. and i am not so young as i was. and then, as i say, to 
crown all, i had a most remarkable dream about your mother. but that’s 
my own affair. elderly people like me are used--well, perhaps i won’t 
say used--we’re not surprise or disturbed by visit from those who have 
gone before. we live, in a sense, among the tombs; though i would not 
have you fancy it’s in any way a morbid or unhappy life to lead. we 
don’t talk about it--certainly not to young people. let them enjoy their 
eden while they can; though there’s plenty of apples, i fear, on the 
tree yet, mr lawford.’ 

she leant forward and whisper it with a big, simple smile:--‘we don’t 
even discuss it much among ourselves. but as one get near and near 
to the wicket-gate there’s other company around one than you’ll find 
in--in the directory. and that is why i have just come on here tonight. 
very probably my errand may seem to have no meaning for you. you look 
ill, but you don’t appear to be in any great trouble or adversity, as i 
fear in my--well, there--as i fear you might be. i must say, though, 
it seem a terribly empty house. and no lights, too!’ 

she slowly, with a little tremble nod of her bonnet, turn 
her head and glance quietly, fixedly, and unflinchingly, out of the 
half-open door. ‘but that’s not my affair.’ and again she look at him 
for a little while. 

then she stoop forward and touched him kindly and trusting on the 
knee. ‘trouble or no trouble,’ she said, ‘it’s never too late to remind 
a man of his mother. and i’m sure, mr lawford, i’m very glad to hear you 
are struggle up out of your illness again. we must keep a brave heart, 
forty or seventy, whichever we may be: “while the evil days come not nor 
the years draw nigh when thou shalt say, i have no pleasure in them,” 
though they have not come to me even yet; and i trust from the bottom of 
my heart, not to you.’ 

she look at him without a trace of emotion or constraint in her 
large, quiet face, and their eyes met for a moment in that brief, fixed, 
baffling fashion that seem to prove that mankind is after all but a 
dumb masked creature saddle with the vain illusion of speech. 

‘and now that i’ve ease my conscience,’ said the old lady, pull 
down her veil, ‘i must beg pardon for intrude at such an hour of the 
evening. and may i have your arm down those dreadful steps? really, mr 
lawford, judge from the house they erect for us, the builder must 
have a very peculiar notion of mankind. is the fly still there? i 
expressly told the man to wait, and what i am go to do if--!’ 

‘he’s there,’ lawford reassure her, crane his neck in their slow 
progress to catch a peep into the quiet road. and like a flock of bird 
scared by a chance comer at their feed in some desert field, a 
whirr cloud of memory swept soft up in his mind--memories whose 
import he made no effort to discover. none the less, the leisurely 
descent became in their company something of a real experience even in 
such a brim week. 

‘i hope, some day, you will really tell me your dream?’ he said, push 
the old lady’s silk skirt in after her as she slow climb into the 
carriage. 

‘ah, my dear lawford, when you are my age,’ she call back to him, 
grope her way into the rather musty gloom, ‘you’ll dream such dream 
for yourself. life’s not what’s just the fashion. and there are queer 
things to be seen and heard just quiet in one’s solitude than this 
busy life give us time to discover. but as for my mystify bewley 
acquaintance--i confess i cannot make head or tail of him.’ 

‘was he,’ said lawford rather vaguely, look up into the dim white 
face that with its plume fill nearly the whole carriage window, ‘was 
his face very unpleasing?’ 

she raise a glove hand. ‘it has haunt me, haunt me, mr lawford; 
its--its conflict! poor fellow; i hope, i do hope, he face his trouble 
out. but i shall never see him again.’ 

he squeeze the trembling, kindly old hand. ‘i bet, miss sinnet,’ he 
said earnestly, ‘even your have thought kindly of the poor beggar 
ease his mind--whoever he may have been. i assure you, assure you of 
that.’ 

‘ay, but i did more than think,’ reply the old lady with a chuckle 
that might have seem even a little derisive if it had not been so 
profound magnanimous. 

he watch the old black fly roll slow off, and still smile at miss 
sinnet’s inscrutable finesse went back into the house. ‘and now, my 
friend,’ he said, address peaceful the throng darkness, ‘the 
time’s nearly up for me to go too.’ 

he had made up his mind. or, rather, it seem as if in the unregarded 
silence of this last long talk his mind had made up itself. only among 
impossible had he the shadow of a choice. in this old haunt 
house, amid this shallow turmoil no practicable clue could show itself 
of a way out. he would go away for a while. 

he left the door ajar behind him for the moments still left, and 
stood for a while thinking. then, lamp in hand, he descended into the 
breakfast-room for pen, ink, and paper. he sat for some time in that 
underground calm, nibble his pen like a harass and self-conscious 
schoolboy. at last he began: 

‘my dear sheila,--i must tell you, to begin with, that the change has 
now all pass away. i am--as near as man can be--completely myself 
again. and next: that i overheard all that was said to-night in the 
dining-room. 

‘i’m sorry for listening; but it’s no good go over all that now. here 
i am, and, as you said, for alice’s sake we must make the best of it. i 
am go away for a while, to get, if i can, a chance to quiet down. i 
suppose every one come soon or later to a time in life when there 
is nothing else to be done but just shut one’s eyes and blunder on. and 
that’s all i can do now--blunder on....’ 

he paused, and suddenly, at the echo of the words in his mind, a 
revulsion of feeling--shame and hatred of himself surge up, and he 
tore his letter into tiny pieces. once more he began, ‘my dear sheila,’ 
drop his pen, sat on for a long time, cold and inert, harbour 
almost unendurable a pitiful, hopeless longing.... he would write to 
grisel another day. 

he leant back in his chair, his finger pressed against his eyelids. and 
clear than those which myriad-hued reality can ever present, pictures 
of the imagination swam up before his eyes. it seemed, indeed, that even 
now some ghost, some revenant of himself was sitting there, in the old 
green churchyard, roof only with a thousand thousand stars. the breath 
of dark stir soft on his cheek. some little scamper shape 
slip by. a bird on high cry weirdly, solemnly, over the globe. he 
shudder faintly, and look out again into the small lamplit room. 

here, too, was quite as inexplicable a coming and going. a fly was 
walking on the table beneath his eyes, with the uneasy gait of one that 
has outlive his hour and most of his companions. mice were scamper 
and shriek in the empty kitchen. and all about him, in the viewless 
air, the phantom of another life pass by, unmindful of his motionless 
body. he fell into a lethargy of the senses, and only gradual became 
aware after a while of the strange long-drawn sigh of rain at the 
window. he rose and open it. the night air flow in, chill with its 
waters and faint fragrant of the dust. it soothe away all thought for 
a while. he turn back to his chair. he would wait until the rain had 
lull before starting.... 

a little before midnight the door was softly, and with extreme care, 
pushed open, and mr bethany’s old face, with an intense and sharpen 
scrutiny, look in on the lamplit room. and as if still intent on 
the least sound within the empty wall around him, he came near, and 
stoop across the table, stare through his spectacles at the sidelong 
face of his friend, so still, with hand so lightly laid on the arms of 
his chair that the old man had need to watch close to detect in his 
heavy slumber the slow measured rise and fall of his breast. 

he turn weary away mutter a little, between an immeasurable 
relief and a now almost intolerable medley of vexations. what was 
this monstrous web of craik’s? what had the creature been nod and 
duckete about?--those whisperings, that tattling? and what in the end, 
when you were old and sour and out-strategied, what was the end to be 
of this urgent dream call life? he sat quiet down and drew his hand 
over his face, pushed his lean knot finger up under his spectacles, 
then sat blinking--and soft slow decipher the solitary ‘my dear 
sheila’ on lawford’s note-paper. ‘h’m,’ he muttered, and look up again 
at the dark still eyelid that in the strange torpor of sleep might yet 
be dim convey to the dream brain behind them some hint of his 
presence. ‘i wish to goodness, you wonderful old creature,’ he muttered, 
wag his head, ‘i wish to goodness you’d wake up.’ 

for some time he sat on, listen to the still soft downpour on the 
fade leaves. ‘they don’t come to me,’ he said soft again; with a 
tiny smile on his old face. ‘it’s that old medieval craik: with a 
face like a last year’s rookery!’ and again he sat, with head a little 
sidelong, listen now to the infinitesimal sound of life without, 
now to the thought within, and ever and again he gaze steadfast on 
lawford. 

at last it seem in the haunt quiet other thought came to him. 
a cloud, as it were of youth, drew over the wrinkle skin, compose the 
birdlike keenness; his head nodded. once, like lawford in the dark 
at widderstone, he glance up sharp across the lamplight at 
his phantasmagoric shadowy companion, heard the steady surge of 
multitudinous rain-drops, like the roar of time’s wing chariot 
hurry near; then he too, with spectacles awry, bob on in his 
chair, a weary old sentinel on the outskirts of his friend’s denude 
battlefield. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the return, by walter de la mare 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the return *** 

***** this file should be name 3075-0.txt or 3075-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/3075/ 

produce by eve sobol 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, “information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right 
of replacement or refund” describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’ with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm’s 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state’s laws. 

the foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation’s web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
