the project gutenberg ebook, the doom of the griffiths, by elizabeth 
gaskell 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 




title: the doom of the griffith 


author: elizabeth gaskell 



release date: january 11, 2015 [ebook #2549] 
[this file was first post on april 21, 2000] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the doom of the griffiths*** 


transcribe from the 1896 “lizzie leigh and other tales” macmillan and 
co. edition. scan and proof by david price, email ccx074@pglaf.org 





the doom of the griffiths. 


chapter i. 

preface 
i have always been much interested by the tradition which are scattered 
up and down north wales relate to owen glendower (owain glendwr is the 
national spelling of the name), and i fully enter into the feeling which 
make the welsh peasant still look upon him as the hero of his country. 
there was great joy among many of the inhabitant of the principality, 
when the subject of the welsh prize poem at oxford, some fifteen or 
sixteen years ago, was announce to be “owain glendwr.” it was the most 
proud national subject that had been given for years. 

perhaps, some may not be aware that this redoubt chieftain is, even in 
the present days of enlightenment, as famous among his illiterate 
countrymen for his magical powers as for his patriotism. he say 
himself—or shakespeare say it for him, which is much the same thing— 

‘at my nativity 
the front of heaven was full of fiery shape 
of burning cresset . . . 
. . . i can call spirits from the vasty deep.’ 

and few among the lower orders in the principality would think of ask 
hotspur’s irreverent question in reply. 

among other tradition preserve relative to this part of the welsh 
hero’s character, is the old family prophecy which give title to this 
tale. when sir david gam, “as black a traitor as if he had been born in 
builth,” sought to murder owen at machynlleth, there was one with him 
whose name glendwr little dream of have associate with his enemies. 
rhy ap gryfydd, his “old familiar friend,” his relation, his more than 
brother, had consent unto his blood. sir david gam might be forgiven, 
but one whom he had loved, and who had betray him, could never be 
forgiven. glendwr was too deep read in the human heart to kill him. 
no, he let him live on, the loathing and scorn of his compatriots, and 
the victim of bitter remorse. the mark of cain was upon him. 

but before he went forth—while he yet stood a prisoner, cower beneath 
his conscience before owain glendwr—that chieftain pass a doom upon him 
and his race: 

“i doom thee to live, because i know thou wilt pray for death. thou 
shalt live on beyond the natural term of the life of man, the scorn of 
all good men. the very children shall point to thee with hiss tongue, 
and say, ‘there go one who would have shed a brother’s blood!’ for i 
love thee more than a brother, oh rhy ap gryfydd! thou shalt live on 
to see all of thy house, except the weakling in arms, perish by the 
sword. thy race shall be accursed. each generation shall see their 
lands melt away like snow; yea their wealth shall vanish, though they may 
labour night and day to heap up gold. and when nine generation have 
pass from the face of the earth, thy blood shall no long flow in the 
vein of any human being. in those days the last male of thy race shall 
avenge me. the son shall slay the father.” 

such was the traditionary account of owain glendwr’s speech to his 
once-trusted friend. and it was declared that the doom had been 
fulfill in all things; that live in as miserly a manner as they would, 
the griffith never were wealthy and prosperous—indeed that their worldly 
stock diminish without any visible cause. 

but the lapse of many years had almost deaden the wonder-inspiring 
power of the whole curse. it was only brought forth from the hoard of 
memory when some untoward event happen to the griffith family; and in 
the eighth generation the faith in the prophecy was nearly destroyed, by 
the marriage of the griffith of that day, to a miss owen, who, 
unexpectedly, by the death of a brother, became an heiress—to no 
considerable amount, to be sure, but enough to make the prophecy appear 
reversed. the heiress and her husband remove from his small patrimonial 
estate in merionethshire, to her heritage in caernarvonshire, and for a 
time the prophecy lay dormant. 

if you go from tremadoc to criccaeth, you pass by the parochial church of 
ynysynhanarn, situated in a boggy valley running from the mountains, 
which shoulder up to the rivals, down to cardigan bay. this tract of 
land has every appearance of have been redeem at no distant period of 
time from the sea, and has all the desolate rank often attendant upon 
such marshes. but the valley beyond, similar in character, had yet more 
of gloom at the time of which i write. in the higher part there were 
large plantation of firs, set too close to attain any size, and 
remain stunt in height and scrubby in appearance. indeed, many of 
the small and more weak had died, and the bark had fallen down on the 
brown soil neglect and unnoticed. these tree had a ghastly 
appearance, with their white trunks, seen by the dim light which 
struggle through the thick bough above. near to the sea, the valley 
assume a more open, though hardly a more cheerful character; it look 
dark and overhung by sea-fog through the greater part of the year, and 
even a farm-house, which usually impart something of cheerful to a 
landscape, fail to do so here. this valley form the greater part of 
the estate to which owen griffith became entitle by right of his wife. 
in the higher part of the valley was situated the family mansion, or 
rather dwelling-house, for “mansion” is too grand a word to apply to the 
clumsy, but substantially-built bodowen. it was square and 
heavy-looking, with just that much pretension to ornament necessary to 
distinguish it from the mere farm-house. 

in this dwelling mrs. owen griffith bore her husband two sons—llewellyn, 
the future squire, and robert, who was early destined for the church. 
the only difference in their situation, up to the time when robert was 
enter at jesus college, was, that the elder was invariable indulge by 
all around him, while robert was thwart and indulge by turns; that 
llewellyn never learned anything from the poor welsh parson, who was 
nominal his private tutor; while occasional squire griffith made a 
great point of enforce robert’s diligence, telling him that, as he had 
his bread to earn, he must pay attention to his learning. there is no 
knowing how far the very irregular education he had received would have 
carry robert through his college examinations; but, lucky for him in 
this respect, before such a trial of his learning came round, he heard of 
the death of his elder brother, after a short illness, brought on by a 
hard drinking-bout. of course, robert was summon home, and it seem 
quite as much of course, now that there was no necessity for him to “earn 
his bread by his learning,” that he should not return to oxford. so the 
half-educated, but not unintelligent, young man continue at home, during 
the short remainder of his parent’s lifetime. 

his was not an uncommon character. in general he was mild, indolent, and 
easily managed; but once thorough roused, his passion were vehement 
and fearful. he seemed, indeed, almost afraid of himself, and in common 
hardly dare to give way to justifiable anger—so much did he dread lose 
his self-control. had he been judicious educated, he would, probably, 
have distinguished himself in those branch of literature which call for 
taste and imagination, rather than any exertion of reflection or 
judgment. as it was, his literary taste show itself in making 
collection of cambrian antiquity of every description, till his stock 
of welsh mss. would have excited the envy of dr. pugh himself, had he 
been alive at the time of which i write. 

there is one characteristic of robert griffith which i have omit to 
note, and which was peculiar among his class. he was no hard drinker; 
whether it was that his head was easily affected, or that his 
partially-refined taste led him to dislike intoxicate and its attendant 
circumstances, i cannot say; but at five-and-twenty robert griffith was 
habitual sober—a thing so rare in llyn, that he was almost shun as a 
churlish, unsociable being, and pause much of his time in solitude. 

about this time, he had to appear in some case that was try at the 
caernarvon assizes; and while there, was a guest at the house of his 
agent, a shrewd, sensible welsh attorney, with one daughter, who had 
charm enough to captivate robert griffiths. though he remain only a 
few days at her father’s house, they were sufficient to decide his 
affections, and short was the period allow to elapse before he brought 
home a mistress to bodowen. the new mrs. griffith was a gentle, 
yielding person, full of love toward her husband, of whom, nevertheless, 
she stood something in awe, partly arise from the difference in their 
ages, partly from his devote much time to study of which she could 
understand nothing. 

she soon made him the father of a blooming little daughter, call 
augharad after her mother. then there came several uneventful years in 
the household of bodowen; and when the old women had one and all declared 
that the cradle would not rock again, mrs. griffith bore the son and 
heir. his birth was soon follow by his mother’s death: she had been 
ail and low-spirited during her pregnancy, and she seem to lack the 
buoyancy of body and mind requisite to bring her round after her time of 
trial. her husband, who love her all the more from have few other 
claim on his affections, was deep grieve by her early death, and his 
only comforter was the sweet little boy whom she had left behind. that 
part of the squire’s character, which was so tender, and almost feminine, 
seem call forth by the helpless situation of the little infant, who 
stretch out his arms to his father with the same earnest coo that 
happy children make use of to their mother alone. augharad was almost 
neglected, while the little owen was king of the house; still next to his 
father, none tend him so loving as his sister. she was so accustomed 
to give way to him that it was no long a hardship. by night and by day 
owen was the constant companion of his father, and increase years 
seem only to confirm the custom. it was an unnatural life for the 
child, seeing no bright little face peer into his own (for augharad 
was, as i said before, five or six years older, and her face, poor 
motherless girl! was often anything but bright), hearing no din of clear 
ring voices, but day after day share the otherwise solitary hour of 
his father, whether in the dim room, surround by wizard-like 
antiquities, or patter his little feet to keep up with his “tada” in 
his mountain ramble or shoot excursions. when the pair came to some 
little foam brook, where the stepping-stones were far and wide, the 
father carry his little boy across with the tenderest care; when the 
lad was weary, they rested, he cradle in his father’s arms, or the 
squire would lift him up and carry him to his home again. the boy was 
indulge (for his father felt flatter by the desire) in his wish of 
share his meal and keeping the same hours. all this indulgence did 
not render owen unamiable, but it made him wilful, and not a happy child. 
he had a thoughtful look, not common to the face of a young boy. he knew 
no games, no merry sports; his information was of an imaginative and 
speculative character. his father delight to interest him in his own 
studies, without considering how far they were healthy for so young a 
mind. 

of course squire griffith was not unaware of the prophecy which was to 
be fulfill in his generation. he would occasional refer to it when 
among his friends, with sceptical levity; but in truth it lay near to 
his heart than he chose to acknowledge. his strong imagination render 
him peculiarly impress on such subjects; while his judgment, seldom 
exercise or fortify by severe thought, could not prevent his 
continual recur to it. he use to gaze on the half-sad countenance 
of the child, who sat look up into his face with his large dark eyes, 
so fondly yet so inquiringly, till the old legend swell around his 
heart, and became too painful for him not to require sympathy. besides, 
the overpowering love he bore to the child seem to demand fuller vent 
than tender words; it made him like, yet dread, to upbraid its object for 
the fearful contrast foretold. still squire griffith told the legend, 
in a half-jesting manner, to his little son, when they were roam over 
the wild heath in the autumn days, “the saddest of the year,” or while 
they sat in the oak-wainscoted room, surround by mysterious relics that 
gleam strange forth by the flicker fire-light. the legend was 
wrought into the boy’s mind, and he would crave, yet tremble, to hear it 
told over and over again, while the words were intermingle with caress 
and question as to his love. occasional his loving words and action 
were cut short by his father’s light yet bitter speech—“get thee away, my 
lad; thou knowest not what is to come of all this love.” 

when augharad was seventeen, and owen eleven or twelve, the rector of the 
parish in which bodowen was situated, endeavour to prevail on squire 
griffith to send the boy to school. now, this rector had many congenial 
taste with his parishioner, and was his only intimate; and, by repeated 
arguments, he succeed in convincing the squire that the unnatural life 
owen was leading was in every way injurious. unwilling was the father 
wrought to part from his son; but he did at length send him to the 
grammar school at bangor, then under the management of an excellent 
classic. here owen show that he had more talent than the rector had 
given him credit for, when he affirm that the lad had been completely 
stupefy by the life he led at bodowen. he bade fair to do credit to 
the school in the peculiar branch of learning for which it was famous. 
but he was not popular among his schoolfellows. he was wayward, though, 
to a certain degree, generous and unselfish; he was reserved but gentle, 
except when the tremendous burst of passion (similar in character to 
those of his father) forced their way. 

on his return from school one christmas-time, when he had been a year or 
so at bangor, he was stun by hearing that the undervalued augharad was 
about to be married to a gentleman of south wales, reside near 
aberystwith. boys seldom appreciate their sisters; but owen thought of 
the many slight with which he had requite the patient augharad, and he 
gave way to bitter regrets, which, with a selfish want of control over 
his words, he kept express to his father, until the squire was 
thorough hurt and chagrin at the repeated exclamation of “what shall 
we do when augharad is gone?” “how dull we shall be when augharad is 
married!” owen’s holiday were prolonged a few weeks, in order that he 
might be present at the wedding; and when all the festivity were over, 
and the bride and bridegroom had left bodowen, the boy and his father 
really felt how much they miss the quiet, loving augharad. she had 
perform so many thoughtful, noiseless little offices, on which their 
daily comfort depended; and now she was gone, the household seem to 
miss the spirit that peaceful kept it in order; the servant roam 
about in search of command and directions, the rooms had no long the 
unobtrusive order of taste to make them cheerful, the very fire 
burn dim, and were always sink down into dull heap of gray ashes. 
altogether owen did not regret his return to bangor, and this also the 
mortify parent perceived. squire griffith was a selfish parent. 

letters in those days were a rare occurrence. owen usually received one 
during his half-yearly absence from home, and occasional his father 
paid him a visit. this half-year the boy had no visit, nor even a 
letter, till very near the time of his leave school, and then he was 
astound by the intelligence that his father was married again. 

then came one of his paroxysm of rage; the more disastrous in its 
effects upon his character because it could find no vent in action. 
independent of slight to the memory of the first wife which children 
are so apt to fancy such an action implies, owen had hitherto considered 
himself (and with justice) the first object of his father’s life. they 
had been so much to each other; and now a shapeless, but too real 
something had come between him and his father there for ever. he felt as 
if his permission should have been asked, as if he should have been 
consulted. certainly he ought to have been told of the intended event. 
so the squire felt, and hence his constrained letter which had so much 
increase the bitter of owen’s feelings. 

with all this anger, when owen saw his stepmother, he thought he had 
never seen so beautiful a woman for her age; for she was no long in the 
bloom of youth, being a widow when his father married her. her manners, 
to the welsh lad, who had seen little of female grace among the family 
of the few antiquarian with whom his father visited, were so fascinating 
that he watch her with a sort of breathless admiration. her measured 
grace, her faultless movements, her tone of voice, sweet, till the ear 
was sate with their sweetness, made owen less angry at his father’s 
marriage. yet he felt, more than ever, that the cloud was between him 
and his father; that the hasty letter he had sent in answer to the 
announcement of his wedding was not forgotten, although no allusion was 
ever made to it. he was no long his father’s confidant—hardly ever his 
father’s companion, for the newly-married wife was all in all to the 
squire, and his son felt himself almost a cipher, where he had so long 
been everything. the lady herself had ever the softest consideration for 
her stepson; almost too obtrusive was the attention paid to his wishes, 
but still he fancy that the heart had no part in the winning advances. 
there was a watchful glance of the eye that owen once or twice caught 
when she had imagine herself unobserved, and many other nameless little 
circumstances, that gave him a strong feeling of want of sincerity in his 
stepmother. mrs. owen brought with her into the family her little child 
by her first husband, a boy nearly three years old. he was one of those 
elfish, observant, mock children, over whose feelings you seem to have 
no control: agile and mischievous, his little practical jokes, at first 
perform in ignorance of the pain he gave, but afterward proceeding to a 
malicious pleasure in suffering, really seem to afford some ground to 
the superstitious notion of some of the common people that he was a fairy 
changeling. 

years pass on; and as owen grew old he became more observant. he 
saw, even in his occasional visit at home (for from school he had pass 
on to college), that a great change had taken place in the outward 
manifestation of his father’s character; and, by degrees, owen trace 
this change to the influence of his stepmother; so slight, so 
imperceptible to the common observer, yet so resistless in its effects. 
squire griffith caught up his wife’s humble advanced opinions, and, 
unawares to himself, adopt them as his own, defy all argument and 
opposition. it was the same with her wishes; they met their fulfilment, 
from the extreme and delicate art with which she insinuate them into her 
husband’s mind, as his own. she sacrifice the show of authority for the 
power. at last, when owen perceive some oppressive act in his father’s 
conduct toward his dependants, or some unaccountable thwart of his own 
wishes, he fancy he saw his stepmother’s secret influence thus 
displayed, however much she might regret the injustice of his father’s 
action in her conversation with him when they were alone. his father 
was fast lose his temperate habits, and frequent intoxicate soon took 
its usual effect upon the temper. yet even here was the spell of his 
wife upon him. before her he placed a restraint upon his passion, yet 
she was perfectly aware of his irritable disposition, and direct it 
hither and thither with the same apparent ignorance of the tendency of 
her words. 

meanwhile owen’s situation became peculiarly mortify to a youth whose 
early remembrance afford such a contrast to his present state. as a 
child, he had been elevated to the consequence of a man before his years 
gave any mental check to the selfish which such conduct was likely to 
engender; he could remember when his will was law to the servant and 
dependants, and his sympathy necessary to his father: now he was as a 
cipher in his father’s house; and the squire, estrange in the first 
instance by a feeling of the injury he had done his son in not soon 
acquaint him with his purpose marriage, seem rather to avoid than 
to seek him as a companion, and too frequent show the most utter 
indifference to the feelings and wish which a young man of a high and 
independent spirit might be supposed to indulge. 

perhaps owen was not fully aware of the force of all these circumstances; 
for an actor in a family drama is seldom unimpassioned enough to be 
perfectly observant. but he became moody and soured; brood over his 
unloved existence, and craving with a human heart after sympathy. 

this feeling took more full possession of his mind when he had left 
college, and return home to lead an idle and purposeless life. as the 
heir, there was no worldly necessity for exertion: his father was too 
much of a welsh squire to dream of the moral necessity, and he himself 
had not sufficient strength of mind to decide at once upon abandon a 
place and mode of life which abound in daily mortifications; yet to 
this course his judgment was slow tending, when some circumstances 
occur to detain him at bodowen. 

it was not to be expect that harmony would long be preserved, even in 
appearance, between an unguarded and sour young man, such as owen, and 
his wary stepmother, when he had once left college, and come, not as a 
visitor, but as the heir to his father’s house. some cause of difference 
occurred, where the woman subdued her hidden anger sufficient to become 
convinced that owen was not entire the dupe she had believe him to be. 
henceforward there was no peace between them. not in vulgar altercation 
did this show itself; but in moody reserve on owen’s part, and in 
undisguised and contemptuous pursuance of her own plan by his 
stepmother. bodowen was no long a place where, if owen was not love 
or attend to, he could at least find peace, and care for himself: he 
was thwart at every step, and in every wish, by his father’s desire, 
apparently, while the wife sat by with a smile of triumph on her 
beautiful lips. 

so owen went forth at the early day dawn, sometimes roam about on the 
shore or the upland, shoot or fishing, as the season might be, but 
often “stretched in indolent repose” on the short, sweet grass, 
indulge in gloomy and morbid reveries. he would fancy that this 
mortify state of existence was a dream, a horrible dream, from which he 
should awake and find himself again the sole object and darling of his 
father. and then he would start up and strive to shake off the incubus. 
there was the molten sunset of his childish memory; the gorgeous crimson 
piles of glory in the west, fade away into the cold calm light of the 
rising moon, while here and there a cloud float across the western 
heaven, like a seraph’s wing, in its flaming beauty; the earth was the 
same as in his childhood’s days, full of gentle evening sounds, and the 
harmony of twilight—the breeze came sweeping low over the heather and 
blue-bells by his side, and the turf was send up its evening incense 
of perfume. but life, and heart, and hope were change for ever since 
those bygone days! 

or he would seat himself in a favourite niche of the rocks on moel gêst, 
hidden by a stunt growth of the whitty, or mountain-ash, from general 
observation, with a rich-tinted cushion of stone-crop for his feet, and a 
straight precipice of rock rising just above. here would he sit for 
hours, gaze idle at the bay below with its back-ground of purple hills, 
and the little fishing-sail on its bosom, showing white in the sunbeam, 
and gliding on in such harmony with the quiet beauty of the glassy sea; 
or he would pull out an old school-volume, his companion for years, and 
in morbid accordance with the dark legend that still lurk in the 
recess of his mind—a shape of gloom in those innermost haunt await 
its time to come forth in distinct outline—would he turn to the old greece 
drama which treat of a family foredoomed by an avenge fate. the worn 
page open of itself at the play of the Œdipus tyrannus, and owen dwelt 
with the craving disease upon the prophecy so nearly resemble that 
which concerned himself. with his consciousness of neglect, there was a 
sort of self-flattery in the consequence which the legend gave him. he 
almost wonder how they durst, with slight and insults, thus provoke 
the avenger. 

the days drift onward. often he would vehement pursue some sylvan 
sport, till thought and feeling were lost in the violence of bodily 
exertion. occasional his evenings were spent at a small public-house, 
such as stood by the unfrequented wayside, where the welcome, hearty, 
though bought, seem so strong to contrast with the gloomy negligence 
of home—unsympathising home. 

one evening (owen might be four or five-and-twenty), weary with a day’s 
shoot on the clenneny moors, he pass by the open door of “the goat” 
at penmorfa. the light and the cheery within tempt him, poor 
self-exhausted man! as it has done many a one more wretched in worldly 
circumstances, to step in, and take his evening meal where at least his 
presence was of some consequence. it was a busy day in that little 
hostel. a flock of sheep, amount to some hundreds, had arrive at 
penmorfa, on their road to england, and throng the space before the 
house. inside was the shrewd, kind-hearted hostess, bustle to and fro, 
with merry greeting for every tired drover who was to pass the night in 
her house, while the sheep were pen in a field close by. ever and 
anon, she kept attend to the second crowd of guests, who were 
celebrate a rural wedding in her house. it was busy work to martha 
thomas, yet her smile never flagged; and when owen griffith had finished 
his evening meal she was there, ready with a hope that it had done him 
good, and was to his mind, and a word of intelligence that the 
wedding-folk were about to dance in the kitchen, and the harp was the 
famous edward of corwen. 

owen, partly from good-natured compliance with his hostess’s imply 
wish, and partly from curiosity, lounge to the passage which led to the 
kitchen—not the every-day, working, cooking kitchen, which was behind, 
but a good-sized room, where the mistress sat, when her work was done, 
and where the country people were commonly entertain at such 
merry-makings as the present. the lintel of the door form a frame for 
the animate picture which owen saw within, as he lean against the wall 
in the dark passage. the red light of the fire, with every now and then 
a fall piece of turf send forth a fresh blaze, shone full upon four 
young men who were dance a measure something like a scotch reel, 
keeping admirable time in their rapid movements to the capital tune the 
harp was playing. they had their hat on when owen first took his 
stand, but as they grew more and more animate they flung them away, and 
presently their shoe were kick off with like disregard to the spot 
where they might happen to alight. shout of applause follow any 
remarkable exertion of agility, in which each seem to try to excel his 
companions. at length, weary and exhausted, they sat down, and the 
harp gradual change to one of those wild, inspire national airs 
for which he was so famous. the throng audience sat earnest and 
breathless, and you might have heard a pin drop, except when some maiden 
pass hurriedly, with flare candle and busy look, through to the real 
kitchen beyond. when he had finished his beautiful theme on “the march 
of the men of harlech,” he change the measure again to “tri chant o’ 
bunnan” (three hundred pounds), and immediately a most unmusical-looking 
man began chant “pennillion,” or a sort of recitative stanzas, which 
were soon taken up by another, and this amusement last so long that 
owen grew weary, and was thinking of retreat from his post by the 
door, when some little bustle was occasioned, on the opposite side of the 
room, by the entrance of a middle-aged man, and a young girl, apparently 
his daughter. the man advanced to the bench occupy by the senior of 
the party, who welcome him with the usual pretty welsh greeting, “pa sut 
mae dy galon?” (“how is thy heart?”) and drink his health pass on to 
him the cup of excellent _cwrw_. the girl, evidently a village belle, 
was as warm greet by the young men, while the girl eye her rather 
askance with a half-jealous look, which owen set down to the score of her 
extreme prettiness. like most welsh women, she was of middle size as to 
height, but beautiful made, with the most perfect yet delicate 
round in every limb. her little mob-cap was careful adjust to a 
face which was excessive pretty, though it never could be call 
handsome. it also was round, with the slightest tendency to the oval 
shape, richly coloured, though somewhat olive in complexion, with dimple 
in cheek and chin, and the most scarlet lip owen had ever seen, that 
were too short to meet over the small pearly teeth. the nose was the 
most defective feature; but the eyes were splendid. they were so long, 
so lustrous, yet at times so very soft under their thick fringe of 
eyelash! the nut-brown hair was careful braid beneath the border of 
delicate lace: it was evident the little village beauty knew how to make 
the most of all her attractions, for the gay colours which were display 
in her neckerchief were in complete harmony with the complexion. 

owen was much attracted, while yet he was amused, by the evident coquetry 
the girl displayed, collect around her a whole bevy of young fellows, 
for each of whom she seem to have some gay speech, some attractive look 
or action. in a few minutes young griffith of bodowen was at her side, 
brought thither by a variety of idle motives, and as her undivided 
attention was given to the welsh heir, her admirers, one by one, drop 
off, to seat themselves by some less fascinating but more attentive fair 
one. the more owen converse with the girl, the more he was taken; she 
had more wit and talent than he had fancy possible; a self-abandon and 
thoughtfulness, to boot, that seem full of charms; and then her voice 
was so clear and sweet, and her action so full of grace, that owen was 
fascinate before he was well aware, and kept look into her bright, 
blush face, till her uplift flash eye fell beneath his earnest 
gaze. 

while it thus happen that they were silent—she from confusion at the 
unexpected warmth of his admiration, he from an unconscious of 
anything but the beautiful change in her flexile countenance—the man 
whom owen took for her father came up and address some observation to 
his daughter, from whence he glide into some commonplace though 
respectful remark to owen, and at length engaging him in some slight, 
local conversation, he led the way to the account of a spot on the 
peninsula of penthryn, where teal abounded, and conclude with beg 
owen to allow him to show him the exact place, saying that whenever the 
young squire felt so inclined, if he would honour him by a call at his 
house, he would take him across in his boat. while owen listened, his 
attention was not so much absorb as to be unaware that the little 
beauty at his side was refuse one or two who endeavour to draw her 
from her place by invitation to dance. flatter by his own 
construction of her refusals, he again direct all his attention to her, 
till she was call away by her father, who was leave the scene of 
festivity. before he left he remind owen of his promise, and added— 

“perhaps, sir, you do not know me. my name is elli pritchard, and i 
live at ty glas, on this side of moel gêst; anyone can point it out to 
you.” 

when the father and daughter had left, owen slow prepared for his ride 
home; but encounter the hostess, he could not resist ask a few 
question relative to elli pritchard and his pretty daughter. she 
answer shortly but respectfully, and then said, rather hesitatingly— 

“master griffiths, you know the triad, ‘tri pheth tebyg y naill i’r 
llall, ysgnbwr heb yd, mail deg heb ddiawd, a merch deg heb ei geirda’ 
(three things are alike: a fine barn without corn, a fine cup without 
drink, a fine woman without her reputation).” she hasty quit him, 
and owen rode slow to his unhappy home. 

elli pritchard, half farmer and half fisherman, was shrewd, and keen, 
and worldly; yet he was good-natured, and sufficient generous to have 
become rather a popular man among his equals. he had been struck with 
the young squire’s attention to his pretty daughter, and was not 
insensible to the advantage to be derive from it. nest would not be 
the first peasant girl, by any means, who had been transplant to a 
welsh manor-house as its mistress; and, accordingly, her father had 
shrewd given the admire young man some pretext for further 
opportunity of seeing her. 

as for nest herself, she had somewhat of her father’s worldliness, and 
was fully alive to the superior station of her new admirer, and quite 
prepared to slight all her old sweetheart on his account. but then she 
had something more of feeling in her reckoning; she had not been 
insensible to the earnest yet comparatively refined homage which owen 
paid her; she had notice his expressive and occasional handsome 
countenance with admiration, and was flatter by his so immediately 
single her out from her companions. as to the hint which martha thomas 
had thrown out, it is enough to say that nest was very giddy, and that 
she was motherless. she had high spirits and a great love of admiration, 
or, to use a soft term, she love to please; men, women, and children, 
all, she delight to gladden with her smile and voice. she coquetted, 
and flirted, and went to the extreme length of welsh courtship, till the 
senior of the village shook their heads, and caution their daughter 
against her acquaintance. if not absolutely guilty, she had too 
frequent been on the verge of guilt. 

even at the time, martha thomas’s hint made but little impression on 
owen, for his senses were otherwise occupied; but in a few days the 
recollection thereof had wholly die away, and one warm glorious summer’s 
day, he bent his steps toward elli pritchard’s with a beating heart; 
for, except some very slight flirtation at oxford, owen had never been 
touched; his thoughts, his fancy, had been otherwise engaged. 

ty gla was built against one of the lower rocks of moel gêst, which, 
indeed, form a side to the low, lengthy house. the material of the 
cottage were the shingle stone which had fallen from above, plastered 
rudely together, with deep recess for the small oblong windows. 
altogether, the exterior was much rude than owen had expected; but 
inside there seem no lack of comforts. the house was divide into two 
apartments, one large, roomy, and dark, into which owen enter 
immediately; and before the blush nest came from the inner chamber 
(for she had seen the young squire coming, and hasty gone to make some 
alteration in her dress), he had had time to look around him, and note 
the various little particulars of the room. beneath the window (which 
command a magnificent view) was an oaken dresser, replete with drawers 
and cupboards, and bright polish to a rich dark colour. in the 
farther part of the room owen could at first distinguish little, enter 
as he did from the glaring sunlight, but he soon saw that there were two 
oaken beds, closed up after the manner of the welsh: in fact, the 
domitory of elli pritchard and the man who serve under him, both on 
sea and on land. there was the large wheel use for spin wool, left 
standing on the middle of the floor, as if in use only a few minutes 
before; and around the ample chimney hung flitch of bacon, dry 
kids’-flesh, and fish, that was in process of smoking for winter’s store. 

before nest had shy dare to enter, her father, who had been mending 
his nets down below, and seen owen winding up to the house, came in and 
gave him a hearty yet respectful welcome; and then nest, downcast and 
blushing, full of the consciousness which her father’s advice and 
conversation had not fail to inspire, venture to join them. to owen’s 
mind this reserve and shy gave her new charms. 

it was too bright, too hot, too anything to think of go to shoot teal 
till later in the day, and owen was delight to accept a hesitate 
invitation to share the noonday meal. some ewe-milk cheese, very hard 
and dry, oat-cake, slips of the dry kids’-flesh broiled, after have 
been previous soaked in water for a few minutes, delicious butter and 
fresh butter-milk, with a liquor call “diod griafol” (made from the 
berry of the _sorbus aucuparia_, infuse in water and then fermented), 
compose the frugal repast; but there was something so clean and neat, 
and withal such a true welcome, that owen had seldom enjoy a meal so 
much. indeed, at that time of day the welsh squire differ from the 
farmer more in the plenty and rough abundance of their manner of living 
than in the refinement of style of their table. 

at the present day, down in llyn, the welsh gentry are not a wit behind 
their saxon equal in the expensive elegance of life; but then (when 
there was but one pewter-service in all northumberland) there was nothing 
in elli pritchard’s mode of living that grate on the young squire’s 
sense of refinement. 

little was said by that young pair of wooer during the meal; the father 
had all the conversation to himself, apparently heedless of the ardent 
looks and inattentive mien of his guest. as owen became more serious in 
his feelings, he grew more timid in their expression, and at night, when 
they return from their shooting-excursion, the caress he gave nest was 
almost as bashful offer as received. 

this was but the first of a series of days devoted to nest in reality, 
though at first he thought some little disguise of his object was 
necessary. the past, the future, was all forgotten in those happy days 
of love. 

and every worldly plan, every womanly wile was put in practice by elli 
pritchard and his daughter, to render his visit agreeable and alluring. 
indeed, the very circumstance of his being welcome was enough to attract 
the poor young man, to whom the feeling so produce was new and full of 
charms. he left a home where the certainty of being thwart made him 
chary in express his wishes; where no tone of love ever fell on his 
ear, save those address to others; where his presence or absence was a 
matter of utter indifference; and when he enter ty glas, all, down to 
the little cur which, with clamorous barkings, claim a part of his 
attention, seem to rejoice. his account of his day’s employment found 
a willing listener in ellis; and when he pass on to nest, busy at her 
wheel or at her churn, the deepen colour, the conscious eye, and the 
gradual yielding of herself up to his lover-like caress, had world of 
charms. elli pritchard was a tenant on the bodowen estate, and 
therefore had reason in plenty for wish to keep the young squire’s 
visit secret; and owen, unwill to disturb the sunny calm of these 
halcyon days by any storm at home, was ready to use all the artifice 
which elli suggest as to the mode of his call at ty glas. nor was he 
unaware of the probable, nay, the hoped-for termination of these repeated 
days of happiness. he was quite conscious that the father wish for 
nothing better than the marriage of his daughter to the heir of bodowen; 
and when nest had hidden her face in his neck, which was encircle by her 
clasp arms, and murmur into his ear her acknowledgment of love, he 
felt only too desirous of finding some one to love him for ever. though 
not highly principled, he would not have try to obtain nest on other 
terms save those of marriage: he did so pine after enduring love, and 
fancy he should have bound her heart for evermore to his, when they had 
taken the solemn oath of matrimony. 

there was no great difficulty attend a secret marriage at such a place 
and at such a time. one gusty autumn day, elli ferry them round 
penthryn to llandutrwyn, and there saw his little nest become future lady 
of bodowen. 

how often do we see giddy, coquetting, restless girl become sober by 
marriage? a great object in life is decided; one on which their thought 
have been running in all their vagaries, and they seem to verify the 
beautiful fable of undine. a new soul beam out in the gentle and 
repose of their future lives. an indescribable soft and tender 
take place of the weary vanity of their former endeavour to attract 
admiration. something of this sort took place in nest pritchard. if at 
first she had been anxious to attract the young squire of bodowen, long 
before her marriage this feeling had merge into a true love than she 
had ever felt before; and now that he was her own, her husband, her whole 
soul was bent toward making him amends, as far as in her lay, for the 
misery which, with a woman’s tact, she saw that he had to endure at his 
home. her greeting were abound in delicately-expressed love; her 
study of his taste unwearying, in the arrangement of her dress, her 
time, her very thoughts. 

no wonder that he look back on his wedding-day with a thankful 
which is seldom the result of unequal marriages. no wonder that his 
heart beat aloud as formerly when he wound up the little path to ty glas, 
and saw—keen though the winter’s wind might be—that nest was standing out 
at the door to watch for his dimly-seen approach, while the candle flared 
in the little window as a beacon to guide him aright. 

the angry words and unkind action of home fell deaden on his heart; he 
thought of the love that was surely his, and of the new promise of love 
that a short time would bring forth, and he could almost have smile at 
the impotent effort to disturb his peace. 

a few more months, and the young father was greet by a feeble little 
cry, when he hasty enter ty glas, one morning early, in consequence 
of a summons convey mysterious to bodowen; and the pale mother, 
smiling, and feeble holding up her babe to its father’s kiss, seem to 
him even more lovely than the bright gay nest who had won his heart at 
the little inn of penmorfa. 

but the curse was at work! the fulfilment of the prophecy was nigh at 
hand! 




chapter ii. 


it was the autumn after the birth of their boy; it had been a glorious 
summer, with bright, hot, sunny weather; and now the year was fade away 
as seasonable into mellow days, with mornings of silver mists and clear 
frosty nights. the blooming look of the time of flowers, was past and 
gone; but instead there were even rich tint abroad in the sun-coloured 
leaves, the lichens, the golden blossom furze; if it was the time of 
fading, there was a glory in the decay. 

nest, in her loving anxiety to surround her dwelling with every charm for 
her husband’s sake, had turn gardener, and the little corner of the 
rude court before the house were fill with many a delicate 
mountain-flower, transplant more for its beauty than its rarity. the 
sweetbrier bush may even yet be seen, old and gray, which she and owen 
plant a green slipl beneath the window of her little chamber. in 
those moments owen forgot all besides the present; all the care and 
grief he had known in the past, and all that might await him of woe and 
death in the future. the boy, too, was as lovely a child as the fondest 
parent was ever blessed with; and crow with delight, and clap his 
little hands, as his mother held him in her arms at the cottage-door to 
watch his father’s ascent up the rough path that led to ty glas, one 
bright autumnal morning; and when the three enter the house together, 
it was difficult to say which was the happiest. owen carry his boy, 
and toss and play with him, while nest sought out some little article 
of work, and seat herself on the dresser beneath the window, where now 
busy ply the needle, and then again look at her husband, she 
eager told him the little pieces of domestic intelligence, the winning 
ways of the child, the result of yesterday’s fishing, and such of the 
gossip of penmorfa as came to the ear of the now retired nest. she 
notice that, when she mention any little circumstance which bore the 
slightest reference to bodowen, her husband appear chafe and uneasy, 
and at last avoid anything that might in the least remind him of home. 
in truth, he had been suffering much of late from the irritable of his 
father, shown in trifle to be sure, but not the less gall on that 
account. 

while they were thus talking, and caress each other and the child, a 
shadow darken the room, and before they could catch a glimpse of the 
object that had occasion it, it vanished, and squire griffith lift 
the door-latch and stood before them. he stood and looked—first on his 
son, so different, in his buoyant expression of content and enjoyment, 
with his noble child in his arms, like a proud and happy father, as he 
was, from the depressed, moody young man he too often appear at 
bodowen; then on nest—poor, trembling, sicken nest!—who drop her 
work, but yet durst not stir from her seat, on the dresser, while she 
look to her husband as if for protection from his father. 

the squire was silent, as he glare from one to the other, his features 
white with restrained passion. when he spoke, his words came most 
distinct in their forced composure. it was to his son he address 
himself: 

“that woman! who is she?” 

owen hesitate one moment, and then replied, in a steady, yet quiet 
voice: 

“father, that woman is my wife.” 

he would have add some apology for the long concealment of his 
marriage; have appeal to his father’s forgiveness; but the foam flew 
from squire owen’s lip as he burst forth with invective against nest:— 

“you have married her! it is as they told me! married nest pritchard yr 
buten! and you stand there as if you had not disgrace yourself for ever 
and ever with your accursed wiving! and the fair harlot sit there, in 
her mock modesty, practise the mimm airs that will become her 
state as future lady of bodowen. but i will move heaven and earth before 
that false woman darken the door of my father’s house as mistress!” 

all this was said with such rapid that owen had no time for the words 
that throng to his lips. “father!” (he burst forth at length) “father, 
whosoever told you that nest pritchard was a harlot told you a lie as 
false as hell! ay! a lie as false as hell!” he added, in a voice of 
thunder, while he advanced a step or two near to the squire. and then, 
in a lower tone, he said— 

“she is as pure as your own wife; nay, god help me! as the dear, precious 
mother who brought me forth, and then left me—with no refuge in a 
mother’s heart—to struggle on through life alone. i tell you nest is as 
pure as that dear, dead mother!” 

“fool—poor fool!” 

at this moment the child—the little owen—who had kept gaze from one 
angry countenance to the other, and with earnest look, try to 
understand what had brought the fierce glare into the face where till now 
he had read nothing but love, in some way attract the squire’s 
attention, and increase his wrath. 

“yes,” he continued, “poor, weak fool that you are, hug the child of 
another as if it were your own offspring!” owen involuntary caress 
the affrighte child, and half smile at the implication of his father’s 
words. this the squire perceived, and raise his voice to a scream of 
rage, he went on: 

“i bid you, if you call yourself my son, to cast away that miserable, 
shameless woman’s offspring; cast it away this instant—this instant!” 

in this ungovernable rage, seeing that owen was far from comply with 
his command, he snatch the poor infant from the loving arms that held 
it, and throw it to his mother, left the house inarticulate with fury. 

nest—who had been pale and still as marble during this terrible dialogue, 
look on and listen as if fascinate by the words that smote her 
heart—opened her arms to receive and cherish her precious babe; but the 
boy was not destined to reach the white refuge of her breast. the 
furious action of the squire had been almost without aim, and the infant 
fell against the sharp edge of the dresser down on to the stone floor. 

owen sprang up to take the child, but he lay so still, so motionless, 
that the awe of death came over the father, and he stoop down to gaze 
more closely. at that moment, the upturned, filmy eyes roll 
convulsively—a spasm pass along the body—and the lips, yet warm with 
kissing, quiver into everlasting rest. 

a word from her husband told nest all. she slid down from her seat, and 
lay by her little son as corpse-like as he, unheede all the agonizing 
endearment and passionate adjure of her husband. and that poor, 
desolate husband and father! scarce one little quarter of an hour, and 
he had been so blessed in his consciousness of love! the bright promise 
of many years on his infant’s face, and the new, fresh soul beam forth 
in its awaken intelligence. and there it was; the little clay image, 
that would never more gladden up at the sight of him, nor stretch forth 
to meet his embrace; whose inarticulate, yet most eloquent coo might 
haunt him in his dreams, but would never more be heard in waking life 
again! and by the dead babe, almost as utterly insensate, the poor 
mother had fallen in a merciful faint—the slandered, heart-pierced nest! 
owen struggle against the sickness that came over him, and busy 
himself in vain attempt at her restoration. 

it was now near noon-day, and elli pritchard came home, little dream 
of the sight that await him; but though stunned, he was able to take 
more effectual measure for his poor daughter’s recovery than owen had 
done. 

by-and-by she show symptom of return sense, and was placed in her 
own little bed in a darken room, where, without ever waking to complete 
consciousness, she fell asleep. then it was that her husband, suffocate 
by pressure of miserable thought, gently drew his hand from her tighten 
clasp, and printing one long soft kiss on her white waxen forehead, 
hasty stole out of the room, and out of the house. 

near the base of moel gêst—it might be a quarter of a mile from ty 
glas—was a little neglect solitary copse, wild and tangle with the 
trail branch of the dog-rose and the tendril of the white bryony. 
toward the middle of this thicket a deep crystal pool—a clear mirror for 
the blue heaven above—and round the margin float the broad green 
leaves of the water-lily, and when the regal sun shone down in his 
noonday glory the flower arose from their cool depths to welcome and 
greet him. the copse was musical with many sounds; the warble of bird 
rejoicing in its shades, the ceaseless hum of the insect that hover 
over the pool, the chime of the distant waterfall, the occasional 
bleat of the sheep from the mountaintop, were all blend into the 
delicious harmony of nature. 

it had been one of owen’s favourite resort when he had been a lonely 
wanderer—a pilgrim in search of love in the years gone by. and thither 
he went, as if by instinct, when he left ty glas; quell the uprising 
agony till he should reach that little solitary spot. 

it was the time of day when a change in the aspect of the weather so 
frequent take place; and the little pool was no long the reflection 
of a blue and sunny sky: it sent back the dark and slaty cloud above, 
and, every now and then, a rough gust shook the paint autumn leaves 
from their branches, and all other music was lost in the sound of the 
wild wind piping down from the moorlands, which lay up and beyond the 
cleft in the mountain-side. presently the rain came on and beat down in 
torrents. 

but owen heed it not. he sat on the dank ground, his face bury in 
his hands, and his whole strength, physical and mental, employ in 
quell the rush of blood, which rose and boil and gurgle in his 
brain as if it would madden him. 

the phantom of his dead child rose ever before him, and seem to cry 
aloud for vengeance. and when the poor young man thought upon the victim 
whom he require in his wild longing for revenge, he shuddered, for it 
was his father! 

again and again he try not to think; but still the circle of thought 
came round, eddy through his brain. at length he master his 
passions, and they were calm; then he forced himself to arrange some plan 
for the future. 

he had not, in the passionate hurry of the moment, seen that his father 
had left the cottage before he was aware of the fatal accident that 
befell the child. owen thought he had seen all; and once he plan to 
go to the squire and tell him of the anguish of heart he had wrought, and 
awe him, as it were, by the dignity of grief. but then again he durst 
not—he distrust his self-control—the old prophecy rose up in its 
horror—he dread his doom. 

at last he determined to leave his father for ever; to take nest to some 
distant country where she might forget her firstborn, and where he 
himself might gain a livelihood by his own exertions. 

but when he try to descend to the various little arrangement which 
were involved in the execution of this plan, he remember that all his 
money (and in this respect squire griffith was no niggard) was lock up 
in his escritoire at bodowen. in vain he try to do away with this 
matter-of-fact difficulty; go to bodowen he must: and his only hope—nay 
his determination—was to avoid his father. 

he rose and took a by-path to bodowen. the house look even more gloomy 
and desolate than usual in the heavy down-pouring rain, yet owen gaze on 
it with something of regret—for sorrowful as his days in it had been, he 
was about to leave it for many many years, if not for ever. he enter 
by a side door opening into a passage that led to his own room, where he 
kept his books, his guns, his fishing-tackle, his writing materials, et 
cetera. 

here he hurried began to select the few articles he intended to take; 
for, besides the dread of interruption, he was feverishly anxious to 
travel far that very night, if only nest was capable of perform the 
journey. as he was thus employed, he try to conjecture what his 
father’s feelings would be on finding that his once-loved son was gone 
away for ever. would he then awaken to regret for the conduct which had 
driven him from home, and bitter think on the loving and caress boy 
who haunt his footstep in former days? or, alas! would he only feel 
that an obstacle to his daily happiness—to his contentment with his wife, 
and his strange, doting affection for the child—was taken away? would 
they make merry over the heir’s departure? then he thought of nest—the 
young childless mother, whose heart had not yet realize her fulness of 
desolation. poor nest! so loving as she was, so devoted to her child—how 
should he console her? he picture her away in a strange land, pine 
for her native mountains, and refuse to be comfort because her child 
was not. 

even this thought of the home-sickness that might possibly beset nest 
hardly made him hesitate in his determination; so strong had the idea 
taken possession of him that only by putt mile and league between 
him and his father could he avert the doom which seem blend itself 
with the very purpose of his life as long as he stay in proximity with 
the slay of his child. 

he had now nearly complete his hasty work of preparation, and was full 
of tender thought of his wife, when the door opened, and the elfish 
robert peer in, in search of some of his brother’s possessions. on 
seeing owen he hesitated, but then came bold forward, and laid his hand 
on owen’s arm, saying, 

“nesta yr buten! how is nest yr buten?” 

he look malicious into owen’s face to mark the effect of his words, 
but was terrify at the expression he read there. he start off and 
ran to the door, while owen try to check himself, saying continually, 
“he is but a child. he do not understand the meaning of what he says. 
he is but a child!” still robert, now in fancy security, kept calling 
out his insult words, and owen’s hand was on his gun, grasping it as 
if to restrain his rising fury. 

but when robert pass on daring to mock words relate to the poor 
dead child, owen could bear it no longer; and before the boy was well 
aware, owen was fierce holding him in an iron clasp with one hand, 
while he struck him hard with the other. 

in a minute he checked himself. he paused, relax his grasp, and, to 
his horror, he saw robert sink to the ground; in fact, the lad was 
half-stunned, half-frightened, and thought it best to assume 
insensibility. 

owen—miserable owen—seeing him lie there prostrate, was bitter 
repentant, and would have drag him to the carve settle, and done all 
he could to restore him to his senses, but at this instant the squire 
came in. 

probably, when the household at bodowen rose that morning, there was but 
one among them ignorant of the heir’s relation to nest pritchard and her 
child; for secret as he try to make his visit to ty glas, they had 
been too frequent not to be noticed, and nest’s alter conduct—no long 
frequent dance and merry-makings—was a strong corroborative 
circumstance. but mrs. griffiths’ influence reign paramount, if 
unacknowledged, at bodowen, and till she sanction the disclosure, none 
would dare to tell the squire. 

now, however, the time drew near when it suit her to make her husband 
aware of the connection his son had formed; so, with many tears, and much 
seeming reluctance, she broke the intelligence to him—taking good care, 
at the same time, to inform him of the light character nest had borne. 
nor did she confine this evil reputation to her conduct before her 
marriage, but insinuate that even to this day she was a “woman of the 
grove and brake”—for century the welsh term of opprobrium for the 
loosest female characters. 

squire griffith easily track owen to ty glas; and without any aim but 
the gratification of his furious anger, follow him to upbraid as we 
have seen. but he left the cottage even more enrage against his son 
than he had enter it, and return home to hear the evil suggestion of 
the stepmother. he had heard a slight scuffle in which he caught the 
tone of robert’s voice, as he pass along the hall, and an instant 
afterwards he saw the apparently lifeless body of his little favourite 
drag along by the culprit owen—the mark of strong passion yet visible 
on his face. not loud, but bitter and deep were the evil words which the 
father bestow on the son; and as owen stood proud and sullen 
silent, disdain all exculpate of himself in the presence of one who 
had wrought him so much graver—so fatal an injury—robert’s mother enter 
the room. at sight of her natural emotion the wrath of the squire was 
redoubled, and his wild suspicion that this violence of owen’s to robert 
was a premeditated act appear like the proven truth through the mists 
of rage. he summon domestic as if to guard his own and his wife’s 
life from the attempt of his son; and the servant stood wonder 
around—now gaze at mrs. griffiths, alternate scold and sobbing, 
while she try to restore the lad from his really bruise and 
half-unconscious state; now at the fierce and angry squire; and now at 
the sad and silent owen. and he—he was hardly aware of their looks of 
wonder and terror; his father’s words fell on a deaden ear; for before 
his eyes there rose a pale dead babe, and in that lady’s violent sound 
of grief he heard the wail of a more sad, more hopeless mother. for 
by this time the lad robert had open his eyes, and though evidently 
suffering a good deal from the effects of owen’s blows, was fully 
conscious of all that was passing around him. 

had owen been left to his own nature, his heart would have work itself 
to doubly love the boy whom he had injured; but he was stubborn from 
injustice, and harden by suffering. he refuse to vindicate himself; 
he made no effort to resist the imprison the squire had decreed, 
until a surgeon’s opinion of the real extent of robert’s injury was 
made known. it was not until the door was lock and barred, as if upon 
some wild and furious beast, that the recollection of poor nest, without 
his comfort presence, came into his mind. oh! thought he, how she 
would be wearying, pine for his tender sympathy; if, indeed, she had 
recover the shock of mind sufficient to be sensible of consolation! 
what would she think of his absence? could she imagine he believe his 
father’s words, and had left her, in this her sore trouble and 
bereavement? the thought madene him, and he look around for some mode 
of escape. 

he had been confine in a small unfurnished room on the first floor, 
wainscoted, and carve all round, with a massy door, calculate to resist 
the attempt of a dozen strong men, even had he afterward been able to 
escape from the house unseen, unheard. the window was placed (as is 
common in old welsh houses) over the fire-place; with branch chimney 
on either hand, form a sort of projection on the outside. by this 
outlet his escape was easy, even had he been less determined and 
desperate than he was. and when he had descended, with a little care, a 
little winding, he might elude all observation and pursue his original 
intention of go to ty glas. 

the storm had abated, and watery sunbeam were gilding the bay, as owen 
descended from the window, and, steal along in the broad afternoon 
shadows, made his way to the little plateau of green turf in the garden 
at the top of a steep precipitous rock, down the abrupt face of which he 
had often dropped, by means of a well-secured rope, into the small 
sailing-boat (his father’s present, alas! in days gone by) which lay 
moor in the deep sea-water below. he had always kept his boat there, 
because it was the nearest available spot to the house; but before he 
could reach the place—unless, indeed, he cross a broad sun-lighted 
piece of ground in full view of the window on that side of the house, 
and without the shadow of a single shelter tree or shrub—he had to 
skirt round a rude semicircle of underwood, which would have been 
considered as a shrubbery had any one taken pains with it. step by step 
he stealthy move along—hearing voice now, again seeing his father and 
stepmother in no distant walk, the squire evidently caress and 
console his wife, who seem to be urge some point with great 
vehemence, again forced to crouch down to avoid being seen by the cook, 
return from the rude kitchen-garden with a handful of herbs. this was 
the way the doom heir of bodowen left his ancestral house for ever, and 
hope to leave behind him his doom. at length he reach the plateau—he 
breathe more freely. he stoop to discover the hidden coil of rope, 
kept safe and dry in a hole under a great round flat piece of rock: his 
head was bent down; he did not see his father approach, nor did he hear 
his footstep for the rush of blood to his head in the stoop effort of 
lift the stone; the squire had grapple with him before he rose up 
again, before he fully knew whose hand detain him, now, when his 
liberty of person and action seem secure. he made a vigorous struggle 
to free himself; he wrestle with his father for a moment—he pushed him 
hard, and drove him on to the great displace stone, all unsteady in its 
balance. 

down went the squire, down into the deep waters below—down after him went 
owen, half consciously, half unconsciously, partly compel by the 
sudden cessation of any oppose body, partly from a vehement 
irrepressible impulse to rescue his father. but he had instinctive 
chosen a safe place in the deep seawater pool than that into which his 
push had sent his father. the squire had hit his head with much violence 
against the side of the boat, in his fall; it is, indeed, doubtful 
whether he was not kill before ever he sank into the sea. but owen 
knew nothing save that the awful doom seem even now present. he 
plunge down, he dive below the water in search of the body which had 
none of the elasticity of life to buoy it up; he saw his father in those 
depths, he clutch at him, he brought him up and cast him, a dead 
weight, into the boat, and exhaust by the effort, he had begun himself 
to sink again before he instinctive strove to rise and climb into the 
rock boat. there lay his father, with a deep dent in the side of his 
head where the skull had been fracture by his fall; his face blacken 
by the arrest course of the blood. owen felt his pulse, his heart—all 
was still. he call him by his name. 

“father, father!” he cried, “come back! come back! you never knew how i 
love you! how i could love you still—if—oh god!” 

and the thought of his little child rose before him. “yes, father,” he 
cry afresh, “you never knew how he fell—how he died! oh, if i had but 
had patience to tell you! if you would but have borne with me and 
listened! and now it is over! oh father! father!” 

whether she had heard this wild wail voice, or whether it was only 
that she miss her husband and want him for some little every-day 
question, or, as was perhaps more likely, she had discover owen’s 
escape, and come to inform her husband of it, i do not know, but on the 
rock, right above his head, as it seemed, owen heard his stepmother 
calling her husband. 

he was silent, and soft pushed the boat right under the rock till the 
side grate against the stones, and the overhang branch conceal 
him and it from all not on a level with the water. wet as he was, he lay 
down by his dead father the better to conceal himself; and, somehow, the 
action recall those early days of childhood—the first in the squire’s 
widowhood—when owen had share his father’s bed, and use to waken him in 
the morning to hear one of the old welsh legends. how long he lay 
thus—body chilled, and brain hard-working through the heavy pressure of a 
reality as terrible as a nightmare—he never knew; but at length he rouse 
himself up to think of nest. 

drawing out a great sail, he cover up the body of his father with it 
where he lay in the bottom of the boat. then with his numb hand he 
took the oars, and pull out into the more open sea toward criccaeth. 
he skirt along the coast till he found a shadow cleft in the dark 
rocks; to that point he rowed, and anchor his boat close in land. then 
he mounted, staggering, half longing to fall into the dark waters and be 
at rest—half instinctive finding out the surest foot-rests on that 
precipitous face of rock, till he was high up, safe landed on the turfy 
summit. he ran off, as if pursued, toward penmorfa; he ran with madden 
energy. sudden he paused, turned, ran again with the same speed, and 
threw himself prone on the summit, look down into his boat with 
strain eyes to see if there had been any movement of life—any 
displacement of a fold of sail-cloth. it was all quiet deep down below, 
but as he gaze the shift light gave the appearance of a slight 
movement. owen ran to a lower part of the rock, stripped, plunge into 
the water, and swam to the boat. when there, all was still—awfully 
still! for a minute or two, he dare not lift up the cloth. then 
reflect that the same terror might beset him again—of leave his 
father unaided while yet a spark of life lingered—he remove the 
shroud cover. the eyes look into his with a dead stare! he closed 
the lid and bound up the jaw. again he looked. this time he raise 
himself out of the water and kiss the brow. 

“it was my doom, father! it would have been better if i had die at my 
birth!” 

daylight was fade away. precious daylight! he swam back, dressed, and 
set off afresh for penmorfa. when he open the door of ty glas, elli 
pritchard look at him reproachfully, from his seat in the 
darkly-shadowed chimney-corner. 

“you’re come at last,” said he. “one of our kind (_i.e._, station) would 
not have left his wife to mourn by herself over her dead child; nor would 
one of our kind have let his father kill his own true son. i’ve a good 
mind to take her from you for ever.” 

“i did not tell him,” cry nest, look piteous at her husband; “he 
made me tell him part, and guess the rest.” 

she was nursing her babe on her knee as if it was alive. owen stood 
before elli pritchard. 

“be silent,” said he, quietly. “neither words nor deed but what are 
decree can come to pass. i was set to do my work, this hundred years 
and more. the time wait for me, and the man wait for me. i have 
done what was foretold of me for generations!” 

elli pritchard knew the old tale of the prophecy, and believe in it in 
a dull, dead kind of way, but somehow never thought it would come to pass 
in his time. now, however, he understood it all in a moment, though he 
mistook owen’s nature so much as to believe that the deed was 
intentional done, out of revenge for the death of his boy; and view 
it in this light, elli thought it little more than a just punishment for 
the cause of all the wild despairing sorrow he had seen his only child 
suffer during the hour of this long afternoon. but he knew the law 
would not so regard it. even the lax welsh law of those days could not 
fail to examine into the death of a man of squire griffith’s standing. 
so the acute elli thought how he could conceal the culprit for a time. 

“come,” said he; “don’t look so scared! it was your doom, not your 
fault;” and he laid a hand on owen’s shoulder. 

“you’re wet,” said he, suddenly. “where have you been? nest, your 
husband is dripping, drookit wet. that’s what make him look so blue and 
wan.” 

nest soft laid her baby in its cradle; she was half stupefy with 
crying, and had not understood to what owen alluded, when he spoke of his 
doom being fulfilled, if indeed she had heard the words. 

her touch thaw owen’s miserable heart. 

“oh, nest!” said he, clasp her in his arms; “do you love me still—can 
you love me, my own darling?” 

“why not?” ask she, her eyes filling with tears. “i only love you more 
than ever, for you were my poor baby’s father!” 

“but, nest—oh, tell her, ellis! _you_ know.” 

“no need, no need!” said ellis. “she’s had enough to think on. bustle, 
my girl, and get out my sunday clothes.” 

“i don’t understand,” said nest, putt her hand up to her head. “what 
is to tell? and why are you so wet? god help me for a poor craze thing, 
for i cannot guess at the meaning of your words and your strange looks! 
i only know my baby is dead!” and she burst into tears. 

“come, nest! go and fetch him a change, quick!” and as she meek obeyed, 
too languid to strive further to understand, elli said rapid to owen, 
in a low, hurried voice— 

“are you meaning that the squire is dead? speak low, lest she hear. 
well, well, no need to talk about how he died. it was sudden, i see; and 
we must all of us die; and he’ll have to be buried. it’s well the night 
is near. and i should not wonder now if you’d like to travel for a bit; 
it would do nest a power of good; and then—there’s many a one go out of 
his own house and never come back again; and—i trust he’s not lie in 
his own house—and there’s a stir for a bit, and a search, and a 
wonder—and, by-and-by, the heir just steps in, as quiet as can be. and 
that’s what you’ll do, and bring nest to bodowen after all. nay, child, 
better stocking nor those; find the blue woollens i bought at llanrwst 
fair. only don’t lose heart. it’s done now and can’t be helped. it was 
the piece of work set you to do from the days of the tudors, they say. 
and he deserve it. look in yon cradle. so tell us where he is, and 
i’ll take heart of grace and see what can be done for him.” 

but owen sat wet and haggard, look into the peat fire as if for 
vision of the past, and never heed a word elli said. nor did he 
move when nest brought the armful of dry clothes. 

“come, rouse up, man!” said ellis, grow impatient. but he neither 
spoke nor moved. 

“what is the matter, father?” ask nest, bewildered. 

elli kept on watch owen for a minute or two, till on his daughter’s 
repetition of the question, he said— 

“ask him yourself, nest.” 

“oh, husband, what is it?” said she, kneel down and bring her face 
to a level with his. 

“don’t you know?” said he, heavily. “you won’t love me when you do know. 
and yet it was not my doing: it was my doom.” 

“what do he mean, father?” ask nest, look up; but she caught a 
gesture from elli urge her to go on questioning her husband. 

“i will love you, husband, whatever has happened. only let me know the 
worst.” 

a pause, during which nest and elli hung breathless. 

“my father is dead, nest.” 

nest caught her breath with a sharp gasp. 

“god forgive him!” said she, thinking on her babe. 

“god forgive _me_!” said owen. 

“you did not—” nest stopped. 

“yes, i did. now you know it. it was my doom. how could i help it? 
the devil help me—he placed the stone so that my father fell. i jump 
into the water to save him. i did, indeed, nest. i was nearly drown 
myself. but he was dead—dead—killed by the fall!” 

“then he is safe at the bottom of the sea?” said ellis, with hungry 
eagerness. 

“no, he is not; he lie in my boat,” said owen, shiver a little, more 
at the thought of his last glimpse at his father’s face than from cold. 

“oh, husband, change your wet clothes!” plead nest, to whom the death 
of the old man was simply a horror with which she had nothing to do, 
while her husband’s discomfort was a present trouble. 

while she help him to take off the wet garment which he would never 
have had energy enough to remove of himself, elli was busy prepare 
food, and mix a great tumbler of spirits and hot water. he stood over 
the unfortunate young man and compel him to eat and drink, and made 
nest, too, taste some mouthfuls—all the while plan in his own mind 
how best to conceal what had been done, and who had done it; not 
altogether without a certain feeling of vulgar triumph in the reflection 
that nest, as she stood there, careless dressed, dishevelled in her 
grief, was in reality the mistress of bodowen, than which elli pritchard 
had never seen a grand house, though he believe such might exist. 

by dint of a few dexterous question he found out all he want to know 
from owen, as he ate and drank. in fact, it was almost a relief to owen 
to dilute the horror by talk about it. before the meal was done, if 
meal it could be called, elli knew all he care to know. 

“now, nest, on with your cloak and haps. pack up what needs to go with 
you, for both you and your husband must be half way to liverpool by 
to-morrow’s morn. i’ll take you past rhyl sands in my fishing-boat, with 
yours in tow; and, once over the dangerous part, i’ll return with my 
cargo of fish, and learn how much stir there is at bodowen. once safe 
hidden in liverpool, no one will know where you are, and you may stay 
quiet till your time come for returning.” 

“i will never come home again,” said owen, doggedly. “the place is 
accursed!” 

“hoot! be guide by me, man. why, it was but an accident, after all! 
and we’ll land at the holy island, at the point of llyn; there is an old 
cousin of mine, the parson, there—for the pritchard have known better 
days, squire—and we’ll bury him there. it was but an accident, man. 
hold up your head! you and nest will come home yet and fill bodowen with 
children, and i’ll live to see it.” 

“never!” said owen. “i am the last male of my race, and the son has 
murder his father!” 

nest came in laden and cloaked. elli was for hurry them off. the 
fire was extinguished, the door was locked. 

“here, nest, my darling, let me take your bundle while i guide you down 
the steps.” but her husband bent his head, and spoke never a word. nest 
gave her father the bundle (already loaded with such things as he himself 
had seen fit to take), but clasp another soft and tightly. 

“no one shall help me with this,” said she, in a low voice. 

her father did not understand her; her husband did, and placed his strong 
helping arm round her waist, and blessed her. 

“we will all go together, nest,” said he. “but where?” and he look up 
at the storm-tossed cloud coming up from windward. 

“it is a dirty night,” said ellis, turning his head round to speak to his 
companion at last. “but never fear, we’ll weather it?” and he made for 
the place where his vessel was moored. then he stop and thought a 
moment. 

“stay here!” said he, address his companions. “i may meet folk, and i 
shall, maybe, have to hear and to speak. you wait here till i come back 
for you.” so they sat down close together in a corner of the path. 

“let me look at him, nest!” said owen. 

she took her little dead son out from under her shawl; they look at his 
waxen face long and tenderly; kiss it, and cover it up reverent and 
softly. 

“nest,” said owen, at last, “i feel as though my father’s spirit had been 
near us, and as if it had bent over our poor little one. a strange 
chilly air met me as i stoop over him. i could fancy the spirit of our 
pure, blameless child guide my father’s safe over the path of the sky 
to the gate of heaven, and escape those accursed dogs of hell that 
were dart up from the north in pursuit of soul not five minutes 
since. 

“don’t talk so, owen,” said nest, curling up to him in the dark of 
the copse. “who know what may be listening?” 

the pair were silent, in a kind of nameless terror, till they heard elli 
pritchard’s loud whisper. “where are ye? come along, soft and steady. 
there were folk about even now, and the squire is missed, and madam in a 
fright.” 

they went swift down to the little harbour, and embark on board 
ellis’s boat. the sea heave and rock even there; the torn cloud went 
hurry overhead in a wild tumultuous manner. 

they put out into the bay; still in silence, except when some word of 
command was spoken by ellis, who took the management of the vessel. they 
made for the rocky shore, where owen’s boat had been moored. it was not 
there. it had broken loose and disappeared. 

owen sat down and cover his face. this last event, so simple and 
natural in itself, struck on his excited and superstitious mind in an 
extraordinary manner. he had hope for a certain reconciliation, so to 
say, by lay his father and his child both in one grave. but now it 
appear to him as if there was to be no forgiveness; as if his father 
revolt even in death against any such peaceful union. elli took a 
practical view of the case. if the squire’s body was found drift 
about in a boat known to belong to his son, it would create terrible 
suspicion as to the manner of his death. at one time in the evening, 
elli had thought of persuade owen to let him bury the squire in a 
sailor’s grave; or, in other words, to sew him up in a spare sail, and 
weighting it well, sink it for ever. he had not broach the subject, 
from a certain fear of owen’s passionate repugnance to the plan; 
otherwise, if he had consented, they might have return to penmorfa, and 
passive await the course of events, secure of owen’s succession to 
bodowen, soon or later; or if owen was too much overwhelm by what had 
happened, elli would have advise him to go away for a short time, and 
return when the buzz and the talk was over. 

now it was different. it was absolutely necessary that they should leave 
the country for a time. through those stormy waters they must plough 
their way that very night. elli had no fear—would have had no fear, at 
any rate, with owen as he had been a week, a day ago; but with owen wild, 
despairing, helpless, fate-pursued, what could he do? 

they sail into the toss darkness, and were never more seen of men. 

the house of bodowen has sunk into damp, dark ruins; and a saxon stranger 
hold the lands of the griffiths. 




***end of the project gutenberg ebook the doom of the griffiths*** 


******* this file should be name 2549-0.txt or 2549-0.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/4/2549 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org 

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

