the project gutenberg ebook, the phantom ship, by captain frederick marryat 


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 





title: the phantom ship 

author: captain frederick marryat 

release date: july 19, 2004 [ebook #12954] 

language: english 


***start of the project gutenberg ebook the phantom ship*** 


e-text prepared by ted garvin, josephine paolucci, and the project 
gutenberg online distribute proofread team 



the phantom ship 

by 

captain frederick marryat 

london 

mdcccxcvi 







contents 


chapter i 
chapter ii 
chapter iii 
chapter iv 
chapter v 
chapter vi 
chapter vii 
chapter viii 
chapter ix 
chapter x 
chapter xi 
chapter xii 
chapter xiii 
chapter xiv 
chapter xv 
chapter xvi 
chapter xvii 
chapter xviii 
chapter xix 
chapter xx 
chapter xxi 
chapter xxii 
chapter xxiii 
chapter xxiv 
chapter xxv 
chapter xxvi 
chapter xxvii 
chapter xxviii 
chapter xxix 
chapter xxx 
chapter xxxi 
chapter xxxii 
chapter xxxiii 
chapter xxxiv 
chapter xxxv 
chapter xxxvi 
chapter xxxvii 
chapter xxxviii 
chapter xxxix 
chapter xl 
chapter xli 
chapter xlii 




prefatory note 


_the phantom ship_ is the most notable of the three novel construct 
by marryat on an historic basis, and like its predecessor in the 
same category, _snarleyyow_, depend largely for its interest on the 
element of _diablerie_, which is very skilful manipulated. here, 
however, the supernatural appearances are never explain away, and 
the ghostly agency are introduce in the spirit of serious, if 
somewhat melodramatic, romance. marryat's personal experience enable 
him, with little research, to produce a life-like picture of old dutch 
seamanship, and his powers in racy narrative have transform the 
vanderdecken legend into a stirring tale of terror. the plot cannot 
be call original, but it is more careful work out and, from the 
nature of the material at hand, more effective than most of marryat's 
own. he has put life into it, moreover, by the creation of some 
genuine characters, design for noble end than to move the 
machinery. 

amine, indeed, as mr hannay points out, "is by far his nearest 
approach to an acceptable heroine." her romantic and curious 
superstitious disposition is admirable restrained by strength of will 
and true courage. the scene of the inquisition by which she meet 
her death are forcibly described. philip vanderdecken is a very 
respectable hero; daring, impetuous, and moody, without being too 
improbable capable. the hand of destiny lend him a dignity of which 
he is by no means unworthy. krantz, the faithful friend, belong to a 
familiar type, but the one-eyed pilot is quite sufficient weird 
for the part he has to play. for the rest we have the usual exciting 
adventure by sea and land; the usual "humours," in this case 
certainly not overdone. the miser dr poots; the bulky kloots, his 
bear, and his supercargo; barentz and his crazy lady-love the _vrow 
katerina_; and the little portugal commandant provide the reader 
with a variety of good-natured entertainment. it was an act of 
doubtful wisdom, perhaps, to introduce a second group of spirits from 
the hartz mountains, but the story of the weir-wolves is told simply, 
without any strain after effect. 

the general success, however, is mar by certain obvious failure 
in detail. the attempt to produce an historic flavour by making the 
characters, during their calm moments, talk in would-be old english 
is more amuse than culpable; but the author's philosophy of the 
unseen, as expound by amine or krantz, is both weak and tiresome, 
and his religious discourses, coloured by prejudice against the 
romanists, are conventional and unconvincing. the close scene 
savour of the sunday-school. 

but these fault are not obtrusive, and the novel as a whole must take 
a high place among its author's second-best. 

_the phantom ship_ appear in _the new monthly magazine_, 1838, 1839. 
it is here reprint from the first edition, in three volumes. henry 
colburn, 1839. 

r.b.j. 




chapter i 

preface 
about the middle of the seventeenth century, in the outskirts of the 
small but fortify town of terneuse, situated on the right bank of 
the scheldt, and nearly opposite to the island of walcheren, there was 
to be seen, in advance of a few other even more humble tenements, a 
small but neat cottage, built according to the prevailing taste of the 
time. the outside front had, some years back, been paint of a deep 
orange, the window and shutter of a vivid green. to about three feet 
above the surface of the earth, it was face alternate with blue and 
white tiles. a small garden, of about two rod of our measure of land, 
surround the edifice; and this little plot was flank by a low 
hedge of privet, and encircle by a moat full of water, too wide to be 
leap with ease. over that part of the moat which was in front of 
the cottage door, was a small and narrow bridge, with ornament 
iron hand-rails, for the security of the passenger. but the colours, 
originally so bright, with which the cottage had been decorated, had 
now faded; symptom of rapid decay were evident in the window-sills, 
the door-jambs, and other wooden parts of the tenement, and many of 
the white and blue tile had fallen down, and had not been replaced. 
that much care had once been bestow upon this little tenement, was 
as evident as that latterly it had been equally neglected. 

the inside of the cottage, both on the basement and the floor above, 
was divide into two large rooms in front, and two small behind; 
the rooms in front could only be call large in comparison with the 
other two, as they were little more than twelve feet square, with but 
one window to each. the upper floor was, as usual, appropriate to the 
bedrooms; on the lower, the two small rooms were now use only as a 
wash-house and a lumber-room; while one of the large was fitted up as 
a kitchen, and furnish with dressers, on which the metal utensil 
for cookery shone clean and polish as silver. the room itself was 
scrupulous neat; but the furniture, as well as the utensils, were 
scanty. the boards of the floor were of a pure white, and so clean 
that you might have laid anything down without fear of soil it. a 
strong deal table, two wooden-seated chairs, and a small easy couch, 
which had been remove from one of the bedroom upstairs, were all 
the movable which this room contained. the other front room had been 
fitted up as a parlour; but what might be the style of its furniture 
was now unknown, for no eye had beheld the contents of that room for 
nearly seventeen years, during which it had been hermetic sealed, 
even to the inmate of the cottage. 

the kitchen, which we have described, was occupy by two persons. one 
was a woman, apparently about forty years of age, but worn down by 
pain and suffering. she had evidently once possessed much beauty: 
there were still the regular outlines, the noble forehead, and the 
large dark eye; but there was a tenuity in her features, a waste 
appearance, such as to render the flesh transparent; her brow, when 
she mused, would sink into deep wrinkles, premature though they were; 
and the occasional flash of her eyes strong impress you 
with the idea of insanity. there appear to be some deep-seated, 
irremovable, hopeless cause of anguish, never for one moment permit 
to be absent from her memory: a chronic oppression, fixed and graven 
there, only to be remove by death. she was dress in the widow's 
coif of the time; but although clean and neat, her garment were fade 
from long wear. she was seat upon the small couch which we have 
mentioned, evidently brought down as a relief to her, in her decline 
state. 

on the deal table in the centre of the room sat the other person, a 
stout, fair-headed, florid youth of nineteen or twenty years old. his 
features were handsome and bold, and his frame powerful to excess; his 
eye denote courage and determination, and as he careless swung his 
legs, and whistle an air in an emphatic manner, it was impossible 
not to form the idea that he was a daring, adventurous, and reckless 
character. 

"do not go to sea, philip; oh, promise me _that_, my dear, dear 
child," said the female, clasp her hands. 

"and why not go to sea, mother?" reply philip; "what's the use of my 
stay here to starve?--for, by heaven! it's little better. i must do 
something for myself and for you. and what else can i do? my uncle van 
brennen has offer to take me with him, and will give me good wages. 
then i shall live happily on board, and my earnings will be sufficient 
for your support at home." 

"philip--philip, hear me. i shall die if you leave me. whom have i in 
the world but you? o my child, as you love me, and i know you _do_ 
love me, philip, don't leave me; but if you will, at all event do not 
go to sea." 

philip gave no immediate reply; he whistle for a few seconds, while 
his mother wept. 

"is it," said he at last, "because my father was drown at sea, that 
you beg so hard, mother?" 

"oh, no--no!" exclaim the sob woman. "would to god--" 

"would to god what, mother?" 

"nothing--nothing. be merciful--be merciful, o god!" reply the 
mother, slide from her seat on the couch, and kneel by the side 
of it, in which attitude she remain for some time in fervent prayer. 

at last she resume her seat, and her face wore an aspect of more 
composure. 

philip, who, during this, had remain silent and thoughtful, again 
address his mother. 

"look ye, mother. you ask me to stay on shore with you, and 
starve,--rather hard conditions:--now hear what i have to say. that 
room opposite has been shut up ever since i can remember--why, you 
will never tell me; but once i heard you say, when we were without 
bread, and with no prospect of my uncle's return--you were then half 
frantic, mother, as you know you sometimes are--" 

"well, philip, what did you hear me say?" enquire his mother with 
tremulous anxiety. 

"you said, mother, that there was money in that room which would save 
us; and then you scream and raved, and said that you prefer 
death. now, mother, what is there in that chamber, and why has it been 
so long shut up? either i know that, or i go to sea." 

at the commencement of this address of philip, his mother appear 
to be transfixed, and motionless as a statue; gradual her lip 
separated, and her eyes glared; she seem to have lost the power of 
reply; she put her hand to her right side, as if to compress it, then 
both her hands, as if to relieve herself from excruciating torture: at 
last she sank, with her head forward, and the blood pour out of her 
mouth. 

philip sprang from the table to her assistance, and prevent her from 
fall on the floor. he laid her on the couch, watch with alarm 
the continue effusion. 

"oh! mother--mother, what is this?" cry he, at last, in great 
distress. 

for some time his mother could make him no reply; she turn further 
on her side, that she might not be suffocate by the discharge from 
the rupture vessel, and the snow-white plank of the floor were soon 
crimson with her blood. 

"speak, dearest mother, if you can," repeated philip, in agony; "what 
shall i do? what shall i give you? god almighty! what is this?" 

"death, my child, death!" at length reply the poor woman, sink 
into a state of unconsciousness. 

philip, now much alarmed, flew out of the cottage, and call the 
neighbour to his mother's assistance. two or three hasten to the 
call; and as soon as philip saw them occupy in restore his mother, 
he ran as fast as he could to the house of a medical man, who live 
about a mile off--one mynheer poots, a little, miserable, avaricious 
wretch, but known to be very skilful in his profession. philip found 
poot at home, and insist upon his immediate attendance. 

"i will come--yes, most certainly," reply poots, who spoke the 
language but imperfectly; "but mynheer vanderdecken, who will pay me?" 

"pay you! my uncle will, directly that he come home." 

"your uncle de skipper van brennen: no, he owe me four guilders, and 
he has owe me for a long time. besides, his ship may sink." 

"he shall pay you the four guilders, and for this attendance also," 
reply philip, in a rage; "come directly, while you are dispute my 
mother may be dead." 

"but, mr philip, i cannot come, now i recollect; i have to see the 
child of the burgomaster at terneuse," reply mynheer poots. 

"look you, mynheer poots," exclaim philip, red with passion; "you 
have but to choose,--will you go quietly, or must i take you there? 
you'll not trifle with me." 

here mynheer poot was under considerable alarm, for the character of 
philip vanderdecken was well known. 

"i will come by-and-bye, mynheer philip, if i can." 

"you'll come now, you wretched old miser," exclaim philip, seize 
hold of the little man by the collar, and pull him out of his door. 

"murder! murder!" cry poots, as he lost his legs, and was drag 
along by the impetuous young man. 

philip stopped, for he perceive that poot was black in the face. 

"must i then choke you, to make you go quietly? for, hear me, go you 
shall, alive or dead." 

"well, then," reply poots, recover himself, "i will go, but i'll 
have you in prison to-night: and, as for your mother, i'll not--no, 
that i will not--mynheer philip, depend upon it." 

"mark me, mynheer poots," reply philip, "as sure as there is a god 
in heaven, if you do not come with me, i'll choke you now; and when 
you arrive, if you do not do your best for my poor mother, i'll murder 
you there. you know that i always do what i say, so now take my 
advice, come along quietly, and you shall certainly be paid, and well 
paid--if i sell my coat." 

this last observation of philip, perhaps, had more effect than even 
his threats. poot was a miserable little atom, and like a child 
in the powerful grasp of the young man. the doctor's tenement was 
isolated, and he could obtain no assistance until within a hundred 
yard of vanderdecken's cottage; so mynheer poot decided that he 
would go, first, because philip had promise to pay him, and secondly, 
because he could not help it. 

this point being settled, philip and mynheer poot made all haste to 
the cottage; and on their arrival, they found his mother still in the 
arms of two of her female neighbours, who were bathing her temple 
with vinegar. she was in a state of consciousness, but she could not 
speak. poot ordered her to be carry upstairs and put to bed, and 
pour some acid down her throat, hasten away with philip to 
procure the necessary remedies. 

"you will give your mother that directly, mynheer philip," said poots, 
putt a phial into his hand; "i will now go to the child of the 
burgomaster, and will afterwards come back to your cottage." 

"don't deceive me," said philip, with a threaten look. 

"no, no, mynheer philip, i would not trust to your uncle van brennen 
for payment, but you have promised, and i know that you always keep 
your word. in one hour i will be with your mother; but you yourself 
must now be quick." 

philip hasten home. after the potion had been administered, the 
bleeding was wholly stopped; and in half an hour, his mother could 
express her wish in a whisper. when the little doctor arrived, he 
careful examine his patient, and then went downstairs with her son 
into the kitchen. 

"mynheer philip," said poots, "by allah! i have done my best, but i 
must tell you that i have little hope of your mother rising from her 
bed again. she may live one day or two days, but not more. it is not 
my fault, mynheer philip," continue poots, in a deprecate tone. 

"no, no; it is the will of heaven," reply philip, mournfully. 

"and you will pay me, mynheer vanderdecken?" continue the doctor, 
after a short pause. 

"yes," reply philip in a voice of thunder, and start from a 
reverie. after a moment's silence, the doctor recommenced. 

"shall i come to-morrow, mynheer philip? you know that will be a 
charge of another guilder: it is of no use to throw away money or time 
either." 

"come to-morrow, come every hour, charge what you please; you shall 
certainly be paid," reply philip, curling his lip with contempt. 

"well, it is as you please. as soon as she is dead, the cottage and 
the furniture will be yours, and you will sell them of course. yes, i 
will come. you will have plenty of money. mynheer philip, i would like 
the first offer of the cottage, if it is to let." 

philip raise his arm in the air as if to crush mynheer poots, who 
retreat to the corner. 

"i did not mean until your mother was buried," said poots, in a 
coax tone. 

"go, wretch, go!" said philip, covering his face with his hands, as he 
sank down upon the blood-stained couch. 

after a short interval, philip vanderdecken return to the bedside 
of his mother, whom he found much better; and the neighbours, have 
their own affair to attend to, left them alone. exhaust with the 
loss of blood, the poor woman slumber for many hours, during which 
she never let go the hand of philip, who watch her breathing in 
mournful meditation. 

it was about one o'clock in the morning when the widow awoke. she had 
in a great degree recover her voice, and thus she address her 
son:-- 

"my dear, my impetuous boy, and have i detain you here a prisoner so 
long?" 

"my own inclination detain me, mother. i leave you not to other 
until you are up and well again." 

"that, philip, i shall never be. i feel that death claim me; and, o, 
my son, were it not for you, how should i quit this world rejoicing! 
i have long been dying, philip,--and long, long have i pray for 
death." 

"and why so, mother?" reply philip, bluntly; "i've done my best." 

"you have, my child, you have: and may god bless you for it. often 
have i seen you curb your fiery temper--restrain yourself when 
justified in wrath--to spare a mother's feelings. 'tis now some days 
that even hunger has not persuade you to disobey your mother. and, 
philip, you must have thought me mad or foolish to insist so long, and 
yet to give no reason. i'll speak--again--directly." 

the widow turn her head upon the pillow, and remain quiet for some 
minutes; then, as if revived, she resumed: 

"i believe i have been mad at times--have i not, philip? and god know 
i have had a secret in my heart enough to drive a wife to frenzy. it 
has oppress me day and night, worn my mind, impair my reason, and 
now, at last, thank heaven! it has overcome this mortal frame: the 
blow is struck, philip,--i'm sure it is. i wait but to tell you 
all,--and yet i would not,--'twill turn your brain as it has turn 
mine, philip." 

"mother," reply philip, earnestly, "i conjure you, let me hear this 
killing secret. be heaven or hell mixed up with it, i fear not. heaven 
will not hurt me, and satan i defy." 

"i know thy bold, proud spirit, philip,--thy strength of mind. if 
anyone could bear the load of such a dreadful tale, thou couldst. my 
brain, alas! was far too weak for it; and i see it is my duty to tell 
it to thee." 

the widow pause as her thought revert to that which she had to 
confide; for a few minutes the tear rain down her hollow cheeks; 
she then appear to have summon resolution, and to have regain 
strength. 

"philip, it is of your father i would speak. it is supposed--that he 
was--drowned at sea." 

"and was he not, mother?" reply philip, with surprise. 

"o no!" 

"but he has long been dead, mother?" 

"no,--yes,--and yet--no," said the widow, covering her eyes. 

her brain wanders, thought philip, but he spoke again: 

"then where is he, mother?" 

the widow raise herself, and a tremor visibly ran through her whole 
frame, as she replied-- 

"in living judgment." 

the poor woman then sank down again upon the pillow, and cover her 
head with the bedclothes, as if she would have hid herself from her 
own memory. philip was so much perplexed and astounded, that he could 
make no reply. a silence of some minutes ensued, when, no long able 
to beat the agony of suspense, philip faint whispered-- 

"the secret, mother, the secret; quick, let me hear it." 

"i can now tell all, philip," reply his mother, in a solemn tone of 
voice. "hear me, my son. your father's disposition was but too like 
your own;--o may his cruel fate be a lesson to you, my dear, dear 
child! he was a bold, a daring, and, they say, a first-rate seaman. 
he was not born here, but in amsterdam; but he would not live there, 
because he still adhere to the catholic religion. the dutch, you 
know, philip, are heretics, according to our creed. it is now 
seventeen years or more that he sail for india, in his fine ship 
the _amsterdammer_, with a valuable cargo. it was his third voyage to 
india, philip, and it was to have been, if it had so pleased god, 
his last, for he had purchase that good ship with only part of his 
earnings, and one more voyage would have made his fortune. o! how 
often did we talk over what we would do upon his return, and how these 
plan for the future console me at the idea of his absence, for i 
love him dearly, philip,--he was always good and kind to me; and 
after he had sailed, how i hope for his return! the lot of a sailor's 
wife is not to be envied. alone and solitary for so many months, 
watch the long wick of the candle, and listen to the howling of 
the wind--foreboding evil and accident--wreck and widowhood. he had 
been gone about six months, philip, and there was still a long dreary 
year to wait before i could expect him back. one night, you, my 
child, were fast asleep; you were my only solace--my comfort in my 
loneliness. i had been watch over you in your slumbers; you smile 
and half pronounced the name of mother; and at last i kiss your 
unconscious lips, and i knelt and prayed--prayed for god's blessing on 
you, my child, and upon him too--little thinking, at the time, that he 
was so horribly, so fearful cursed." 

the widow pause for breath, and then resumed. philip could not speak. 
his lip were sundered, and his eyes rivet upon his mother, as he 
devour her words. 

"i left you and went downstairs into that room, philip, which since 
that dreadful night has never been re-opened. i sate me down and read, 
for the wind was strong, and when the gale blows, a sailor's wife can 
seldom sleep. it was past midnight, and the rain pour down. i felt 
unusual fear,--i knew not why. i rose from the couch and dip my 
finger in the blessed water, and i cross myself. a violent gust 
of wind roar round the house, and alarm me still more. i had a 
painful, horrible foreboding; when, of a sudden, the window and 
window-shutters were all blown in, the light was extinguished, and 
i was left in utter darkness. i scream with fright; but at last i 
recover myself, and was proceeding towards the window that i 
might reclose it, when whom should i behold, slow enter at the 
casement, but--your father,--philip!--yes, philip,--it was your 
father!" 

"merciful god!" mutter philip, in a low tone almost subdued into a 
whisper. 

"i knew not what to think,--he was in the room; and although the 
dark was intense, his form and features were as clear and as 
define as if it were noon-day. fear would have inclined me to recoil 
from,--his love presence to fly towards him. i remain on the spot 
where i was, choke with agonising sensations. when he had enter the 
room, the window and shutter closed of themselves, and the candle 
was relighted--then i thought it was his apparition, and i faint on 
the floor. 

"when i recover i found myself on the couch, and perceive that 
a cold (o how cold!) and dripping hand was clasp in mine. this 
reassure me, and i forgot the supernatural sign which accompany 
his appearance. i imagine that he had been unfortunate, and had 
return home. i open my eyes, and beheld my love husband and threw 
myself into his arms. his clothes were saturate with the rain: i 
felt as if i had embrace ice--but nothing can check the warmth of a 
woman's love, philip. he received my caresses, but he caress 
not again: he spoke not, but look thoughtful and unhappy. 
'william--william,' cry i! 'speak, vanderdecken, speak to your dear 
catherine.' 

"'i will,' reply he, solemnly, 'for my time is short.' 

"'no, no, you must not go to sea again: you have lost your vessel, but 
you are safe. have i not you again?' 

"'alas! no--be not alarmed, but listen, for my time is short. i have 
not lost my vessel, catherine, but i have lost!!! make no reply, but 
listen; i am not dead, nor yet am i alive. i hover between this world 
and the world of spirits. mark me. 

"'for nine week did i try to force my passage against the elements 
round the stormy cape, but without success; and i swore terribly. 
for nine week more did i carry sail against the adverse wind and 
currents, and yet could gain no ground; and then i blasphemed,--ay, 
terribly blasphemed. yet still i persevered. the crew, worn out 
with long fatigue, would have had me return to the table bay; but i 
refused; nay, more, i became a murderer,--unintentionally, it is true, 
but still a murderer. the pilot oppose me, and persuade the men to 
bind me, and in the excess of my fury, when he took me by the collar, 
i struck at him; he reeled; and, with the sudden lurch of the vessel, 
he fell overboard, and sank. even this fearful death did not restrain 
me; and i swore by the fragment of the holy cross, preserve in that 
relic now hanging round your neck, that i would gain my point in 
defiance of storm and seas, of lightning, of heaven, or of hell, even 
if i should beat about until the day of judgment. 

"'my oath was register in thunder, and in stream of sulphurous 
fire. the hurricane burst upon the ship, the canvas flew away in 
ribbons; mountain of sea swept over us, and in the centre of a deep 
o'erhanging cloud, which shroud all in utter darkness, were written 
in letters of livid flame, these words--until the day of judgment. 

"'listen to me, catherine, my time is short. _one hope_ alone remains, 
and for this am i permit to come here. take this letter.' he put a 
seal paper on the table. 'read it, catherine, dear, and try if you 
can assist me. read it and now farewell--my time is come.' 

"again the window and window-shutters burst open--again the light was 
extinguished, and the form of my husband was, as it were, waft in 
the dark expanse. i start up and follow him with outstretched arms 
and frantic scream as he sail through the window;--my glaring eyes 
beheld his form borne away like lightning on the wings of the wild 
gale, till it was lost as a speck of light, and then it disappeared. 
again the window closed, the light burned, and i was left alone! 

"heaven, have mercy! my brain!--my brain!--philip!--philip!" shriek 
the poor woman; "don't leave me--don't--don't--pray don't!" 

during these exclamation the frantic widow had raise herself from 
the bed, and, at the last, had fallen into the arms of her son. she 
remain there some minutes without motion. after a time philip felt 
alarm at her long quiescence; he laid her gently down upon the bed, 
and as he did so her head fell back--her eyes were turned--the widow 
vanderdecken was no more. 




chapter ii 


philip vanderdecken, strong as he was in mental courage, was almost 
paralyse by the shock when he discover that his mother's spirit had 
fled; and for some time he remain by the side of the bed with his 
eyes fixed upon the corpse, and his mind in a state of vacuity. 
gradual he recover himself; he rose, smooth down the pillow, 
closed her eyelids, and then clasp his hands, the tear trickle 
down his manly cheeks. he impress a solemn kiss upon the pale white 
forehead of the departed, and drew the curtains round the bed. 

"poor mother!" said he, sorrowfully, as he complete his task, "at 
length thou hast found rest,--but thou hast left thy son a bitter 
legacy." 

and as philip's thought revert to what had passed, the dreadful 
narrative whirl in his imagination and scathe his brain. he raise 
his hand to his temples, compress them with force, and try to 
collect his thoughts, that he might decide upon what measure he 
should take. he felt that he had no time to indulge his grief. his 
mother was in peace: but his father--where was he? 

he recall his mother's words--"one hope alone remained." then there 
was hope. his father had laid a paper on the table--could it be there 
now? yes, it must be; his mother had not had the courage to take it 
up. there was hope in that paper, and it had lain unopened for more 
than seventeen years. 

philip vanderdecken resolve that he would examine the fatal 
chamber--at once he would know the worst. should he do it now, or wait 
till daylight?--but the key, where was it? his eyes rest upon an old 
japan cabinet in the room: he had never seen his mother open it in 
his presence: it was the only likely place of concealment that he was 
aware of. prompt in all his decisions, he took up the candle, and 
proceed to examine it. it was not locked; the door swung open, and 
drawer after drawer was examined, but philip discover not the object 
of his search; again and again did he open the drawers, but they were 
all empty. it occur to philip that there might be secret drawers, 
and he examine for some time in vain. at last he took out all the 
drawers, and laid them on the floor, and lift the cabinet off its 
stand he shook it. a rattling sound in one corner told him that in all 
probability the key was there concealed. he renew his attempt to 
discover how to gain it, but in vain. daylight now stream through 
the casements, and philip had not desist from his attempts: at last, 
weary out, he resolve to force the back panel of the cabinet; he 
descended to the kitchen, and return with a small chopping-knife and 
hammer, and was on his knee busy employ force out the panel, 
when a hand was placed upon his shoulder. 

philip started; he had been so occupy with his search and his wild 
chase thoughts, that he had not heard the sound of an approach 
footstep. he look up and beheld the father seysen, the priest of the 
little parish, with his eyes stern fixed upon him. the good man had 
been informed of the dangerous state of the widow vanderdecken, and 
had risen at daylight to visit and afford her spiritual comfort. 

"how now, my son," said the priest: "fearest thou not to disturb thy 
mother's rest? and wouldst thou pilfer and purloin even before she is 
in her grave?" 

"i fear not to disturb my mother's rest, good father," reply philip, 
rising on his feet, "for she now rest with the blessed. neither do i 
pilfer or purloin. it is not gold i seek, although if gold there were, 
that gold would now be mine. i seek but a key, long hidden, i believe, 
within this secret drawer, the opening of which is a mystery beyond my 
art." 

"thy mother is no more, sayest thou, my son? and dead without 
receiving the rite of our most holy church! why didst thou not send 
for me?" 

"she died, good father, suddenly--most suddenly, in these arms, about 
two hour ago. i fear not for her soul, although i can but grieve you 
were not at her side." 

the priest gently open the curtains, and look upon the corpse. he 
sprinkle holy water on the bed, and for a short time his lip were 
seen to move in silent prayer. he then turn round to philip. 

"why do i see thee thus employed? and why so anxious to obtain that 
key? a mother's death should call forth filial tear and prayer for 
her repose. yet are thine eyes dry, and thou art employ upon an 
indifferent search while yet the tenement is warm which but now held 
her spirit. this is not seemly, philip. what is the key thou seekest?" 

"father, i have no time for tears--no time to spare for grief or 
lamentation. i have much to do and more to think of than thought can 
well embrace. that i love my mother, you know well." 

"but the key thou seekest, philip?" 

"father, it is the key of a chamber which has not been unlock for 
years, which i must--will open; even if--" 

"if what, my son?" 

"i was about to say what i should not have said. forgive me, father; i 
meant that i must search that chamber." 

"i have long heard of that same chamber being closed; and that thy 
mother would not explain wherefore, i know well, for i have ask 
her, and have been denied. nay, when, as in duty bound, i pressed the 
question, i found her reason was disorder by my importunity, and 
therefore i abandoned the attempt. some heavy weight was on thy 
mother's mind, my son, yet would she never confess or trust it with 
me. tell me, before she died, hadst thou this secret from her?" 

"i had, most holy father." 

"wouldst thou not feel comfort if thou didst confide to me, my son? i 
might advise--assist--" 

"father, i would indeed--i could confide it to thee, and ask for thy 
assistance--i know 'tis not from curious feeling thou wouldst have it, 
but from a better motive. but of that which has been told it is not 
yet manifest--whether it is as my poor mother says, or but the phantom 
of a heated brain. should it indeed be true, fain would i share the 
burthen with you--yet little you might thank me for the heavy load. 
but no--at least not now--it must not, cannot be revealed. i must do 
my work--enter that hate room alone." 

"fearest thou not?" 

"father, i fear nothing. i have a duty to perform--a dreadful one, i 
grant; but i pray thee, ask no more; for, like my poor mother, i feel 
as if the probe of the wound would half unseat my reason." 

"i will not press thee further, philip. the time may come when i may 
prove of service. farewell, my child; but i pray thee to discontinue 
thy unseemly labour, for i must send in the neighbour to perform the 
duty to thy departed mother, whose soul i trust is with its god." 

the priest look at philip; he perceive that his thought were 
elsewhere; there was a vacancy and appearance of mental stupefaction, 
and as he turn away, the good man shook his head. 

"he is right," thought philip, when once more alone; and he took up 
the cabinet, and placed it upon the stand. "a few hour more can make 
no difference: i will lay me down, for my head is giddy." 

philip went into the adjoin room, threw himself upon his bed, and 
in a few minutes was in a sleep as sound as that permit to the 
wretch a few hour previous to his execution. 

during his slumber the neighbour had come in, and had prepared 
everything for the widow's interment. they had been careful not to 
wake the son, for they held as sacred the sleep of those who must 
wake up to sorrow. among others, soon after the hour of noon arrive 
mynheer poots; he had been informed of the death of the widow, but 
have a spare hour, he thought he might as well call, as it would 
raise his charge by another guilder. he first went into the room 
where the body lay, and from thence he proceed to the chamber of 
philip, and shook him by the shoulder. 

philip awoke, and, sitting up, perceive the doctor standing by him. 

"well, mynheer vanderdecken," commence the unfeeling little man, "so 
it's all over. i knew it would be so, and recollect you owe me now 
another guilder, and you promise faithfully to pay me; altogether, 
with the potion, it will be three guilder and a half--that is, 
provided you return my phial." 

philip, who at first waking was confused, gradual recover his 
senses during this address. 

"you shall have your three guilder and a half, and your phial to 
boot, mr poots," reply he, as he rose from off the bed. 

"yes, yes; i know you mean to pay me--if you can. but look you, 
mynheer philip, it may be some time before you sell the cottage. you 
may not find a customer. now, i never wish to be hard upon people who 
have no money, and i'll tell you what i'll do. there is a something 
on your mother's neck. it is of no value, none at all, but to a good 
catholic. to help you in your strait, i will take that thing, and then 
we shall be quits. you will have paid me, and there will be an end of 
it." 

philip listen calmly: he knew to what the little miser had 
referred,--the relic on his mother's neck--that very relic upon which 
his father swore the fatal oath. he felt that million of guilder 
would not have induce him to part with it. 

"leave the house," answer he abruptly. "leave it immediately. your 
money shall be paid." 

now, mynheer poots, in the first place, knew that the setting of the 
relic, which was in a square frame of pure gold, was worth much more 
than the sum due to him: he also knew that a large price had been paid 
for the relic itself, and as at that time such a relic was considered 
very valuable, he had no doubt but that it would again fetch a 
considerable sum. tempt by the sight of it when he enter the 
chamber of death, he had taken it from the neck of the corpse, and it 
was then actually conceal in his bosom, so he replied-- 

"my offer is a good one, mynheer philip, and you had better take it. 
of what use is such trash?" 

"i tell you, no," cry philip, in a rage. 

"well, then, you will let me have it in my possession till i am paid, 
mynheer vanderdecken--that is but fair. i must not lose my money. when 
you bring me my three guilder and a half and the phial, i will return 
it to you." 

philip's indignation was now without bounds. he seize mynheer poot 
by the collar, and threw him out of the door. "away immediately," 
cry he, "or by--" 

there was no occasion for philip to finish the imprecation. the doctor 
had hasten away with such alarm, that he fell down half the steps 
of the staircase, and was limp away across the bridge. he almost 
wish that the relic had not been in his possession; but his sudden 
retreat had prevent him, even if so inclined, from replace it on 
the corpse. 

the result of this conversation naturally turn philip's thought to 
the relic, and he went into his mother's room to take possession of 
it. he open the curtains--the corpse was laid out--he put forth his 
hand to untie the black ribbon. it was not there. "gone!" exclaim 
philip. "they hardly would have remove it--never would--. it must 
be that villain poots--wretch; but i will have it, even if he has 
swallow it, though i tear him limb from limb!" 

philip dart down the stairs, rush out of the house, clear the 
moat at one bound, and without coat or hat, flew away in the direction 
of the doctor's lonely residence. the neighbour saw him as he pass 
them like the wind; they wondered, and they shook their heads. mynheer 
poot was not more than half-way to his home, for he had hurt his 
ankle. apprehensive of what might possibly take place should his theft 
be discovered, he occasional look behind him; at length, to his 
horror, he beheld philip vanderdecken at a distance bound on in 
pursuit of him. frightened almost out of his senses, the wretched 
pilfer hardly knew how to act; to stop and surrender up the stolen 
property was his first thought, but fear of vanderdecken's violence 
prevent him; so he decided on taking to his heels, thus hope to 
gain his house, and barricade himself in, by which means he would be 
in a condition to keep possession of what he had stolen, or at least 
make some terms ere he restore it. 

mynheer poot had need to run fast, and so he did; his thin leg 
bearing his shrivel form rapid over the ground; but philip, who, 
when he witness the doctor's attempt to escape, was fully convinced 
that he was the culprit, redouble his exertions, and rapid came up 
with the chase. when within a hundred yard of his own door, mynheer 
poot heard the bound step of philip gain upon him, and he sprang 
and leap in his agony. near and near still the step, until at 
last he heard the very breathing of his pursuer, and poot shriek in 
his fear, like the hare in the jaws of the greyhound. philip was not 
a yard from him; his arm was outstretched, when the miscreant drop 
down paralyse with terror, and the impetus of vanderdecken was so 
great that he pass over his body, tripped, and after try in vain 
to recover his equilibrium, he fell and roll over and over. this 
save the little doctor; it was like the double of a hare. in a second 
he was again on his legs, and before philip could rise and again exert 
his speed, poot had enter his door and bolt it within. philip 
was, however, determined to repossess the important treasure; and as 
he panted, he cast his eyes around, to see if any means offer for 
his force his entrance into the house. but as the habitation of the 
doctor was lonely, every precaution had been taken by him to render 
it secure against robbery; the window below were well barricade and 
secured, and those on the upper story were too high for anyone to 
obtain admittance by them. 

we must here observe, that although mynheer poot was, from his 
known abilities, in good practice, his reputation as a hard-hearted, 
unfeeling miser was well established. no one was ever permit to 
enter his threshold, nor, indeed, did any one feel inclined. he was as 
isolated from his fellow-creatures as was his tenement, and was only 
to be seen in the chamber of disease and death. what his establishment 
consist of no one knew. when he first settled in the neighbourhood, 
an old decrepit woman occasional answer the knock given at the 
door by those who require the doctor's services; but she had been 
bury some time, and, ever since, all call at the door had been 
answer by mynheer poot in person, if he were at home, and if not, 
there was no reply to the most importunate summons. it was then 
surmise that the old man live entire by himself, being too 
niggardly to pay for any assistance. this philip also imagined; and as 
soon as he had recover his breath, he began to devise some scheme by 
which he would be enable not only to recover the stolen property, but 
also to wreak a dire revenge. 

the door was strong, and not to be forced by any means which present 
themselves to the eye of vanderdecken. for a few minutes he pause 
to consider, and as he reflected, so did his anger cool down, and 
he decided that it would be sufficient to recover his relic without 
have recourse to violence. so he call out in a loud voice:-- 

"mynheer poots, i know that you can hear me. give me back what you 
have taken, and i will do you no hurt; but if you will not, you must 
take the consequence, for your life shall pay the forfeit before i 
leave this spot." 

this speech was indeed very plainly heard by mynheer poots, but the 
little miser had recover from his fright, and, thinking himself 
secure, could not make up his mind to surrender the relic without a 
struggle; so the doctor answer not, hope that the patience of 
philip would be exhausted, and that by some arrangement, such as 
the sacrifice of a few guilders, no small matter to one so needy as 
philip, he would be able to secure what he was satisfy would sell at 
a high price. 

vanderdecken, finding that no answer was returned, indulge in strong 
invective, and then decided upon measure certainly in themselves by 
no means undecided. 

there was part of a small stack of dry fodder standing not far from 
the house, and under the wall a pile of wood for firing. with these 
vanderdecken resolve upon setting fire to the house, and thus, if he 
did not gain his relic, he would at least obtain ample revenge. he 
brought several armful of fodder and laid them at the door of the 
house, and upon that he pile the fagot and log of wood, until the 
door was quite conceal by them. he then procure a light from the 
steel, flint, and tinder, which every dutchman carry in his pocket, 
and very soon he had fan the pile into a flame. the smoke ascend 
in column up to the rafter of the roof while the fire rage below. 
the door was ignited, and was add to the fury of the flames, and 
philip shout with joy at the success of his attempt. 

"now, miserable despoil of the dead--now, wretched thief, now you 
shall feel my vengeance," cry philip, with a loud voice. "if you 
remain within, you perish in the flames; if you attempt to come out 
you shall die by my hands. do you hear, mynheer poots--do you hear?" 

hardly had philip conclude this address when the window of the upper 
floor furthest from the burning door was thrown open. 

"ay,--you come now to beg and to entreat; but no--no," cry 
philip--who stop as he beheld at the window what seem to be an 
apparition, for, instead of the wretched little miser, he beheld 
one of the loveliest form nature ever deign to mould--an angel 
creature, of about sixteen or seventeen, who appear calm and 
resolute in the midst of the danger by which she was threatened. her 
long black hair was braid and twin round her beautifully-formed 
head; her eyes were large, intense dark, yet soft; her forehead high 
and white, her chin dimpled, her ruby lip arch and delicate 
fine, her nose small and straight. a lovely face could not be well 
imagined; it remind you of what the best of painter have sometimes, 
in their more fortunate moments, succeed in embodying, when they 
would represent a beauteous saint. and as the flame wreathe and the 
smoke burst out in column and swept past the window, so might she 
have remind you in her calm of demeanour of some martyr at the 
stake. 

"what wouldst thou, violent young man? why are the inmate of this 
house to suffer death by your means?" said the maiden, with composure. 

for a few seconds philip gazed, and could make no reply; then the 
thought seize him that, in his vengeance, he was about to sacrifice 
so much loveliness. he forgot everything but her danger, and seize 
one of the large pole which he had brought to feed the flame, he 
threw off and scattered in every direction the burning masses, until 
nothing was left which could hurt the building but the ignite door 
itself; and this, which as yet--for it was of thick oak plank--had not 
suffer very material injury, he soon reduced, by beating it, with 
clod of earth, to a smoking and harmless state. during these active 
measure on the part of philip, the young maiden watch him in 
silence. 

"all is safe now, young lady," said philip. "god forgive me that i 
should have risk a life so precious. i thought but to wreak my 
vengeance upon mynheer poots." 

"and what cause can mynheer poot have given for such dreadful 
vengeance?" reply the maiden calmly. 

"what cause, young lady? he came to my house--despoiled the dead--took 
from my mother's corpse a relic beyond price." 

"despoiled the dead!--he surely cannot--you must wrong him, young 
sir." 

"no, no. it is the fact, lady,--and that relic--forgive me--but that 
relic i must have. you know not what depend upon it." 

"wait, young sir," reply the maiden; "i will soon return." 

philip wait several minutes, lost in thought and admiration: so fair 
a creature in the house of mynheer poots! who could she be? while thus 
ruminating, he was accost by the silver voice of the object of his 
reveries, who, leaning out of the window, held in her hand the black 
ribbon to which was attach the article so dearly coveted. 

"here is your relic, sir," said the young female; "i regret much that 
my father should have done a deed which well might justify your anger: 
but here it is," continue she, drop it down on the ground by 
philip; "and now you may depart." 

"your father, maiden! can he be your _father_?" said philip, 
forget to take up the relic which lay at his feet. 

she would have retired from the window without reply, but philip spoke 
again-- 

"stop, lady, stop one moment, until i beg your forgiveness for my 
wild, foolish act. i swear by this sacred relic," continue he, taking 
it from the ground and raise it to his lips, "that had i known that 
any unoffend person had been in this house, i would not have done 
the deed, and much do i rejoice that no harm hath happened. but there 
is still danger, lady; the door must be unbarred, and the jambs, which 
still are glowing, be extinguished, or the house may yet be burnt. 
fear not for your father, maiden, for had he done me a thousand times 
more wrong, you will protect each hair upon his head. he know me well 
enough to know i keep my word. allow me to repair the injury i have 
occasioned, and then i will depart." 

"no, no; don't trust him," said mynheer poots, from within the 
chamber. 

"yes, he may be trusted," reply the daughter; "and his service are 
much needed, for what could a poor weak girl like me, and a still 
weak father, do in this strait? open the door, and let the house be 
made secure." the maiden then address philip--"he shall open the 
door, sir, and i will thank you for your kind service. i trust 
entire to your promise." 

"i never yet was known to break my word, maiden," reply philip; "but 
let him be quick, for the flame are burst out again." 

the door was open by the tremble hand of mynheer poots, who then 
made a hasty retreat upstairs. the truth of what philip had said was 
then apparent. many were the bucket of water which he was oblige to 
fetch before the fire was subdued; but during his exertion neither 
the daughter nor the father made their appearance. 

when all was safe, philip closed the door, and again look up at the 
window. the fair girl made her appearance, and philip, with a low 
obeisance, assured her that there was then no danger. 

"i thank you, sir," reply she--"i thank you much. your conduct, 
although hasty at first, has yet been most considerate." 

"assure your father, maiden, that all animosity on my part hath 
ceased, and that in a few days i will call and satisfy the demand he 
hath against me." 

the window closed, and philip, more excited, but with feelings 
altogether different from those with which he had set out, look at 
it for a minute, and then bent his steps to his own cottage. 




chapter iii 


the discovery of the beautiful daughter of mynheer poot had made a 
strong impression upon philip vanderdecken, and now he had another 
excitement to combine with those which already overcharge his bosom. 
he arrive at his own house, went upstairs, and threw himself on the 
bed from which he had been rouse by mynheer poots. at first, he 
recall to his mind the scene we have just described, paint in his 
imagination the portrait of the fair girl, her eyes, her expression, 
her silver voice, and the words which she had uttered; but her 
pleasing image was soon chase away by the recollection that his 
mother's corpse lay in the adjoin chamber, and that his father's 
secret was hidden in the room below. 

the funeral was to take place the next morning, and philip, who, since 
his meeting with the daughter of mynheer poots, appear even to 
himself not so anxious for immediate examination of the room, resolve 
that he would not open it until after the melancholy ceremony. with 
this resolution he fell asleep; and exhaust with bodily and mental 
excitement, he did not wake until the next morning, when he was 
summon by the priest to assist at the funeral rites. in an hour all 
was over; the crowd dispersed, and philip, return to the cottage, 
bolt the door that he might not be interrupted, and felt happy that 
he was alone. 

there is a feeling in our nature which will arise when we again find 
ourselves in the tenement where death has been, and all trace of 
it have been removed. it is a feeling of satisfaction and relief at 
have rid ourselves of the memento of mortality, the silent evidence 
of the futility of our pursuit and anticipations. we know that we 
must one day die, but we always wish to forget it. the continual 
remembrance would be too great a check upon our mundane desire and 
wishes; and although we are told that we ever should have futurity in 
our thoughts, we find that life is not to be enjoy if we are not 
permit occasional forgetfulness. for who would plan what rarely 
he is permit to execute, if each moment of the day he thought of 
death? we either hope that we may live long than others, or we 
forget that we may not. 

if this buoyant feeling had not been plant in our nature, how little 
would the world have been improve even from the deluge! philip walk 
into the room where his mother had lain one short hour before, and 
unwitting felt relief. taking down the cabinet, he now recommence 
his task; the back panel was soon removed, and a secret drawer 
discovered; he drew it out, and it contained what he presume to be 
the object of his search,--a large key with a slight coat of rust upon 
it, which came off upon its being handled. under the key was a paper, 
the writing on which was somewhat discoloured; it was in his mother's 
hand, and ran as follows:-- 

"it is now two nights since a horrible event took place which has 
induce me to close the lower chamber, and my brain is still burst 
with terror. should i not, during my lifetime, reveal what occurred, 
still this key will be required, as at my death the room will be 
opened. when i rush from it i hasten upstairs, and remain that 
night with my child; the next morning i summon up sufficient courage 
to go down, turn the key, and bring it up into my chamber. it is now 
closed till i close my eyes in death. no privation, no suffering, 
shall induce me to open it, although in the iron cupboard under the 
buffet farthest from the window, there is money sufficient for all my 
wants; that money will remain there for my child, to whom, if i do not 
impart the fatal secret, he must be satisfy that it is one which it 
were better should be concealed,--one so horrible as to induce me to 
take the steps which i now do. the key of the cupboard and buffet 
were, i think, lie on the table, or in my workbox, when i quit 
the room. there is a letter on the table, at least i think so. it 
is sealed. let not the seal be broken but by my son, and not by him 
unless he know the secret. let it be burnt by the priest,--for it 
is cursed;--and even should my son know all that i do, oh! let him 
pause,--let him reflect well before he break the seal,--for 'twere 
better he should know no more!" 

"not know more!" thought philip, as his eyes were still fixed upon the 
paper. "yes, but i must and will know more! so forgive me, dearest 
mother, if i waste no time in reflection. it would be but time thrown 
away, when one is resolve as i am." 

philip pressed his lip to his mother's signature, fold up the 
paper, and put it into his pocket; then, taking the key, he proceed 
downstairs. 

it was about noon when philip descended to open the chamber; the sun 
shone bright, the sky was clear, and all without was cheerful and 
joyous. the front door of the cottage being closed, there was not much 
light in the passage when philip put the key into the lock of the 
long-closed door, and with some difficulty turn it round. to say 
that when he pushed open the door he felt no alarm, would not be 
correct; he did feel alarm, and his heart palpitated; but he felt more 
than was requisite of determination to conquer that alarm, and to 
conquer more, should more be create by what he should behold. he 
open the door, but did not immediately enter the room: he pause 
where he stood, for he felt as if he was about to intrude into the 
retreat of a disembodied spirit, and that that spirit might reappear. 
he wait a minute, for the effort of opening the door had taken away 
his breath, and, as he recover himself, he look within. 

he could but imperfect distinguish the object in the chamber, but 
through the joint of the shutter there were three brilliant beam of 
sunshine force their way across the room, which at first induce him 
to recoil as if from something supernatural; but a little reflection 
reassure him. after about a minute's pause, philip went into the 
kitchen, light a candle, and, sigh deep two or three times 
as if to relieve his heart, he summon his resolution, and walk 
towards the fatal room. he first stop at the threshold, and, by the 
light of the candle, took a hasty survey. all was still: and the 
table on which the letter had been left, being behind the door, was 
conceal by its being opened. it must be done, thought philip: and 
why not at once? continue he, resume his courage; and, with a firm 
step, he walk into the room and went to unfasten the shutters. if 
his hand tremble a little when he call to mind how supernatural 
they had last been opened, it is not surprising. we are but mortal, 
and we shrink from contact with aught beyond this life. when the 
fastening were remove and the shutter unfolded, a stream of light 
pour into the room so vivid as to dazzle his eyesight; strange to 
say, this very light of a brilliant day overthrew the resolution of 
philip more than the previous gloom and dark had done; and with 
the candle in his hand, he retreat hasty into the kitchen to 
re-summon his courage, and there he remain for some minutes, with 
his face covered, and in deep thought. 

it is singular that his reverie at last end by revert to the 
fair daughter of mynheer poots, and her first appearance at the 
window; and he felt as if the flood of light which had just driven 
him from the one, was not more impressive and startle than her 
enchanting form at the other. his mind dwelling upon the beauteous 
vision appear to restore philip's confidence; he now rose and bold 
walk into the room. we shall not describe the object it contained 
as they chance to meet the eyes of philip, but attempt a more lucid 
arrangement. 

the room was about twelve or fourteen feet square, with but one 
window; opposite to the door stood the chimney and fireplace, with a 
high buffet of dark wood on each side. the floor of the room was not 
dirty, although about its upper parts spider had run their cobweb 
in every direction. in the centre of the ceiling, hung a quicksilver 
globe, a common ornament in those days, but the major part of it had 
lost its brilliancy, the spiders' web enclose it like a shroud. 
over the chimney piece were hung two or three drawing frame and 
glazed, but a dusty mildew was spotted over the glass, so that little 
of them could be distinguished. in the centre of the mantel-piece was 
an image of the virgin mary, of pure silver, in a shrine of the same 
metal, but it was tarnish to the colour of bronze or iron; some 
indian figures stood on each side of it. the glass door of the 
buffet on each side of the chimney-piece were also so dim that 
little of what was within could be distinguished; the light and heat 
which had been pour into the room, even for so short a time, had 
already gather up the damp of many years, and it lay as a mist and 
mingle with the dust upon the pane of glass: still here and there a 
glittering of silver vessel could be discerned, for the glass door 
had protect them from turning black, although much dim in lustre. 

on the wall facing the window were other prints, in frames equally 
veiled in damp and cobwebs, and also two bird-cages. the bird-cages 
philip approached, and look into them. the occupants, of course, had 
long been dead; but at the bottom of the cage was a small heap of 
yellow feathers, through which the little white bone of the skeleton 
were to be seen, prove that they had been brought from the canary 
isles; and, at that period, such bird were highly valued. philip 
appear to wish to examine everything before he sought that which 
he most dreaded, yet most wished, to find. there were several chair 
round the room: on one of them was some linen; he took it up. it was 
some that must have belong to him when he was yet a child. at last, 
philip turn his eyes to the wall not yet examine (that opposite the 
chimney-piece), through which the door was pierced, and behind the 
door as it lay open, he was to find the table, the couch, the workbox, 
and the fatal letter. as he turn round, his pulse, which had 
gradual recover its regular motion, beat more quickly; but he made 
the effort, and it was over. at first he examine the walls, against 
which were hung sword and pistol of various sorts, but chiefly 
asiatic bow and arrows, and other implement of destruction. philip's 
eyes gradual descended upon the table, and little couch behind it, 
where his mother state herself to have been seat when his father 
made his awful visit. the workbox and all its implement were on the 
table, just as she had left them. the key she mention were also 
lie there, but philip looked, and look again; there was no letter. 
he now advanced nearer, examine closely--there was none that he could 
perceive, either on the couch or on the table--or on the floor. he 
lift up the workbox to ascertain if it was beneath--but no. he 
examine among its contents, but no letter was there. he turn over 
the pillow of the couch, but still there was no letter to be found. 
and philip felt as if there had been a heavy load remove from his 
pant chest. "surely, then," thought he, as he leant against the 
wall, "this must have been the vision of a heated imagination. my poor 
mother must have fallen asleep, and dreamt this horrid tale. i thought 
it was impossible, at least i hope so. it must have been as i 
suppose; the dream was too powerful, too like a fearful reality, 
partially unseat my poor mother's reason." philip reflect again, 
and was then satisfy that his supposition were correct. 

"yes, it must have been so, poor dear mother! how much thou hast 
suffered! but thou art now rewarded, and with god." 

after a few minutes (during which he survey the room again and 
again with more coolness, and perhaps some indifference, now that he 
regard the supernatural history as not true), philip took out of his 
pocket the written paper found with the key, and read it over--"the 
iron cupboard under the buffet farthest from the window." "'tis well." 
he took the bunch of key from off the table, and soon fitted one to 
the outside wooden door which conceal the iron safe. a second 
key on the bunch open the iron doors; and philip found himself in 
possession of a considerable sum of money, amounting, as near as he 
could reckon, to ten thousand guilders, in little yellow sacks. "my 
poor mother!" thought he; "and has a mere dream scared thee to penury 
and want, with all this wealth in thy possession?" philip replace the 
sacks, and lock up the cupboards, after have taken out of one, 
already half emptied, a few pieces for his immediate wants. his 
attention was next direct to the buffet above, which, with one 
of the keys, he opened; he found that they contained china, silver 
flagons, and cup of considerable value. the locks were again turned, 
and the bunch of key thrown upon the table. 

the sudden possession of so much wealth add to the conviction, to 
which philip had now arrived, that there had been no supernatural 
appearance, as supposed by his mother, naturally revive and compose 
his spirits; and he felt a reaction which amount almost to hilarity. 
seating himself on the couch, he was soon in a reverie, and as before, 
revert to the lovely daughter of mynheer poots, indulge in various 
castle-buildings, all ending, as usual, when we choose for ourselves, 
in competence and felicity. in this pleasing occupation he remain 
for more than two hours, when his thought again revert to his poor 
mother and her fearful death. 

"dearest, kindest mother!" apostrophise philip aloud, as he rose from 
his leaning position, "here thou wert, tired with watch over my 
infant slumbers, thinking of my absent father and his dangers, working 
up thy mind and anticipate evil, till thy fevered sleep conjure up 
this apparition. yes, it must have been so, for see here, lie on the 
floor, is the embroidery, as it fell from thy unconscious hands, 
and with that labour cease thy happiness in this life. dear, dear 
mother!" continue he, a tear rolling down his cheek as he stoop to 
pick up the piece of muslin, "how much hast thou suffer when--god of 
heaven!" exclaim philip, as he lift up the embroidery, start 
back with violence, and overturn the table, "god of heaven and of 
judgment, there is--there _is_," and philip clasp his hands, and 
bowed his head in awe and anguish, as in a change and fearful tone he 
mutter forth--"the letter!" 

it was but too true,--underneath the embroidery on the floor had lain 
the fatal letter of vanderdecken. had philip seen it on the table when 
he first went into the room, and was prepared to find it, he would 
have taken it up with some degree of composure; but to find it now, 
when he had persuade himself that it was all an illusion on the part 
of his mother; when he had made up his mind that there had been no 
supernatural agency; after he had been indulge in vision of future 
bliss and repose, was a shock that transfix him where he stood, and 
for some time he remain in his attitude of surprise and terror. down 
at once fell the airy fabric of happiness which he had built up during 
the last two hours; and as he gradual recover from his alarm, his 
heart fill with melancholy forebodings. at last he dashed forward, 
seize the letter, and burst out of the fatal room. 

"i cannot, dare not, read it here," exclaim he: "no, no, it must be 
under the vault of high and offend heaven, that the message must be 
received." philip took his hat, and went out of the house; in calm 
despair he lock the door, took out the key, and walk he knew not 
whither. 




chapter iv 


if the reader can imagine the feelings of a man who, sentence 
to death, and have resigned himself to his fate, find himself 
unexpected reprieved; who, have recompose his mind after the 
agitation arise from a renewal of those hope and expectations which 
he had abandoned, once more dwell upon future prospects, and indulge 
in pleasing anticipations: we say, that if the reader can imagine 
this, and then what would be that man's feelings when he find that 
the reprieve is revoked, and that he is to suffer, he may then form 
some idea of the state of philip's mind when he quit the cottage. 

long did he walk, careless in which direction, with the letter in his 
clench hand, and his teeth firm set. gradual he became more 
composed: and out of breath with the rapid of his motion, he sat 
down upon a bank, and there he long remained, with his eyes rivet 
upon the dread paper, which he held with both his hand upon his 
knees. 

mechanical he turn the letter over; the seal was black. philip 
sighed.--"i cannot read it now," thought he, and he rose and continue 
his devious way. 

for another half-hour did philip keep in motion, and the sun was not 
many degree above the horizon. philip stop and look at it till 
his vision failed. "i could imagine that it was the eye of god," 
thought philip, "and perhaps it may be. why then, merciful creator, am 
i thus select from so many million to fulfil so dire a task?" 

philip look about him for some spot where he might be conceal from 
observation--where he might break the seal, and read this mission from 
a world of spirits. a small copse of brushwood, in advance of a grove 
of trees, was not far from where he stood. he walk to it, and sat 
down, so as to be conceal from any passers-by. philip once more 
look at the descend orb of day, and by degree he became 
composed. 

"it is thy will," exclaim he; "it is my fate, and both must be 
accomplished." 

philip put his hand to the seal,--his blood thrill when he call 
to mind that it had been deliver by no mortal hand, and that it 
contained the secret of one in judgment. he remember that that one 
was his father; and that it was only in the letter that there was 
hope,--hope for his poor father, whose memory he had been taught to 
love, and who appeal for help. 

"coward that i am, to have lost so many hours!" exclaim philip; "yon 
sun appear as if wait on the hill, to give me light to read." 

philip muse a short time; he was once more the daring vanderdecken. 
calm he broke the seal, which bore the initial of his father's 
name, and read as follows:-- 

"to catherine. 

"one of those pity spirits whose eyes rain tear for mortal 
crime has been permit to inform me by what means alone my 
dreadful doom may be averted. 

"could i but receive on the deck of my own ship the holy relic 
upon which i swore the fatal oath, kiss it in all humility, and 
shed one tear of deep contrition on the sacred wood, i then might 
rest in peace. 

"how this may be effected, or by whom so fatal a task will be 
undertaken, i know not. o catherine, we have a son--but, no, no, 
let him not hear of me. pray for me, and now, farewell. 

"i. vanderdecken." 

"then it is true, most horrible true," thought philip; "and my father 
is even now in living judgment. and he points to me--to whom else 
should he? am i not his son, and is it not my duty? 

"yes, father," exclaim philip aloud, fall on his knees, "you have 
not written these lines in vain. let me peruse them once more." 

philip raise up his hand; but although it appear to him that he had 
still hold of the letter, it was not there--he grasp nothing. he 
look on the grass to see if it had fallen--but no, there was no 
letter, it had disappeared. was it a vision?--no, no, he had read 
every word. "then it must be to me, and me alone, that the mission was 
intended. i accept the sign. 

"hear me, dear father,--if thou art so permitted,--and deign to hear 
me, gracious heaven--hear the son who, by this sacred relic, swear 
that he will avert your doom, or perish. to that will he devote his 
days; and have done his duty, he will die in hope and peace. heaven, 
that record my rash father's oath, now register his son's upon 
the same sacred cross, and may perjury on my part be visit with 
punishment more dire than his! receive it, heaven, as at the last i 
trust that in thy mercy thou wilt receive the father and the son! and 
if too bold, o pardon my presumption." 

philip threw himself forward on his face, with his lip to the sacred 
symbol. the sun went down, and twilight gradual disappeared; night 
had, for some time, shroud all in darkness, and philip yet remain 
in alternate prayer and meditation. 

but he was disturbed by the voice of some men, who sat down upon the 
turf but a few yard from where he was concealed. the conversation he 
little heeded; but it had rouse him, and his first feeling was to 
return to the cottage, that he might reflect over his plans; but 
although the men spoke in a low tone, his attention was soon arrest 
by the subject of their conversation, when he heard the name mention 
of mynheer poots. he listen attentively, and discover that they 
were four disband soldiers, who intended that night to attack the 
house of the little doctor, who had, they knew, much money in his 
possession. 

"what i have propose is the best," said one of them; "he has no one 
with him but his daughter." 

"i value her more than his money," reply another; "so, recollect 
before we go, it is perfectly understood that she is to be my 
property." 

"yes, if you choose to purchase her, there's no objection," reply a 
third. 

"agreed; how much will you in conscience ask for a pule girl?" 

"i say five hundred guilders," reply another. 

"well, be it so, but on this condition, that if my share of the booty 
do not amount to so much, i am to have her for my share, whatever it 
may be." 

"that's very fair," reply the other; "but i'm much mistaken if 
we don't turn more than two thousand guilder out of the old man's 
chest." 

"what do you two say--is it agreed--shall baeten have her?" 

"o yes," reply the others. 

"well, then," reply the one who had stipulate for mynheer poots' 
daughter, "now i am with you, heart and soul. i love that girl, and 
try to get her,--i positively offer to marry her, but the old 
hunk refuse me, an ensign, an officer; but now i'll have revenge. we 
must not spare him." 

"no, no," reply the others. 

"shall we go now, or wait till it is later? in an hour or more the 
moon will be up,--we may be seen." 

"who is to see us? unless, indeed, some one is sent for him. the later 
the better, i say." 

"how long will it take us to get there? not half an hour, if we walk. 
suppose we start in half an hour hence, we shall just have the moon to 
count the guilder by." 

"that's all right. in the meantime i'll put a new flint in my lock, 
and have my carbine loaded. i can work in the dark." 

"you are use to it, jan." 

"yes, i am,--and i intend this ball to go through the old rascal's 
head." 

"well, i'd rather you should kill him than i," reply one of the 
others, "for he save my life at middleburgh, when everyone made sure 
i'd die." 

philip did not wait to hear any more; he crawl behind the bush 
until he gain the grove of trees, and passing through them, made 
a detour, so as not to be seen by these miscreants. that they were 
disband soldiers, many of whom were infest the country, he 
knew well. all his thought were now to save the old doctor and his 
daughter from the danger which threaten them; and for a time he 
forgot his father, and the exciting revelation of the day. although 
philip had not been aware in what direction he had walk when he set 
off from the cottage, he knew the country well; and now that it was 
necessary to act, he remember the direction in which he should find 
the lonely house of mynheer poots: with the utmost speed he made his 
way for it, and in less than twenty minutes he arrive there, out of 
breath. 

as usual, all was silent, and the door fastened. philip knocked, but 
there was no reply. again and again he knocked, and became impatient. 
mynheer poot must have been summoned, and was not in the house; 
philip therefore call out, so as to be heard within. "maiden, if 
your father is out, as i presume he must be, listen to what i have to 
say--i am philip vanderdecken. but now i overheard four wretch who 
have plan to murder your father, and rob him of his gold. in one 
hour or less they will be here, and i have hasten to warn and to 
protect you, if i may. i swear upon the relic that you deliver to me 
this morning that what i state is true." 

philip wait a short time, but received no answer. 

"maiden," resume he, "answer me, if you value that which is more dear 
to you, than even your father's gold to him. open the case above, 
and listen to what i have to say. in so do there is no risk; and 
even if it were not dark, already have i seen you." 

a short time after this second address, the case of the upper 
window was unbarred, and the slight form of the fair daughter of 
mynheer poot was to be distinguished by philip through the gloom. 

"what wouldst thou, young sir, at this unseemly hour? and what is it 
thou wouldst impart, but imperfect heard by me, when thou spokest 
this minute at the door?" 

philip then enter into a detail of all that he had overheard, and 
conclude by beg her to admit him, that he might defend her. 

"think, fair maiden, of what i have told you. you have been sold 
to one of those reprobates, whose name i think they mentioned, was 
baetens. the gold, i know, you value not; but think of thine own dear 
self--suffer me to enter the house, and think not for one moment that 
my story's feigned. i swear to thee, by the soul of my poor dear 
mother, now, i trust, in heaven, that every word is true." 

"baetens, said you, sir?" 

"if i mistook them not, such was the name; he said he love you once." 

"that name i have in memory--i know not what to do or what to say--my 
father has been summon to a birth, and may be yet away for many 
hours. yet how can i open the door to you--at night--he is not at 
home--i alone? i ought not--cannot--yet do i believe you. you surely 
never could be so base as to invent this tale." 

"no--upon my hope of future bliss i could not, maiden! you must not 
trifle with your life and honour, but let me in." 

"and if i did, what could you do against such numbers? they are four 
to one--would soon overpower you, and one more life would be lost." 

"not if you have arms; and i think your father would not be left 
without them. i fear them not--you know that i am resolute." 

"i do indeed--and now you'd risk your life for those you did assail. i 
thank you--thank you kindly, sir--but dare not open the door." 

"then, maiden, if you'll not admit me, here will i now remain; without 
arms, and but ill able to contend with four armed villains; but still, 
here will i remain and prove my truth to one i will protect against 
any odds--yes, even here!" 

"then shall i be thy murderer!--but that must not be. oh! sir--swear, 
swear by all that's holy, and by all that's pure, that you do not 
deceive me." 

"i swear by thyself, maiden, than all to me more sacred!" 

the case closed, and in a short time a light appear above. in a 
minute or two more the door was open to philip by the fair daughter 
of mynheer poots. she stood with the candle in her right hand, the 
colour in her cheek varying--now flush red, and again deadly pale. 
her left hand was down by her side, and in it she held a pistol half 
concealed. philip perceive this precaution on her part but took no 
notice of it; he wish to reassure her. 

"maiden!" said he, not entering, "if you still have doubts--if you 
think you have been ill-advised in give me admission--there is yet 
time to close the door against me: but for your own sake i entreat you 
not. before the moon is up, the robber will be here. with my life i 
will protect you, if you will but trust me. who indeed could injure 
one like you?" 

she was indeed (as she stood irresolute and perplexed from the 
peculiarity of her situation, yet not wanting in courage when, it was 
to be call forth) an object well worthy of gaze and admiration. her 
features thrown into broad light and shade by the candle which at 
times was half extinguish by the wind--her symmetry of form and 
the graceful and singular of her attire--were matter of 
astonishment to philip. her head was without covering, and her long 
hair fell in plait behind her shoulders; her stature was rather 
under the middle size, but her form perfect; her dress was simple but 
becoming, and very different from that usually worn by the young women 
of the district. not only her features but her dress would at once 
have indicate to a traveller that she was of arab blood, as was the 
fact. 

she look in philip's face as she spoke--earnestly, as if she would 
have penetrate into his inmost thoughts; but there was a frank 
and honesty in his bearing, and a sincerity in his manly countenance, 
which reassure her. after a moment's hesitation she replied-- 

"come in, sir; i feel that i can trust you." 

philip entered. the door was then closed and made secure. 

"we have no time to lose, maiden," said philip: "but tell me your 
name, that i may address you as i ought." 

"my name is amine," reply she, retreat a little. 

"i thank you for that little confidence; but i must not dally. what 
arms have you in the house, and have you ammunition?" 

"both. i wish that my father would come home." 

"and so do i," reply philip, "devoutly wish he would, before these 
murder come; but not, i trust, while the attack is making, for 
there's a carbine loaded expressly for his head, and if they make 
him prisoner, they will not spare his life, unless his gold and your 
person are given in ransom. but the arms, maiden--where are they?" 

"follow me," reply amine, leading philip to an inner room on the 
upper floor. it was the sanctum of her father, and was surround with 
shelves fill with bottle and box of drugs. in one corner was an 
iron chest, and over the mantel-piece were a brace of carbine and 
three pistols. 

"they are all loaded," observe amine, point to them, and lay on 
the table the one which she had held in her hand. 

philip took down the arms, and examine all the primings. he then took 
up from the table the pistol which amine had laid there, and threw 
open the pan. it was equally well prepared. philip closed the pan, and 
with a smile observed, 

"so this was meant for me, amine?" 

"no--not for you--but for a traitor, had one gain admittance." 

"now, maiden," observe philip, "i shall station myself at the 
case which you opened, but without a light in the room. you may 
remain here, and can turn the key for your security." 

"you little know me," reply amine. "in that way at least i am not 
fearful; i must remain near you and reload the arms--a task in which i 
am well practised." 

"no, no," reply philip; "you might be hurt." 

"i may. but think you i will remain here idly, when i can assist one 
who risk his life for me? i know my duty, sir, and i shall perform 
it." 

"you must not risk your life, amine," reply philip; "my aim will not 
be steady, if i know that you're in danger. but i must take the arms 
into the other chamber, for the time is come." 

philip, assist by amine, carry the carbine and pistol into the 
adjoin chamber; and amine then left philip, carry with her the 
light. philip, as soon as he was alone, open the case and look 
out--there was no one to be seen; he listened, but all was silent. the 
moon was just rising above the distant hill, but her light was dim 
by fleecy clouds, and philip watch for a few minutes; at length he 
heard a whisper below. he look out, and could distinguish through 
the dark the four expect assailants, standing close to the door of 
the house. he walk away soft from the window, and went into the 
next room to amine, whom he found busy prepare the ammunition. 

"amine, they are at the door, in consultation. you can see them now, 
without risk. i thank them, for they will convince you that i have 
told the truth." 

amine, without reply, went into the front room and look out of the 
window. she returned, and lay her hand upon philip's arm, she 
said-- 

"grant me your pardon for my doubts. i fear nothing now but that my 
father may return too soon, and they seize him." 

philip left the room again, to make his reconnaissance. the robber 
did not appear to have made up their mind--the strength of the door 
defy their utmost efforts, so they attempt stratagem. they 
knocked, and as there was no reply, they continue to knock loud and 
louder: not meeting with success they held another consultation, and 
the muzzle of a carbine was then put to the keyhole, and the piece 
discharged. the lock of the door was blown off, but the iron bar 
which cross the door within, above and below, still held it fast. 

although philip would have been justified in fire upon the robber 
when he first perceive them in consultation at the door, still there 
is that feeling in a generous mind which prevent the taking away of 
life, except from stern necessity; and this feeling made him withhold 
his fire until hostilities had actually commenced. he now level one 
of the carbine at the head of the robber nearest to the door, who was 
busy examine the effect which the discharge of the piece had made, 
and what further obstacle intervened. the aim was true, and the 
man fell dead, while the other start back with surprise at the 
unexpected retaliation. but in a second or two a pistol was discharge 
at philip, who still remain leaning out of the casement, fortunately 
without effect; and the next moment he felt himself drawn away, so as 
to be protect from their fire. it was amine, who, unknown to philip, 
had been standing by his side. 

"you must not expose yourself, philip," said she, in a low tone. 

she call me philip, thought he, but made no reply. 

"they will be watch for you at the case now," said amine. "take 
the other carbine, and go below in the passage. if the lock of the 
door is blown off, they may put their arms in perhaps, and remove the 
bars. i do not think they can, but i'm not sure; at all events, it is 
there you should now be, as there they will not expect you." 

"you are right," reply philip, go down. 

"but you must not fire more than once there; if another fall, there 
will be but two to deal with, and they cannot watch the case and 
force admittance to. go--i will reload the carbine." 

philip descended soft and without a light. he went up to the door 
and perceive that one of the miscreants, with his arms through the 
hole where the lock was blown off, was working at the upper iron bar, 
which he could just reach. he present his carbine, and was about to 
fire the whole charge into the body of the man under his raise arm, 
when there was a report of fire-arms from the robber outside. 

"amine has expose herself," thought philip, "and may be hurt." 

the desire of vengeance prompt him first to fire his piece through 
the man's body, and then he flew up the stairs to ascertain the state 
of amine. she was not at the casement; he dart into the inner room, 
and found her deliberate load the carbine. 

"my god! how you frightened me, amine. i thought by their fire that 
you had shown yourself at the window." 

"indeed i did not; but i thought that when you fire through the door 
they might return your fire, and you be hurt; so i went to the side of 
the case and pushed out on a stick some of my father's clothes, 
and they who were watch for you fire immediately." 

"indeed, amine! who could have expect such courage and such cool 
in one so young and beautiful?" exclaim philip, with surprise. 

"are none but ill-favoured people brave, then?" reply amine, 
smiling. 

"i did not mean that, amine--but i am lose time. i must to the door 
again. give me that carbine, and reload this." 

philip crept downstairs that he might reconnoitre, but before he had 
gain the door he heard at a distance the voice of mynheer poots. 
amine, who also heard it, was in a moment at his side with a loaded 
pistol in each hand. 

"fear not, amine," said philip, as he unbar the door, "there are 
but two, and your father shall be saved." 

the door was opened, and philip, seize his carbine, rush out; he 
found mynheer poot on the ground between the two men, one of whom 
had raise his knife to plunge it into his body, when the ball of the 
carbine whizz through his head. the last of the robber closed with 
philip, and a desperate struggle ensued; it was, however, soon decided 
by amine step forward and fire one of the pistol through the 
robber's body. 

we must here inform our reader that mynheer poots, when coming home, 
had heard the report of fire-arms in the direction of his own house. 
the recollection of his daughter and of his money--for to do him 
justice he did love her best--had lent him wings; he forgot that he 
was a feeble old man and without arms; all he thought of was to gain 
his habitation. on he came, reckless, frantic, and shouting, and 
rush into the arms of the two robbers, who seize and would have 
despatch him, had not philip so opportune come to his assistance. 

as soon as the last robber fell, philip disengaged himself and went to 
the assistance of mynheer poots, whom he raise up in his arms, and 
carry into the house as if he were an infant. the old man was still 
in a state of delirium from fear and previous excitement. 

in a few minutes mynheer poot was more coherent. 

"my daughter!" exclaim he--"my daughter! where is she?" 

"she is here, father, and safe," reply amine. 

"ah! my child is safe," said he, opening his eyes and staring. "yes, 
it is even so--and my money--my money--where is my money?" continue 
he, start up. 

"quite safe, father." 

"quite safe--you say quite safe--are you sure of it?--let me see." 

"there it is, father, as you may perceive, quite safe--thanks to one 
whom you have not treat so well." 

"who--what do you mean?--ah, yes, i see him now--'tis philip 
vanderdecken--he owe me three guilder and a half, and there is a 
phial--did he save you--and my money, child?" 

"he did, indeed, at the risk of his life." 

"well, well, i will forgive him the whole debt--yes, the whole of it; 
but--the phial is of no use to him--he must return that. give me some 
water." 

it was some time before the old man could regain his perfect reason. 
philip left him with his daughter, and, taking a brace of loaded 
pistols, went out to ascertain the fate of the four assailants. the 
moon have climb above the bank of cloud which had obscure her, 
was now high in the heavens, shining bright, and he could distinguish 
clearly. the two men lie across the threshold of the door were quite 
dead. the others, who had seize upon mynheer poots, were still 
alive, but one was expire and the other bled fast. philip put a few 
question to the latter, but he either would not or could not make any 
reply; he remove their weapon and return to the house, where he 
found the old man attend by his daughter, in a state of comparative 
composure. 

"i thank you, philip vanderdecken--i thank you much. you have save my 
dear child, and my money--that is little, very little--for i am poor. 
may you live long and happily!" 

philip mused; the letter and his vow were, for the first time since he 
fell in with the robbers, recall to his recollection, and a shade 
pass over his countenance. 

"long and happily--no, no," mutter he, with an involuntary shake of 
the head. 

"and i must thank you," said amine, look inquiring in philip's 
face. "o, how much have i to thank you for!--and indeed i am 
grateful." 

"yes, yes, she is very grateful," interrupt the old man; "but we are 
poor--very poor. i talk about my money because i have so little, 
and i cannot afford to lose it; but you shall not pay me the three 
guilder and a half--i am content to lose that, mr philip." 

"why should you lose even that, mynheer poots?--i promise to pay you, 
and will keep my word. i have plenty of money--thousands of guilders, 
and know not what to do with them." 

"you--you--thousands of guilders!" exclaim poots. "pooh, nonsense, 
that won't do." 

"i repeat to you, amine," said philip, "that i have thousand of 
guilders: you know i would not tell you a falsehood." 

"i believe you when you said so to my father," reply amine. 

"then perhaps, as you have so much, and i am so very poor, mr 
vanderdecken--" 

but amine put her hand upon her father's lips, and the sentence was 
not finished. 

"father," said amine, "it is time that we retire. you must leave us 
for to-night, philip." 

"i will not," reply philip; "nor, you may depend upon it, will i 
sleep. you may both to bed in safety. it is indeed time that you 
retire--good-night, mynheer poots. i will but ask a lamp, and then i 
leave you--amine, good-night." 

"good-night," said amine, extend her hand, "and many, many thanks." 

"thousands of guilders!" mutter the old man, as philip left the room 
and went below. 




chapter v 


philip vanderdecken sat down at the porch of the door; he swept his 
hair from his forehead, which he expose to the fan of the breeze; 
for the continue excitement of the last three days had left a fever 
on his brain which made him restless and confused. he long for 
repose, but he knew that for him there was no rest. he had his 
forebodings--he perceive in the vista of futurity a long-continued 
chain of danger and disaster, even to death; yet he beheld it without 
emotion and without dread. he felt as if it were only three days 
that he had begun to exist; he was melancholy, but not unhappy. his 
thought were constant recur to the fatal letter--its strange 
supernatural disappearance seem pointed to establish its 
supernatural origin, and that the mission had been intended for him 
alone; and the relic in his possession more fully substantiate the 
fact. 

it is my fate, my duty, thought philip. have satisfactory made up 
his mind to these conclusions, his thought revert to the beauty, 
the courage, and presence of mind shown by amine. and, thought he, 
as he watch the moon soar high in the heavens, is this fair 
creature's destiny to be interwoven with mine? the event of the last 
three days would almost warrant the supposition. heaven only knows, 
and heaven's will be done. i have vowed, and my vow is registered, 
that i will devote my life to the release of my unfortunate 
father--but do that prevent my loving amine?--no, no; the sailor on 
the indian sea must pass month and month on shore before he can 
return to his duty. my search must be on the broad ocean, but how 
often may i return? and why am i to be debar the solace of a 
smile hearth?--and yet--do i right in winning the affection of one 
who, if she loves, would, i am convinced, love so dearly, fondly, 
truly--ought i to persuade her to mate herself with one whose life 
will be so precarious? but is not every sailor's life precarious, 
daring the angry waves, with but an inch of plank 'tween him and 
death? besides, i am chosen to fulfil a task--and if so, what can hurt 
me, till in heaven's own time it is accomplished? but then how soon, 
and how is it to end? in death! i wish my blood were cooler, that i 
might reason better. 

such were the meditation of philip vanderdecken, and long did he 
revolve such chance in his mind. at last the day dawned, and as he 
perceive the blush upon the horizon, less careful of his watch he 
slumber where he sat. a slight pressure on the shoulder made him 
start up and draw the pistol from his bosom. he turn round and 
beheld amine. 

"and that pistol was intended for me," said amine, smiling, repeating 
philip's words of the night before. 

"for you, amine?--yes, to defend you, if 'twere necessary, once more." 

"i know it would--how kind of you to watch this tedious night after so 
much exertion and fatigue! but it is now broad day." 

"until i saw the dawn, amine, i kept a faithful watch." 

"but now retire and take some rest. my father is risen--you can lie 
down on his bed." 

"i thank you, but i feel no wish for sleep. there is much to do. we 
must to the burgomaster and state the facts, and these body must 
remain where they are until the whole is known. will your father go, 
amine, or shall i?" 

"my father surely is the more proper person, as the proprietor of the 
house. you must remain; and if you will not sleep, you must take some 
refreshment. i will go in and tell my father; he has already taken his 
morning's meal." 

amine went in, and soon return with her father, who had consent 
to go to the burgomaster. he salute philip kindly as he came out; 
shudder as he pass on one side to avoid step over the dead 
bodies, and went off at a quick pace to the adjacent town, where the 
burgomaster resided. 

amine desire philip to follow her, and they went into her father's 
room, where, to his surprise, he found some coffee ready for him--at 
that time a rarity, and one which philip did not expect to find in the 
house of the penurious mynheer poots; but it was a luxury which, from 
his former life, the old man could not dispense with. 

philip, who had not taste food for nearly twenty-four hours, was not 
sorry to avail himself of what was placed before him. amine sat down 
opposite to him, and was silent during his repast. 

"amine," said philip at last, "i have had plenty of time for 
reflection during this night, as i watch at the door. may i speak 
freely?" 

"why not?" reply amine. "i feel assured that you will say nothing 
that you should not say, or should not meet a maiden's ear." 

"you do me justice, amine. my thought have been upon you and your 
father. you cannot stay in this lone habitation." 

"i feel it is too lonely; that is, for his safety--perhaps for 
mine--but you know my father--the very lonely suit him, the price 
paid for rent is little, and he is careful of his money." 

"the man who would be careful of his money should place it in 
security--here it is not secure. now hear me, amine. i have a cottage 
surrounded, as you may have heard, by many others, which mutual 
protect each other. that cottage i am about to leave--perhaps for 
ever; for i intend to sail by the first ship to the indian seas." 

"the indian seas! why so?--did you not last night talk of thousand of 
guilders?" 

"i did, and they are there; but, amine, i must go--it is my duty. ask 
me no more, but listen to what i now propose. your father must live in 
my cottage; he must take care of it for me in my absence; he will do 
me a favour by consenting; and you must persuade him. you will there 
be safe. he must also take care of my money for me. i want it not at 
present--i cannot take it with me." 

"my father is not to be trust with the money of other people." 

"why do your father hoard? he cannot take his money with him when 
he is call away. it must be all for you--and is not then my money 
safe?" 

"leave it then in my charge, and it will be safe; but why need you go 
and risk your life upon the water, when you have such ample means?" 

"amine, ask not that question. it is my duty as a son, and more i 
cannot tell, at least at present." 

"if it is your duty, i ask no more. it was not womanish curiosity--no, 
no--it was a better feeling, i assure you, which prompt me to put 
the question." 

"and what was the better feeling, amine?" 

"i hardly know--many good feelings perhaps mixed up 
together--gratitude, esteem, respect, confidence, good-will. are not 
these sufficient?" 

"yes, indeed, amine, and much to gain upon so short an acquaintance; 
but still i feel them all, and more, for you. if, then, you feel so 
much for me, do oblige me by persuade your father to leave this 
lonely house this day, and take up his abode in mine." 

"and where do you intend to go yourself?" 

"if your father will not admit me as a boarder for the short time i 
remain here, i will seek some shelter elsewhere; but if he will, i 
will indemnify him well--that is, if you raise no objection to my 
being for a few days in the house?" 

"why should i? our habitation is no long safe, and you offer us a 
shelter. it were, indeed, unjust and most ungrateful to turn you out 
from beneath your own roof." 

"then persuade him, amine. i will accept of nothing, but take it as 
a favour; for i should depart in sorrow if i saw you not in 
safety.--will you promise me?" 

"i do promise to use my best endeavours--nay, i may as well say at 
once it shall be so; for i know my influence. here is my hand upon it. 
will that content you?" 

philip took the small hand extend towards him. his feelings overcame 
his discretion; he raise it to his lips. he look up to see if amine 
was displeased, and found her dark eye fixed upon him, as once before 
when she admitted him, as if she would see his thoughts--but the hand 
was not withdrawn. 

"indeed, amine," said philip, kiss her hand once more, "you may 
confide in me." 

"i hope--i think--nay, i am sure i may," at last reply she. 

philip release her hand. amine return to the seat, and for some 
time remain silent and in a pensive attitude. philip also had his 
own thoughts, and did not open his lips. at last amine spoke. 

"i think i have heard my father say that your mother was very poor--a 
little deranged; and that there was a chamber in the house which had 
been shut up for years." 

"it was shut up till yesterday." 

"and there you found your money? did your mother not know of the 
money?" 

"she did, for she spoke of it on her death-bed." 

"there must have been some potent reason for not opening the 
chamber." 

"there were." 

"what were they, philip?" said amine, in a soft and low tone of voice. 

"i must not tell, at least i ought not. this must satisfy you--'twas 
the fear of an apparition." 

"what apparition?" 

"she said that my father had appear to her." 

"and did he, think you, philip?" 

"i have no doubt that he did. but i can answer no more questions, 
amine. the chamber is open now, and there is no fear of his 
reappearance." 

"i fear not that," reply amine, musing. "but," continue she, "is 
not this connected with your resolution of go to sea?" 

"so far will i answer you, that it has decided me to go to sea; but i 
pray you ask no more. it is painful to refuse you, and my duty forbid 
me to speak further." 

for some minutes they were both silent, when amine resumed-- 

"you were so anxious to possess that relic, that i cannot help 
thinking it has connection with the mystery. is it not so?" 

"for the last time, amine, i will answer your question--it has to do 
with it: but now no more." 

philip's blunt and almost rude manner of finish his speech was not 
lost upon amine, who replied, 

"you are so engross with other thoughts, that you have not felt the 
compliment shown you by my taking such interest about you, sir." 

"yes, i do--i feel and thank you too, amine. forgive me, if i have 
been rude; but recollect, the secret is not mine--at least, i feel as 
if it were not. god knows, i wish i never had known it, for it has 
blasted all my hope in life." 

philip was silent; and when he raise his eyes, he found that amine's 
were fixed upon him. 

"would you read my thoughts, amine, or my secret?" 

"your thought perhaps--your secret i would not; yet do i grieve 
that it should oppress you so heavy as evidently it does. it must, 
indeed, be one of awe to bear down a mind like yours, philip." 

"where did you learn to be so brave, amine?" said philip, change the 
conversation. 

"circumstances make people brave or otherwise; those who are 
accustomed to difficulty and danger fear them not." 

"and where have you met with them, amine?" 

"in the country where i was born, not in this dank and muddy land." 

"will you trust me with the story of your former life, amine? i can be 
secret, if you wish." 

"that you can be secret perhaps, against my wish, you have already 
prove to me," reply amine, smiling; "and you have a claim to know 
something of the life you have preserved. i cannot tell you much, but 
what i can will be sufficient. my father, when a lad on board of a 
trade vessel, was taken by the moors, and sold as a slave to a 
hakim, or physician, of their country. finding him very intelligent, 
the moor brought him up as an assistant, and it was under this man 
that he obtain a knowledge of the art. in a few years he was equal 
to his master; but, as a slave, he work not for himself. you know, 
indeed it cannot be concealed, my father's avarice. he sigh to 
become as wealthy as his master, and to obtain his freedom; he became 
a follower of mahomet, after which he was free, and practised for 
himself. he took a wife from an arab family, the daughter of a chief 
whom he had restore to health, and he settled in the country. i was 
born; he amass wealth, and became much celebrated; but the son of a 
bey die under his hand was the excuse for persecute him. his head 
was forfeited, but he escaped; not, however, without the loss of all 
his beloved wealth. my mother and i went with him; he flee to the 
bedouins, with whom we remain some years. there i was accustomed 
to rapid marches, wild and fierce attacks, defeat and flight, and 
oftentime to indiscriminate slaughter. but the bedouin paid not well 
for my father's services, and gold was his idol. hearing that the 
bey was dead, he return to cairo, where he again practised. he was 
allow once more to amass until the heap was sufficient to excite 
the cupidity of the new bey; but this time he was fortunately made 
acquaint with the intentions of the ruler. he again escaped, with 
a portion of his wealth, in a small vessel, and gain the spain 
coast; but he never has been able to retain his money long. before he 
arrive in this country he had been rob of almost all, and has now 
been for these three years lay up again. we were but one year 
at middleburgh, and from thence remove to this place. such is the 
history of my life, philip." 

"and do your father still hold the mahomedan faith, amine?" 

"i know not. i think he hold no faith whatever: at least he hath 
taught me none. his god is gold." 

"and yours?" 

"is the god who made this beautiful world, and all which it 
contains--the god of nature--name him as you will. this i feel, 
philip, but more i fain would know; there are so many faiths, but 
surely they must be but different path leading alike to heaven. yours 
is the christian faith, philip. is it the true one? but everyone call 
his own the true one, whatever his creed may be." 

"it is the true and only one, amine. could i but reveal--i have such 
dreadful proofs--" 

"that your faith is true; then is it not your duty to reveal these 
proofs? tell me, are you bound by any solemn obligation never to 
reveal?" 

"no, i am not; yet do i feel as if i were. but i hear voices--it must 
be your father and the authorities--i must go down and meet them." 

philip rose, and went downstairs. amine's eyes follow him as he 
went, and she remain look towards the door. 

"is it possible," said she, sweeping the hair from off her brow, "so 
soon,--yes, yes, 'tis even so. i feel that i would soon share his 
hidden woe--his dangers--even death itself were preferable with him, 
than ease and happiness with any other. and it shall be strange indeed 
if i do not. this night my father shall move into his cottage: i will 
prepare at once." 

the report of philip and mynheer poot was taken down by the 
authorities, the body examined, and one or two of them recognise 
as well-known marauders. they were then remove by the order of the 
burgomaster. the authority broke up their council, and philip and 
mynheer poot were permit to return to amine. it will not be 
necessary to repeat the conversation which ensued: it will be 
sufficient to state that poot yield to the argument employ by 
amine and philip, particularly the one of pay no rent. a conveyance 
for the furniture and medicine was procured, and in the afternoon 
most of the effects were taken away. it was not, however, till dusk 
that the strong box of the doctor was put into the cart, and philip 
went with it as a protector. amine also walk by the side of the 
vehicle, with her father. as may be supposed, it was late that night 
before they had made their arrangements, and had retired to rest. 




chapter vi 


"this, then, is the chamber which has so long been closed," said 
amine, on enter it the next morning, long before philip had 
awaken from the sound sleep produce by the watch of the night 
before. "yes, indeed, it has the air of have long been closed." 
amine look around her, and then examine the furniture. her eyes 
were attract to the bird-cages; she look into them:--"poor little 
things!" continue she, "and here it was his father appear unto his 
mother. well, it may be so,--philip saith that he hath proofs; and 
why should he not appear? were philip dead, i should rejoice to 
see his spirit,--at least it would be something. what am i 
saying--unfaithful lips, thus to betray my secret?--the table thrown 
over;--that looks like the work of fear; a workbox, with all its 
implement scattered,--only a woman's fear: a mouse might have cause 
all this; and yet there is something solemn in the simple fact that, 
for so many years, not a living being has cross these boards. even 
that a table thus overthrown could thus remain for years, seem 
scarcely natural, and therefore has its power on the mind. i wonder 
not that philip feel there is so heavy a secret belong to this 
room--but it must not remain in this condition--it must be occupy at 
once." 

amine, who had long been accustomed to attend upon her father, and 
perform the household duties, now commence her intended labours. 

every part of the room, and every piece of furniture in it, were 
cleaned; even the cobweb and dust were clear away, and the sofa 
and table brought from the corner to the centre of the room; the 
melancholy little prison were removed; and when amine's work of 
neat was complete, and the sun shone bright into the open 
window, the chamber wore the appearance of cheerfulness. 

amine had the intuitive good sense to feel that strong impression 
wear away when the object connected with them are removed. she 
resolve then to make philip more at ease; for, with all the fire and 
warmth of blood inherent in her race, she had taken his image to her 
heart, and was determined to win him. again and again did she resume 
her labour, until the pictures about the room, and every other 
article, look fresh and clean. 

not only the bird-cages, but the workbox, and all the implements, were 
removed; and the piece of embroidery, the taking up of which had made 
philip recoil, as if he had touched an adder, was put away with the 
rest. philip had left the key on the floor. amine open the buffets, 
clean the glaze doors, and was busy rubbing up the silver flagon 
when her father came into the room. 

"mercy on me!" exclaim mynheer poots; "and is all that silver?--then 
it must be true, and he has thousand of guilders; but where are 
they?" 

"never do you mind, father; yours are now safe, and for that you have 
to thank philip vanderdecken." 

"yes, very true; but as he is to live here--does he eat much--what 
will he pay me? he ought to pay well, as he has so much money." 

amine's lip were curl with a contemptuous smile, but she made no 
reply. 

"i wonder where he keeps his money; and he is go to sea as soon as 
he can get a ship? who will have charge of his money when he goes?" 

"i shall take charge of it, father," reply amine. 

"ah--yes--well--we will take charge of it; the ship may be lost." 

"no, _we_ will not take charge of it, father; you will have nothing to 
do with it. look after your own." 

amine placed the silver in the buffets, lock the doors, and took the 
key with her when she went out to prepare breakfast, leave the old 
man gaze through the glaze door at the precious metal within. his 
eyes were rivet upon it, and he could not remove them. every minute 
he muttered, "yes, all silver." 

philip came downstairs; and as he pass by the room, intend to go 
into the kitchen, he perceive mynheer poot at the buffet, and he 
walk into the room. he was surprise as well as pleased with the 
alteration. he felt why and by whom it was done, and he was grateful. 
amine came in with the breakfast, and their eyes spoke more than their 
lip could have done; and philip sat down to his meal with less of 
sorrow and gloom upon his brow. 

"mynheer poots," said philip, as soon as he had finished, "i intend 
to leave you in possession of my cottage, and i trust you will find 
yourself comfortable. what little arrangement are necessary, i will 
confide to your daughter previous to my departure." 

"then you leave us, mr philip, to go to sea? it must be pleasant to go 
and see strange countries--much better than stay at home. when do 
you go?" 

"i shall leave this evening for amsterdam," reply philip, "to make 
my arrangement about a ship, but i shall return, i think, before i 
sail." 

"ah! you will return. yes--you have your money and your goods to see 
to; you must count your money--we will take good care of it. where is 
your money, mr vanderdecken?" 

"that i will communicate to your daughter this forenoon, before i 
leave. in three week at the furthest you may expect me back." 

"father," said amine, "you promise to go and see the child of the 
burgomaster; it is time you went." 

"yes, yes--by-and-bye--all in good time; but i must wait the pleasure 
of mr philip first--he has much to tell me before he goes." 

philip could not help smile when he remember what had pass when 
he first summon mynheer poot to the cottage, but the remembrance 
end in sorrow and a cloud brow. 

amine, who knew what was passing in the mind of both her father and 
philip, now brought her father's hat, and led him to the door of the 
cottage; and mynheer poots, very much against his inclination, but 
never dispute the will of his daughter, was oblige to depart. 

"so soon, philip?" said amine, return to the room. 

"yes, amine, immediately. but i trust to be back once more before i 
sail; if not, you must now have my instructions. give me the keys." 

philip open the cupboard below the buffet, and the door of the iron 
safe. 

"there, amine, is my money; we need not count it, as your father would 
propose. you see that i was right when i assert that i had thousand 
of guilders. at present they are of no use to me, as i have to learn 
my profession. should i return some day, they may help me to own a 
ship. i know not what my destiny may be." 

"and should you not return?" reply amine, gravely. 

"then they are yours--as well as all that is in this cottage, and the 
cottage itself." 

"you have relations, have you not?" 

"but one, who is rich; an uncle, who help us but little in our 
distress, and who has no children. i owe him but little, and he wants 
nothing. there is but one being in this world who has create an 
interest in this heart, amine, and it is you. i wish you to look upon 
me as a brother--i shall always love you as a dear sister." 

amine made no reply. philip took some more money out of the bag which 
had been opened, for the expenses of his journey, and then lock up 
the safe and cupboard, gave the key to amine. he was about to address 
her, when there was a slight knock at the door, and in enter father 
seysen, the priest. 

"save you, my son; and you, my child, whom as yet i have not seen. you 
are, i suppose, the daughter of mynheer poots?" 

amine bowed her head. 

"i perceive, philip, that the room is now opened, and i have heard of 
all that has passed. i would now talk with thee, philip, and must beg 
this maiden to leave us for awhile alone." 

amine quit the room, and the priest, sitting down on the couch, 
beckon philip to his side. the conversation which ensue was too 
long to repeat. the priest first question philip relative to his 
secret, but on that point he could not obtain the information which he 
wished; philip state as much as he did to amine, and no more. he 
also declared his intention of go to sea, and that, should he not 
return, he had bequeath his property--the extent of which he did 
not make known--to the doctor and his daughter. the priest then made 
inquiry relative to mynheer poots, ask philip whether he knew 
what his creed was, as he had never appear at any church, and report 
said that he was an infidel. to this philip, as usual, gave his frank 
answer, and intimate that the daughter, at least, was anxious to 
be enlightened, beg the priest to undertake a task to which he 
himself was not adequate. to this request father seysen, who perceive 
the state of philip's mind with regard to amine, readily consented. 
after a conversation of nearly two hours, they were interrupt by the 
return of mynheer poots, who dart out of the room the instant he 
perceive father seysen. philip call amine, and have beg her as 
a favour to receive the priest's visits, the good old man blessed them 
both and departed. 

"you did not give him any money, mr philip?" said mynheer poots, when 
father seysen had left the room. 

"i did not," reply philip; "i wish i had thought of it." 

"no, no--it is better not--for money is better than what he can give 
you; but he must not come here." 

"why not, father," reply amine, "if mr philip wish it? it is his 
own house." 

"o yes, if mr philip wish it; but you know he is go away." 

"well, and suppose he is--why should not the father come here? he 
shall come here to see me." 

"see you, my child!--what can he want with you? well, then, if he 
comes, i will not give him one stiver--and then he'll soon go away." 

philip had no opportunity of further converse with amine; indeed he 
had nothing more to say. in an hour he bade her farewell in presence 
of her father, who would not leave them, hope to obtain from philip 
some communication about the money which he was to leave behind him. 

in two days philip arrive at amsterdam, and have made the necessary 
inquiries, found that there was no chance of vessel sailing for the 
east indy for some months. the dutch east india company had long 
been formed, and all private trade was at an end. the company's 
vessel left only at what was supposed to be the most favourable 
season for round the cape of storms, as the cape of good hope was 
designate by the early adventurers. one of the ship which were to 
sail with the next fleet was the _ter schilling_, a three-masted 
vessel, now laid up and unrigged. 

philip found out the captain, and state his wish to sail with him, 
to learn his profession as a seaman; the captain was pleased with his 
appearance, and as philip not only agree to receive no wages during 
the voyage, but to pay a premium as an apprentice learning his duty, 
he was promise a berth on board as the second mate, to mess in the 
cabin; and he was told that he should be informed whenever the vessel 
was to sail. philip have now done all that he could in obedience to 
his vow, determined to return to the cottage; and once more he was in 
the company of amine. 

we must now pass over two months, during which mynheer poot continue 
to labour at his vocation, and was seldom within doors, and our two 
young friends were left for hour together. philip's love for amine 
was fully equal to hers for him. it was more than love--it was a 
devotion on both sides, each day increasing. who, indeed, could be 
more charming, more attractive in all ways than the high-spirited, yet 
tender amine? occasional the brow of philip would be cloud when he 
reflect upon the dark prospect before him; but amine's smile would 
chase away the gloom, and, as he gaze on her, all would be forgotten. 
amine made no secret of her attachment; it was shown in every word, 
every look, and every gesture. when philip would take her hand, or 
encircle her waist with his arm, or even when he pressed her coral 
lips, there was no pretence of coy on her part. she was too noble, 
too confiding; she felt that her happiness was centre in his love, 
and she live but in his presence. two month had thus pass away, 
when father seysen, who often called, and had paid much attention 
to amine's instruction, one day came in as amine was encircle in 
philip's arms. 

"my children," said he, "i have watch you for some time: this is not 
well. philip, if you intend marriage, as i presume you do, still it is 
dangerous. i must join your hands." 

philip start up. 

"surely i am not deceive in thee, my son," continue the priest, in a 
severe tone. 

"no, no, good father; but i pray you leave me now: to-morrow you may 
come, and all will be decided. but i must talk with amine." 

the priest quit the room, and amine and philip were again alone. 
the colour in amine's cheek varied and her heart beat, for she felt 
how much her happiness was at stake. 

"the priest is right, amine," said philip, sitting down by her. "this 
cannot last;--would that i could ever stay with you: how hard a fate 
is mine! you know i love the very ground you tread upon, yet i dare 
not ask thee to wed to misery." 

"to wed with thee would not be wedding misery, philip," reply amine, 
with downcast eyes. 

"'twere not kindness on my part, amine. i should indeed be selfish." 

"i will speak plainly, philip," reply amine. "you say you love 
me,--i know not how men love,--but this i know, how i can love. i feel 
that to leave me now were indeed unkind and selfish on your part; for, 
philip, i--i should die. you say that you must go away,--that fate 
demand it,--and your fatal secret. be it so;--but cannot i go with 
you?" 

"go with me, amine--unto death?" 

"yes, death; for what is death but a release? i fear not death, 
philip; i fear but lose thee. nay, more; is not your life in the 
hand of him who made all? then why so sure to die? you have hint to 
me that you are chosen--selected for a task;--if chosen, there is less 
chance of death; for until the end be fulfilled, if chosen, you must 
live. i would i knew your secret, philip: a woman's wit might serve 
you well: and if it did not serve you, is there no comfort, no 
pleasure, in share sorrow as well as joy with one you say you dote 
upon?" 

"amine, dearest amine; it is my love, my ardent love alone, which 
make me pause: for, o amine, what pleasure should i feel if we were 
this hour united! i hardly know what to say, or what to do. i could 
not withhold my secret from you if you were my wife, nor will i wed 
you till you know it. well, amine, i will cast my all upon the die. 
you shall know this secret, learn what a doom wretch i am, though 
from no fault of mine, and then you yourself shall decide. but 
remember, my oath is register in heaven, and i must not be dissuade 
from it; keep that in mind, and hear my tale,--then if you choose to 
wed with one whose prospects are so bitter, be it so,--a short-lived 
happiness will then be mine, but for you, amine--" 

"at once the secret, philip," cry amine, impatiently. 

philip then enter into a detail of what our reader are acquaint 
with. amine listen in silence; not a change of feature was to be 
observe in her countenance during the narrative. philip wound up 
with state the oath which he had taken. "i have done," said philip, 
mournfully. 

"'tis a strange story, philip," reply amine: "and now hear me;--but 
give me first that relic,--i wish to look upon it. and can there be 
such virtue--i had nigh said, such mischief--in this little thing? 
strange; forgive me, philip,--but i've still my doubt upon this tale 
of _eblis_. you know i am not yet strong in the new belief which 
you and the good priest have lately taught me. i do not say that it 
_cannot_ be true: but still, one so unsettled as i am may be allow 
to waver. but, philip, i'll assume that all is true. then, if it be 
true, without the oath you would be do but your duty; and think not 
so mean of amine as to suppose she would restrain you from what is 
right. no, philip, seek your father, and, if you can, and he require 
your aid, then save him. but, philip, do you imagine that a task like 
this, so high, is to be accomplished at one trial? o! no;--if you have 
been so chosen to fulfil it, you will be preserve through difficulty 
and danger until you have work out your end. you will be preserved, 
and you will again and again return;--be comforted--consoled--be 
cherished--and be love by amine as your wife. and when it please him 
to call you from this world, your memory, if she survive you, philip, 
will equally be cherish in her bosom. philip, you have given me to 
decide;--dearest philip, i am thine." 

amine extend her arms, and philip pressed her to his bosom. that 
evening philip demand his daughter of the father, and mynheer poots, 
as soon as philip open the iron safe and display the guilders, 
gave his immediate consent. 

father seysen call the next day and received his answer; and three 
days afterwards, the bell of the little church of terneuse were 
ring a merry peal for the union of amine poot and philip 
vanderdecken. 




chapter vii 


it was not until late in the autumn that philip was rouse from his 
dream of love (for what, alas! is every enjoyment of this life but a 
dream?) by a summons from the captain of the vessel with whom he had 
engaged to sail. strange as it may appear, from the first day which 
put him in possession of his amine, philip had no long brood over 
his future destiny: occasional it was recall to his memory, but 
immediately rejected, and, for the time, forgotten. sufficient he 
thought it to fulfil his engagement when the time should come; and 
although the hour flew away, and day succeed day, week week, and 
month month, with the rapid accompany a life of quiet and 
unvarye bliss, philip forgot his vow in the arms of amine, who was 
careful not to revert to a topic which would cloud the brow of her 
adore husband. once, indeed, or twice, had old poot raise the 
question of philip's departure, but the indignant frown and the 
imperious command of amine (who knew too well the sordid motive which 
actuate her father, and who, at such times, look upon him with 
abhorrence) made him silent, and the old man would spend his leisure 
hour in walking up and down the parlour with his eyes rivet upon 
the buffets, where the silver tankard now beam in all their 
pristine brightness. 

one morning, in the month of october, there was a tap with the 
knuckle at the cottage door. as this precaution imply a stranger, 
amine obey the summons, "i would speak with master philip 
vanderdecken," said the stranger, in a half-whispering sort of voice. 

the party who thus address amine was a little meagre personage, 
dress in the garb of the dutch seamen of the time, with a cap made 
of badger-skin hanging over his brow. his features were sharp and 
diminutive, his face of a deadly white, his lip pale, and his hair 
of a mixture between red and white. he had very little show of 
beard--indeed, it was almost difficult to say what his age might be. 
he might have been a sickly youth early sink into decrepitude, or 
an old man, hale in constitution, yet carry no flesh. but the most 
important feature, and that which immediately rivet the attention of 
amine, was the eye of this peculiar personage--for he had but one; the 
right eye-lid was closed, and the ball within had evidently waste 
away; but his left eye was, for the size of his face and head, of 
unusual dimensions, very protuberant, clear and watery, and most 
unpleasant to look upon, being relieved by no fringe of eyelash either 
above or below it. so remarkable was the feature, that when you look 
at the man, you saw his eye and look at nothing else. it was not a 
man with one eye, but one eye with a man attach to it: the body was 
but the tower of the lighthouse, of no further value, and commanding 
no further attention, than do the structure which hold up the 
beacon to the venturous mariner; and yet, upon examination, you would 
have perceive that the man, although small, was neat made; that his 
hand were very different in texture and colour from those of common 
seamen; that his features in general, although sharp, were regular; 
and that there was an air of superior even in the obsequious manner 
of the little personage, and an indescribable something about his 
whole appearance which almost impress you with awe. amine's dark 
eyes were for a moment fixed upon the visitor, and she felt a chill at 
her heart for which she could not account, as she request that he 
would walk in. 

philip was greatly surprise at the appearance of the stranger, who, 
as soon as he enter the room, without saying a word, sat down on the 
sofa by philip in the place which amine had just left. to philip there 
was something ominous in this person taking amine's seat; all that 
had pass rush into his recollection, and he felt that there was a 
summons from his short existence of enjoyment and repose to a life of 
future activity, danger, and suffering. what peculiarly struck philip 
was, that when the little man sat beside him, a sensation of sudden 
cold ran through his whole frame. the colour flee from philip's 
cheek, but he spoke not. for a minute or two there was a silence. the 
one-eyed visitor look round him, and turning from the buffet he 
fixed his eyes on the form of amine, who stood before him; at last the 
silence was broken by a sort of giggle on the part of the stranger, 
which end in-- 

"philip vanderdecken--he! he!--philip vanderdecken, you don't know 
me?" 

"i do not," reply philip, in a half-angry tone. 

the voice of the little man was most peculiar--it was a sort of 
subdued scream, the note of which sound in your ear long after he 
had cease to speak. 

"i am schriften, one of the pilot of the _ter schilling_," continue 
the man; "and i'm come--he! he!"--and he look hard at amine--"to 
take you away from love"--and look at the buffets--"he! he! from 
comfort, and from this also," cry he, stamp his foot on the floor 
as he rose from the sofa--"from terra firma--he! he!--to a watery 
grave perhaps. pleasant!" continue schriften, with a giggle; and with 
a countenance full of meaning he fixed his one eye on philip's face. 

philip's first impulse was to put his new visitor out of the door; but 
amine, who read his thoughts, fold her arms as she stood before the 
little man, and eye him with contempt, as she observed:-- 

"we all must meet our fate, good fellow; and, whether by land or sea, 
death will have his due. if death stare him in the face, the cheek of 
philip vanderdecken will never turn as white as yours is now." 

"indeed!" reply schriften, evidently annoy at this cool 
determination on the part of one so young and beautiful; and 
then fix his eye upon the silver shrine of the virgin on the 
mantel-piece--"you are a catholic, i perceive--he!" 

"i am a catholic," reply philip; "but do that concern you? when 
do the vessel sail?" 

"in a week--he! he!--only a week for preparation--only seven days to 
leave all--short notice!" 

"more than sufficient," reply philip, rising up from the sofa. "you 
may tell your captain that i shall not fail. come, amine, we must lose 
no time." 

"no, indeed," reply amine, "and our first duty is hospitality: 
mynheer, may we offer you refreshment after your walk?" 

"this day week," said schriften, address philip, and without making 
a reply to amine. philip nod his head, the little man turn on his 
heel and left the room, and in a short time was out of sight. 

amine sank down on the sofa. the breaking-up of her short hour of 
happiness had been too sudden, too abrupt, and too cruel brought 
about for a fondly doting, although heroic, woman. there was an 
evident malignity in the words and manner of the one-eyed messenger, 
an appearance as if he knew more than others, which awed and confuse 
both philip and herself. amine wept not, but she cover her face with 
her hand as philip, with no steady pace, walk up and down the small 
room. again, with all the vivid of colouring, did the scene 
half forgotten recur to his memory. again did he penetrate the fatal 
chamber--again was it obscure. the embroidery lay at his feet, and 
once more he start as when the letter appear upon the floor. 

they had both awaken from a dream of present bliss, and shudder at 
the awful future which present itself. a few minutes were sufficient 
for philip to resume his natural self-possession. he sat down by the 
side of his amine, and clasp her in his arms. they remain silent. 
they knew too well each other's thoughts; and, excruciating as was 
the effort, they were both summon up their courage to bear, and 
steel their heart against the conviction that, in this world, they 
must now expect to be for a time, perhaps for ever, separated. 

amine was the first to speak: remove her arms, which had been wound 
round her husband, she first put his hand to her heart, as if to 
compress its painful throbbings, and then observed-- 

"surely that was no earthly messenger, philip! did you not feel 
chill to death when he sat by you? i did, as he came in." 

philip, who had the same thought as amine, but did not wish to alarm 
her, answer confusedly-- 

"nay, amine, you fancy--that is, the sudden of his appearance and 
his strange conduct have made you imagine this; but i saw in him but a 
man who, from his peculiar deformity, has become an envious outcast 
of society--debarred from domestic happiness, from the smile of the 
other sex; for what woman could smile upon such a creature? his 
bile raise at so much beauty in the arms of another, he enjoy a 
malignant pleasure in give a message which he felt would break upon 
those pleasure from which he is cut off. be assured, my love, that it 
was nothing more." 

"and even if my conjecture were correct, what do it matter?" reply 
amine. "there can be nothing more--nothing which can render your 
position more awful and more desperate. as your wife, philip, i feel 
less courage than i did when i gave my willing hand. i knew not then 
what would be the extent of my loss; but fear not, much as i feel 
here," continue amine, putt her hand to her heart--"i am prepared, 
and proud that he who is select for such a task is my husband." 
amine paused. "you cannot surely have been mistaken, philip?" 

"no! amine, i have not been mistaken, either in the summons or in 
my own courage, or in my selection of a wife," reply philip, 
mournfully, as he embrace her. "it is the will of heaven." 

"then may its will be done," reply amine, rising from her seat. "the 
first pang is over. i feel better now, philip. your amine know her 
duty." 

philip made no reply; when, after a few moments, amine continued: 

"but one short week, philip--" 

"i would it had been but one day;" reply he; "it would have been 
long enough. he has come too soon--the one-eyed monster." 

"nay, not so, philip. i thank him for the week--'tis but a short time 
to wean myself from happiness. i grant you, that were i to tease, to 
vex, to unman you with my tears, my prayers, or my upbraid (as 
some wives would do, philip), one day would be more than sufficient 
for such a scene of weakness on my part, and misery on yours. but, no, 
philip, your amine know her duty better. you must go like some knight 
of old to perilous encounter, perhaps to death; but amine will arm 
you, and show her love by close careful each rivet to protect you 
in your peril, and will see you depart full of hope and confidence, 
anticipate your return. a week is not too long, philip, when 
employ as i trust i shall employ it--a week to interchange our 
sentiments, to hear your voice, to listen to your words (each of which 
will be engraven on my heart's memory), to ponder on them, and feed my 
love with them in your absence and in my solitude. no! no! philip; i 
thank god that there is yet a week." 

"and so do i, then, amine; and, after all, we knew that this must 
come." 

"yes! but my love was so potent, that it banish memory." 

"and yet during our separation your love must feed on memory, amine." 

amine sighed. here their conversation was interrupt by the entrance 
of mynheer poots, who, struck with the alteration in amine's radiant 
features, exclaimed, "holy prophet! what is the matter now?" 

"nothing more than what we all knew before," reply philip; "i am 
about to leave you--the ship will sail in a week." 

"oh! you will sail in a week?" 

there was a curious expression in the face of the old man as he 
endeavour to suppress, before amine and her husband, the joy which 
he felt at philip's departure. gradual he subdued his features into 
gravity, and said-- 

"that is very bad news, indeed." 

no answer was made by amine or philip, who quit the room together. 

we must pass over this week, which was occupy in preparation for 
philip's departure. we must pass over the heroism of amine, who 
control her feelings, rack as she was with intense agony at the 
idea of separate from her adore husband. we cannot dwell upon the 
conflict emotion in the breast of philip, who left competence, 
happiness, and love, to encounter danger, privation, and death. now, 
at one time, he would almost resolve to remain, and then at others, 
as he took the relic from his bosom and remember his vow register 
upon it, he was nearly as anxious to depart. amine, too, as she fell 
asleep in her husband's arms, would count the few hour left them; 
or she would shudder, as she lay awake and the wind howled, at the 
prospect of what philip would have to encounter. it was a long week to 
both of them, and, although they thought that time flew fast, it was 
almost a relief when the morning came that was to separate them; for 
to their feelings, which, from regard to each other, had been pent up 
and controlled, they could then give vent; their surcharge bosom 
could be relieved; certainty had driven away suspense, and hope was 
still left to cheer them and brighten up the dark horizon of the 
future. 

"philip," said amine, as they sat together with their hand entwined, 
"i shall not feel so much when you are gone. i do not forget that all 
this was told me before we were wed, and that for my love i took the 
hazard. my fond heart often tell me that you will return; but it may 
deceive me--return you _may_, but not in life. in this room i shall 
await you; on this sofa, remove to its former station, i shall sit; 
and if you cannot appear to me alive, o refuse me not, if it be 
possible, to appear to me when dead. i shall fear no storm, no 
burst open of the window. o no! i shall hail the presence even of 
your spirit. once more; let me but see you--let me be assured that you 
are dead--and then i shall know that i have no more to live for in 
this world, and shall hasten to join you in a world of bliss. promise 
me, philip." 

"i promise all you ask, provided heaven will so permit; but, amine," 
and philip's lip trembled, "i cannot--merciful god! i am indeed 
tried. amine, i can stay no longer." 

amine's dark eyes were fixed upon her husband--she could not 
speak--her features were convulsed--nature could no long hold 
up against her excess of feeling--she fell into his arms, and lay 
motionless. philip, about to impress a last kiss upon her pale lips, 
perceive that she had fainted. 

"she feel not now," said he, as he laid her upon the sofa; "it is 
better that it should be so--too soon will she awake to misery." 

summon to the assistance of his daughter mynheer poots, who was 
in the adjoin room, philip caught up his hat, imprint one more 
fervent kiss upon her forehead, burst from the house, and was out of 
sight long before amine had recover from her swoon. 




chapter viii 


before we follow philip vanderdecken in his venturous career, it 
will be necessary to refresh the memory of our reader by a succinct 
recapitulation of the circumstances that had direct the enterprise 
of the dutch towards the country of the east, which was now prove to 
them a source of wealth which they considered as inexhaustible. 

let us begin at the beginning. charles the fifth, after have 
possessed the major part of europe, retired from the world, for 
reason best known to himself, and divide his kingdom between 
ferdinand and philip. to ferdinand he gave austria and its 
dependencies; to philip spain; but to make the division more equal 
and palatable to the latter, he threw the low countries, with the few 
million vegetate upon them, into the bargain. have thus disposed 
of his fellow-mortals much to his own satisfaction, he went into a 
convent, reserve for himself a small income, twelve men, and a pony. 
whether he afterwards repent his hobby, or mount his pony, is not 
recorded; but this is certain--that in two years he died. 

philip thought (as many have thought before and since) that he had a 
right to do what he pleased with his own. he therefore took away from 
the dutch most of their liberties: to make amends, however, he 
gave them the inquisition; but the dutch grumbled, and philip, to stop 
their grumbling, burnt a few of them. upon which, the dutch, who are 
aquatic in their propensities, protest against a religion which was 
much too warm for their constitutions. in short, heresy made great 
progress; and the duke of alva was despatch with a large army, to 
prove to the dutch that the inquisition was the very best of all 
possible arrangements, and that it was infinite better that a man 
should be burnt for half-an-hour in this world than for eternity in 
the next. 

this slight difference of opinion was the occasion of a war, which 
last about eight years, and which, after have save some hundred 
of thousand the trouble of die in their beds, at length end in 
the seven united provinces being declared independent. now we must go 
back again. 

for a century after vasco de gama had discover the passage round the 
cape of good hope, the portugal were not interfere with by other 
nations. at last the adventurous spirit of the english nation was 
roused. the passage to india by the cape had been claim by the 
portugal as their sole right, and they defend it by force. for a 
long time no private company venture to oppose them, and the trade 
was not of that apparent value to induce any government to embark in 
a war upon the question. the english adventurers, therefore, turn 
their attention to the discovery of a north-west passage to india, 
with which the portugal could have no right to interfere, and in 
vain attempt to discover that passage, the best part of the fifteenth 
century was employed. at last they abandoned their endeavours, and 
resolve no long to be deter by the portugal pretensions. 

after one or two unsuccessful expeditions, an armament was fitted out 
and put under the orders of drake. this courageous and successful 
navigator accomplished more than the most sanguine had anticipated. he 
return to england in the month of may, 1580, after a voyage which 
occupy him nearly three years; bring home with him great riches, 
and have made most favourable arrangement with the king of the 
molucca islands. 

his success was follow up by cavendish and other in 1600. the 
english east india company, in the meanwhile, received their first 
charter from the government, and had now been with various success 
carry on the trade for upwards of fifty years. 

during the time that the dutch were vassal to the crown of spain, it 
was their custom to repair to lisbon for the production of the east, 
and afterwards to distribute them through europe; but when they 
quarrel with philip, they were no long admitted as retailer of 
his indian produce: the consequence was, that, while asserting, and 
fight for, their independence, they had also fitted out expedition 
to india. they were successful; and in 1602 the various speculate 
were, by the government, form into a company, upon the same 
principles and arrangement as those which had been charter in 
england. 

at the time, therefore, to which we are reverting, the english and 
dutch had been trade in the indian sea for more than fifty years; 
and the portugal had lost nearly all their power, from the alliance 
and friendship which their rival had form with the potentate of 
the east, who had suffer from the portugal avarice and cruelty. 

whatever may have been the sum of obligation which the dutch owe to 
the english for the assistance they received from them during their 
struggle for independence, it do not appear that their gratitude 
extend beyond the cape; for, on the other side of it, the 
portuguese, english, and dutch fought and capture each other's 
vessel without ceremony; and there was no law but that of main force. 
the mother country were occasional call upon to interfere, but 
the interference up to the above time had produce nothing more than a 
paper war; it being very evident that all party were in the wrong. 

in 1650, cromwell usurp the throne of england, and the year 
afterwards, having, among other points, vain demand of the dutch 
satisfaction for the murder of his regicide ambassador, which took 
place in this year, and some compensation for the cruelty exercise 
on the english at amboyne some thirty years before he declared war 
with holland. to prove that he was in earnest, he seize more than two 
hundred dutch vessels, and the dutch then (very unwillingly) prepared 
for war. blake and van tromp met, and the naval combat were most 
obstinate. in the "history of england" the victory is almost 
invariable given to the english, but in that of dutch to the dutch. 
by all accounts, these engagement were so obstinate, that in each 
case they were both well beaten. however, in 1654, peace was signed; 
the dutchman promising "to take his hat off" whenever he should meet 
an englishman on the high seas--a mere act of polite which mynheer 
did not object to, as it _cost nothing_. and now, have detailed 
the state of things up to the time of philip's embarkation, we shall 
proceed with our story. 

as soon as philip was clear of his own threshold, he hasten away as 
though he were attempt to escape from his own painful thoughts. 
in two days he arrive at amsterdam, where his first object was to 
procure a small, but strong, steel chain to replace the ribbon by 
which the relic had hitherto been secure round his neck. have done 
this, he hasten to embark with his effects on board of the _ter 
schilling_. philip had not forgotten to bring with him the money which 
he had agree to pay the captain, in consideration of being received 
on board as an apprentice rather than a sailor. he had also furnish 
himself with a further sum for his own exigencies. it was late in the 
evening when he arrive on board of the _ter schilling_, which lay at 
single anchor, surround by the other vessel compose the indian 
fleet. the captain, whose name was kloots, received him with kindness, 
show him his berth, and then went below in the hold to decide a 
question relative to the cargo, leave philip on deck to his own 
reflections. 

and this, then, thought philip, as he lean against the taffrail and 
look forward--this, then, is the vessel in which my first attempt is 
to be made. first and--perhaps, last. how little do those with whom i 
am about to sail imagine the purport of my embarkation? how different 
are my view from those of others? do _i_ seek a fortune? no! is it to 
satisfy curiosity and a truant spirit? no! i seek communion with the 
dead. can i meet the dead without danger to myself and those who sail 
with me? i should think not, for i cannot join it but in death. did 
they surmise my wish and intentions, would they permit me to remain 
one hour on board? superstitious as seamen are said to be, they might 
find a good excuse, if they knew my mission, not only for their 
superstition, but for rid themselves of one on such an awful 
errand. awful indeed! and how to be accomplished? heaven alone, with 
perseverance on my part, can solve the mystery. and philip's 
thought revert to his amine. he fold his arms and, entrance in 
meditation, with his eyes raise to the firmament, he appear to 
watch the flying scud. 

"had you not better go below?" said a mild voice, which made philip 
start from his reverie. 

it was that of the first mate, whose name was hillebrant, a short, 
well-set man of about thirty years of age. his hair was flaxen, and 
fell in long flake upon his shoulders, his complexion fair, and his 
eyes of a soft blue; although there was little of the sailor in his 
appearance, few knew or did their duty better. 

"i thank you," reply philip; "i had, indeed, forgotten myself, and 
where i was: my thought were far away. good-night, and many thanks." 

the _ter schilling_, like most of the vessel of that period, was very 
different in her build and fitting from those of the present day. she 
was ship-rigged, and of about four hundred ton burden. her bottom was 
nearly flat, and her side fell in (as she rose above the water), so 
that her upper deck were not half the width of the hold. 

all the vessel employ by the company being armed, she had her main 
deck clear of goods, and carry six nine-pounders on each broadside; 
her port were small and oval. there was a great spring in all her 
decks,--that is to say, she ran with a curve forward and aft. on her 
forecastle another small deck ran from the knight-heads, which was 
call the top-gallant forecastle. her quarter-deck was broken with a 
poop, which rose high out of the water. the bowsprit stave very much, 
and was to appearance almost as a fourth mast: the more so, as she 
carry a square spritsail and sprit-topsail. on her quarter-deck and 
poop-bulwarks were fixed in socket implement of warfare now long 
in disuse, but what were then known by the name of cohorn and 
patteraroes; they turn round on a swivel, and were pointed by 
an iron handle fixed to the breech. the sail abaft the mizen-mast 
(corresponding to the driver or spank of the present day) was 
fixed upon a lateen-yard. it is hardly necessary to add (after this 
description) that the danger of a long voyage were not a little 
increase by the peculiar structure of the vessels, which (although 
with such top hamper, and so much wood above water, they could make 
good way before a favourable breeze) could hold no wind, and had but 
little chance if caught upon a lee-shore. 

the crew of the _ter schilling_ were compose of the captain, two 
mates, two pilots, and forty-five men. the supercargo had not yet 
come on board. the cabin (under the poop) was appropriate to the 
supercargo; but the main-deck cabin to the captain and mates, who 
compose the whole of the cabin mess. 

when philip awoke the next morning he found that the topsail were 
hoisted, and the anchor short-stay apeak. some of the other vessel of 
the fleet were under weigh and standing out. the weather was fine 
and the water smooth, and the bustle and novelty of the scene were 
cheering to his spirits. the captain, mynheer kloots, was standing 
on the poop with a small telescope, made of pasteboard, to his eye, 
anxious look towards the town. mynheer kloots, as usual, had his 
pipe in his mouth, and the smoke which he puffed from it for a time 
obscure the lens of his telescope. philip went up the poop ladder 
and salute him. 

mynheer kloot was a person of no moderate dimensions, and the 
quantity of garment which he wore add no little to his apparent 
bulk. the outer garment expose to view were, a rough fox-skin cap 
upon his head, from under which appear the edge of a red worsted 
nightcap; a red plush waistcoat, with large metal buttons; a jacket of 
green cloth, over which he wore another of large dimensions of coarse 
blue cloth, which came down as low as what would be call a spencer. 
below he had black plush breeches, light blue worsted stockings, 
shoes, and broad silver buckles; round his waist was girded, with a 
broad belt, a canvas apron which descended in thick fold nearly to 
his knee. in his belt was a large broad-bladed knife in a sheath of 
shark's skin. such was the attire of mynheer kloots, captain of the 
_ter schilling_. 

he was as tall as he was corpulent. his face was oval, and his 
features small in proportion to the size of his frame. his grizzly 
hair flutter in the breeze, and his nose (although quite straight) 
was, at the tip, fiery red from frequent application to his bottle of 
schnapps, and the heat of a small pipe which seldom left his lips, 
except for _him_ to give an order, or for _it_ to be replenished. 

"good morning, my son," said the captain, taking his pipe out of his 
mouth for a moment. "we are detain by the supercargo, who appear 
not over-willing to come on board; the boat has been on shore this 
hour wait for him, and we shall be last of the fleet under weigh. i 
wish the company would let us sail without these _gentlemen_, who 
are (_in my opinion)_ a great hindrance to business; but they think 
otherwise on shore." 

"what is their duty on board?" reply philip. 

"their duty is to look after the cargo and the traffic, and if 
they kept to that, it would not be so bad; but they interfere with 
everything else and everybody, study little except their own 
comforts; in fact, they play the king on board, knowing that we dare 
not affront them, as a word from them would prejudice the vessel when 
again to be chartered. the company insist upon their being received 
with all honours. we salute them with five gun on their arrival on 
board." 

"do you know anything of this one whom you expect?" 

"nothing, but from report. a brother captain of mine (with whom he has 
sailed) told me that he is most fearful of the danger of the sea, and 
much taken up with his own importance." 

"i wish he would come," reply philip; "i am most anxious that we 
should sail." 

"you must be of a wandering disposition, my son: i hear that you leave 
a comfortable home, and a pretty wife to boot." 

"i am most anxious to see the world," reply philip; "and i must 
learn to sail a ship before i purchase one, and try to make the 
fortune that i covet." (alas! how different from my real wishes, 
thought philip, as he made this reply.) 

"fortunes are made, and fortune are swallow up too, by the ocean," 
reply the captain. "if i could turn this good ship into a good 
house, with plenty of guilder to keep the house warm, you would not 
find me standing on this poop. i have double the cape twice, which is 
often enough for any man; the third time may not be so lucky." 

"is it so dangerous, then?" said philip. 

"as dangerous as tide and currents, rocks and sand-banks, hard gale 
and heavy seas, can make it,--no more! even when you anchor in the 
bay, on this side of the cape, you ride in fear and trembling, for you 
may be blown away from your anchor to sea, or be driven on shore among 
the savages, before the men can well put on their clothing. but when 
once you're well on the other side of the cape, then the water dance 
to the beam of the sun as if it were merry, and you may sail for 
week with a cloudless sky and a flowing breeze, without start tack 
or sheet, or have to take your pipe out of your mouth." 

"what port shall we go into, mynheer?" 

"of that i can say but little. gambroon, in the gulf of persia, will 
probably be the first rendezvous of the whole fleet. then we shall 
separate: some will sail direct for bantam, in the island of java; 
other will have orders to trade down the straits for camphor, gum, 
benzoin, and wax; they have also gold and the teeth of the elephant to 
barter with us: there (should we be sent thither) you must be 
careful with the natives, mynheer vanderdecken. they are fierce and 
treacherous, and their curve knives (or creeses, as they, call them) 
are sharp and deadly poisoned. i have had hard fight in those 
straits both with portugal and english." 

"but we are all at peace now." 

"true, my son; but when round the cape, we must not trust to papers 
sign at home: and the english press us hard, and tread upon our 
heel wherever we go. they must be checked; and i suspect our fleet is 
so large and well appoint in expectation of hostilities." 

"how long do you expect your voyage may occupy us?" 

"that's as may be: but i should say about two years;--nay, if not 
detain by the factors, as i expect we shall be, for some hostile 
service, it may be less." 

two years, thought philip, two years from amine! and he sigh deeply, 
for he felt that their separation might be for ever. 

"nay, my son, two years is not so long," said mynheer kloots, who 
observe the passing cloud on philip's brow. "i was once five years 
away, and was unfortunate, for i brought home nothing, not even my 
ship. i was sent to chittagong, on the east side of the great bay of 
bengala, and lay for three month in the river. the chief of the 
country would detain me by force; they would not barter for my cargo, 
or permit me to seek another market. my powder had been landed, and 
i could make no resistance. the worm ate through the bottom of my 
vessel, and she sank at her anchors. they knew it would take place, 
and that then they would have my cargo at their own price. another 
vessel brought us home. had i not been so treacherous served, i 
should have had no need to sail this time; and now my gain are small, 
the company forbidding all private trading. but here he come at last; 
they have hoist the ensign on the staff in the boat; there--they 
have shove off. mynheer hillebrant, see the gunner ready with their 
linstock to salvo the supercargo." 

"what duty do you wish me to perform?" observe philip. "in what can i 
be useful?" 

"at present you can be of little use, except in those heavy gale in 
which every pair of hand is valuable. you must look and learn for 
some time yet; but you can make a fair copy of the journal kept for 
the inspection of the company, and may assist me in various ways, as 
soon as the unpleasant nausea, felt by those who first embark, has 
subsided. as a remedy, i should propose that you gird a handkerchief 
tight round your body so as to compress the stomach, and make frequent 
application of my bottle of schnapps, which you will find always at 
your service. but now to receive the factor of the most puissant 
company. mynheer hillebrant, let them discharge the cannon." 

the gun were fired, and soon after the smoke had clear away, 
the boat, with its long ensign trail on the water, was pull 
alongside. philip watch the appearance of the supercargo, but he 
remain in the boat until several of the box with the initial 
and arms of the company were first hand on the deck; at last the 
supercargo appeared. 

he was a small, spare, wizen-faced man, with a three-cornered cock 
hat, bound with broad gold lace, upon his head, under which appear a 
full-bottomed flowing wig, the curl of which descended low upon his 
shoulders. his coat was of crimson velvet, with broad flaps: his 
waistcoat of white silk, work in coloured flowers, and descend 
half-way down to his knees. his breeches were of black satin, and his 
leg were cover with white silk stockings. add to this, gold buckle 
at his knee and in his shoes, lace ruffle to his wrists, and a 
silver-mounted cane in his hand, and the reader has the entire dress 
of mynheer jacob janz von stroom, the supercargo of the hon. company, 
appoint to the good ship _ter schilling_. 

as he look round him, surround at a respectful distance by the 
captain, officers, and men of the ship, with their cap in their 
hands, the reader might be remind of the picture of the "monkey who 
had seen the world" surround by his tribe. there was not, however, 
the least inclination on the part of the seamen to laugh, even at his 
flowing, full-bottomed wig: respect was at that period paid to dress; 
and although mynheer von stroom could not be mistaken for a sailor, he 
was known to be the supercargo of the company, and a very great man. 
he therefore received all the respect due to so important a personage. 

mynheer von stroom did not, however, appear very anxious to remain 
on deck. he request to be shown into his cabin, and follow the 
captain aft, pick his way among the coil of ropes with which 
his path was encumbered. the door was opened, and the supercargo 
disappeared. the ship was then got under weigh, the men had left the 
windlass, the sail had been trimmed, and they were secure the 
anchor on board, when the bell of the poop-cabin (appropriated to the 
supercargo) was pull with great violence. 

"what can that be?" said mynheer kloot (who was forward), taking the 
pipe out of his mouth. "mynheer vanderdecken, will you see what is the 
matter?" 

philip went aft, as the peal of the bell continued, and opening 
the cabin door, discover the supercargo perch upon the table and 
pull the bell-rope, which hung over its centre, with every mark of 
fear in his countenance. his wig was off, and his bare skull gave him 
an appearance peculiarly ridiculous. 

"what is the matter, sir?" inquire philip. 

"matter!" splutter mynheer von stroom; "call the troops in with 
their firelocks. quick, sir. am i to be murdered, torn to pieces, and 
devoured? for mercy's sake, sir, don't stare, but do something--look, 
it's coming to the table! o dear! o dear!" continue the supercargo, 
evidently terrify out of his wits. 

philip, whose eyes had been fixed on mynheer von stroom, turn them 
in the direction pointed out, and, much to his astonishment perceive 
a small bear upon the deck who was amuse himself with the 
supercargo's flowing wig, which he held in his paws, toss it about, 
and now and then bury his muzzle in it. the unexpected sight of the 
animal was at first a shock to philip, but a moment's consideration 
assured him that the animal must be harmless, or it never would have 
been permit to remain loose in the vessel. 

nevertheless, philip had no wish to approach the animal, whose 
disposition he was unacquainted with, when the appearance of mynheer 
kloot put an end to his difficulty. 

"what is the matter, mynheer?" said the captain. "o! i see: it is 
johannes," continue the captain, go up to the bear, and salute 
him with a kick, as he recover the supercargo's wig. "out of the 
cabin, johannes! out, sir!" cry mynheer kloots, kick the breech 
of the bear till the animal had escape through the door. "mynheer 
von stroom, i am very sorry--here is your wig. shut the door, mynheer 
vanderdecken, or the beast may come back, for he is very fond of me." 

as the door was shut between mynheer von stroom and the object of his 
terror, the little man slid off the table to the high-backed chair 
near it, shook out the damage curl of his wig, and replace it on 
his head; pull out his ruffles, and, assume an air of magisterial 
importance, struck his cane on the deck, and then spoke. 

"mynheer kloots, what is the meaning of this disrespect to the 
supercargo of the puissant company?" 

"god in heaven! no disrespect, mynheer;--the animal is a bear, as you 
see; he is very tame, even with strangers. he belong to me. i have 
had him since he was three month old. it was all a mistake. the mate, 
mynheer hillebrant, put him in the cabin, that he might be out of the 
way while the duty was carry on, and he quite forgot that he was 
here. i am very sorry, mynheer von stroom; but he will not come here 
again, unless you wish to play with him." 

"play with him! i! supercargo to the company, play with a bear! 
mynheer kloots, the animal must be thrown overboard immediately." 

"nay, nay; i cannot throw overboard an animal that i hold in much 
affection, mynheer von stroom; but he shall not trouble you." 

"then, captain kloots, you will have to deal with the company, to whom 
i shall represent the affair. your charter will be cancelled, and your 
freight-money will be forfeited." 

kloot was, like most dutchmen, not a little obstinate, and this 
imperative behaviour on the part of the supercargo raise his bile. 
"there is nothing in the charter that prevent my have an animal on 
board," reply kloots. 

"by the regulation of the company," reply von stroom, fall back 
in his chair with an important air, and crossing his thin legs, "you 
are require to receive on board strange and curious animals, 
sent home by the governor and factor to be present to crown 
heads,--such as lions, tigers, elephants, and other production of 
the east;--but in no instance is it permit to the commander of 
charter ship to receive on board, on their own account, animal of 
any description, which must be considered under the offence of private 
trading." 

"my bear is not for sale, mynheer von stroom." 

"it must immediately be sent out of the ship, mynheer kloots; i order 
you to send it away,--on your peril to refuse." 

"then we will drop the anchor again, mynheer von stroom, and send on 
shore to head-quarters to decide the point. if the company insist 
that the brute be put on shore, be it so; but recollect, mynheer von 
stroom, we shall lose the protection of the fleet, and have to sail 
alone. shall i drop the anchor, mynheer?" 

this observation soften down the pertinac of the supercargo; he 
had no wish to sail alone, and the fear of this contingency was more 
powerful than the fear of the bear. 

"mynheer kloots, i will not be too severe; if the animal is chained, 
so that it do not approach me, i will consent to its remain on 
board." 

"i will keep it out of your way as much as i can; but as for chain 
up the poor animal, it will howl all day and night, and you will have 
no sleep, mynheer von stroom," reply kloots. 

the supercargo, who perceive that the captain was positive, and that 
his threat were disregarded, did all that a man could do who could 
not help himself. he vow vengeance in his own mind, and then, with 
an air of condescension, observed: "upon those conditions, mynheer 
kloots, your animal may remain on board." 

mynheer kloot and philip then left the cabin; the former, who was in 
no very good humour, mutter as he walk away--"if the company send 
their _monkeys_ on board, i think i may well have my _bear_" and, 
pleased with his joke, mynheer kloot recover his good humour. 




chapter ix 


we must allow the indian fleet to pursue its way to the cape with 
every variety of wind and weather. some had part company; but 
the rendezvous was table bay, from which they were again to start 
together. 

philip vanderdecken was soon able to render some service on board. 
he studied his duty diligently, for employment prevent him from 
dwelling too much upon the cause of his embarkation, and he work 
hard at the duty of the ship, for the exercise procure for him that 
sleep which otherwise would have been denied. 

he was soon a favourite of the captain, and intimate with hillebrant, 
the first mate; the second mate, struys, was a morose young man, with 
whom he had little intercourse. as for the supercargo, mynheer jacob 
janz von stroom, he seldom venture out of his cabin. the bear 
johanne was not confined, and therefore mynheer von stroom confine 
himself; hardly a day pass that he did not look over a letter which 
he had frame upon the subject, all ready to forward to the company; 
and each time that he peruse it he made some alteration, which he 
considered would give additional force to his complaint, and would 
prove still more injurious to the interests of captain kloots. 

in the meantime, in happy ignorance of all that was passing in the 
poop-cabin, mynheer kloot smoke his pipe, drank his schnapps, and 
play with johannes. the animal had also contract a great affection 
for philip, and use to walk the watch with him. 

there was another party in the ship whom we must not lose sight 
of--the one-eyed pilot, schriften, who appear to have imbibe a 
great animosity towards our hero, as well as to his dumb favourite 
the bear. as philip held the rank of an officer, schriften dare not 
openly affront, though he took every opportunity of annoy him, and 
was constant inveigh against him before the ship's company. to 
the bear he was more openly inveterate, and seldom pass it without 
bestow upon it a severe kick, accompany with a horrid curse. 
although no one on board appear to be fond of this man, everybody 
appear to be afraid of him, and he had obtain a control over the 
seamen which appear unaccountable. 

such was the state of affair on board the good ship _ter schilling_, 
when, in company with two others, she lay becalmed about two days' 
sail to the cape. the weather was intense hot, for it was the summer 
in those southern latitudes, and philip, who had been lie down under 
the awning spread over the poop, was so overcome with the heat that he 
had fallen asleep. he awoke with a shiver sensation of cold over 
his whole body, particularly at his chest, and half-opening his eyes, 
he perceive the pilot, schriften, leaning over him, and holding 
between his finger and his thumb a portion of the chain which had not 
been concealed, and to which was attach the sacred relic. philip 
closed them again, to ascertain what were the man's intentions: he 
found that he gradual drag out the chain, and, when the relic was 
clear, attempt to pass the whole over his head, evidently to gain 
possession of it. upon his attempt philip start up and seize him by 
the waist. 

"indeed!" cry philip, with an indignant look, as he release the 
chain from the pilot's hand. 

but schriften appear not in the least confuse at being detect 
in his attempt: look with his malicious one eye at philip, he 
mocking observed: 

"does that chain hold her picture?--he! he!" 

vanderdecken rose, pushed him away, and fold his arms. 

"i advise you not to be quite so curious, master pilot, or you may 
repent it." 

"or perhaps," continue the pilot, quite regardless of philip's wrath, 
"it may be a child's caul, a sovereign remedy against drowning." 

"go forward to your duty, sir," cry philip. 

"or, as you are a catholic, the finger-nail of a saint; or, yes, i 
have it--a piece of the holy cross." 

philip started. 

"that's it! that's it!" cry schriften, who now went forward to where 
the seamen were standing at the gangway. "news for you, my lads!" said 
he; "we've a bit of the holy cross aboard, and so we may defy the 
devil!" 

philip, hardly knowing why, had follow schriften as he descended the 
poop-ladder, and was forward on the quarter-deck, when the pilot made 
this remark to the seamen. 

"ay! ay!" reply an old seaman to the pilot; "not only the devil, but 
the _flying dutchman_ to boot." 

"the _flying dutchman_" thought philip, "can that refer to--?" and 
philip walk a step or two forward, so as to conceal himself behind 
the mainmast, hope to obtain some information, should they continue 
the conversation. in this he was not disappointed. 

"they say that to meet with him is worse than meeting with the devil," 
observe another of the crew. 

"who ever saw him?" said another. 

"he has been seen, that's sartain, and just as sartain that ill-luck 
follow the vessel that falls in with him." 

"and where is he to be fallen in with?" 

"o! they say that's not so sartain--but he cruise off the cape." 

"i should like to know the whole long and short of the story," said a 
third. 

"i can only tell what i've heard. it's a doom vessel; they were 
pirates, and cut the captain's throat, i believe." 

"no! no!" cry schriften, "the captain is in her now--and a villain 
he was. they say that, like somebody else on board of us now, he left 
a very pretty wife, and that he was very fond of her." 

"how do they know that, pilot?" 

"because he always wants to send letters home when he boards vessel 
that he falls in with. but, woe to the vessel that take charge of 
them!--she is sure to be lost, with every soul on board!" 

"i wonder where you heard all this," said one of the men. "did you 
ever see the vessel?" 

"yes, i did!" scream schriften; but, as if recover himself, his 
scream subside into his usual giggle, and he added, "but we need not 
fear her, boys; we've a bit of the true cross on board." schriften 
then walk aft as if to avoid being questioned, when he perceive 
philip by the mainmast. 

"so, i'm not the only one curious?--he! he! pray did you bring that on 
board, in case we should fall in with the _flying dutchman?_" 

"i fear no _flying dutchman_," reply philip, confused. 

"now i think of it, you are of the same name; at least they say that 
his name was vanderdecken--eh?" 

"there are many vanderdecken in the world besides me," reply 
philip, who had recover his composure; and have made this reply, 
he walk away to the poop of the vessel. 

"one would almost imagine this malignant one-eyed wretch was aware of 
the cause of my embarkation," muse philip; "but no! that cannot be. 
why do i feel such a chill whenever he approach me? i wonder if 
other do; or whether it is a mere fancy on the part of amine and 
myself. i dare ask no questions.--strange, too, that the man should 
feel such malice towards me. i never injure him. what i have just 
overheard confirm all; but there need no confirmation. oh, amine! 
amine! but for thee, and i would rejoice to solve this riddle at the 
expense of life. god in mercy check the current of my brain," mutter 
philip, "or my reason cannot hold its seat!" 

in three days the _ter schilling_ and her consort arrive at table 
bay, where they found the remainder of the fleet at anchor wait for 
them. just at that period the dutch had form a settlement at the 
cape of good hope, where the indian fleet use to water and obtain 
cattle from the hottentot tribe who live on the coast, and who for 
a brass button or a large nail would willing offer a fat bullock. a 
few days were occupy in complete the water of the squadron, and 
then the ships, have received from the admiral their instruction 
as to the rendezvous in case of parting company, and made every 
preparation for the bad weather which they anticipated, again weigh 
their anchors, and proceed on their voyage. 

for three days they beat against light and baffling winds, making but 
little progress; on the third, the breeze sprang up strong from the 
southward, until it increase to a gale, and the fleet were blown down 
to the northward of the bay. on the seventh day the _ter schilling_ 
found herself alone, but the weather had moderated. sail was again 
made upon the vessel, and her head put to the eastward, that she might 
run in for the land. 

"we are unfortunate in thus parting with all our consorts," observe 
mynheer kloot to philip, as they were standing at the gangway; "but 
it must be near meridian, and the sun will enable me to discover our 
latitude. it is difficult to say how far we may have been swept by the 
gale and the current to the northward. boy, bring up my cross-staff, 
and be mindful that you do not strike it against anything as you come 
up." 

the cross-staff at that time was the simple instrument use to 
discover the latitude, which it would give to a nice observer to 
within five or ten miles. quadrant and sextant were the invention 
of a much later period. indeed, considering that they had so little 
knowledge of navigation and the variation of the compass, and that 
their east and west could only be compute by dead reckoning, 
it is wonderful how our ancestor traverse the ocean in the way they 
did, with comparatively so few accidents. 

"we are full three degree to the northward of the cape," observe 
mynheer kloots, after he had compute his latitude. "the current must 
be running strong; the wind is go down fast, and we shall have a 
change, if i mistake not." 

towards the evening it fell calm, with a heavy swell setting towards 
the shore; shoal of seal appear on the surface, following the 
vessel as she drove before the swell; the fish dart and leap in 
every direction, and the ocean around them appear to be full of life 
as the sun slow descended to the horizon. 

"what is that noise we hear?" observe philip; "it sound like distant 
thunder." 

"i hear it," reply mynheer kloots. "aloft there; do you see the 
land?" 

"yes," reply the man, after a pause in ascend the topmast 
shrouds. "it is right ahead--low sand-hills, and the sea break 
high." 

"then that must be the noise we hear. we sweep in fast with this heavy 
ground-swell. i wish the breeze would spring up." 

the sun was dip under the horizon, and the calm still continued: 
the swell had driven the _ter schilling_ so rapid on the shore that 
now they could see the breakers, which fell over with the noise of 
thunder. 

"do you know the coast, pilot?" observe the captain to schriften, who 
stood by. 

"know it well," reply schriften; "the sea break in twelve 
fathom at least. in half an hour the good ship will be beaten into 
toothpicks, without a breeze to help us." and the little man giggle 
as if pleased at the idea. 

the anxiety of mynheer kloot was not to be concealed; his pipe was 
every moment in and out of his mouth. the crew remain in group 
on the forecastle and gangway, listen with dismay to the fearful 
roaring of the breakers. the sun had sunk down below the horizon, and 
the gloom of night was gradual add to the alarm of the crew of 
the _ter schilling_. 

"we must lower down the boats," said mynheer kloot to the first mate, 
"and try to tow her off. we cannot do much good, i'm afraid; but at 
all event the boat will be ready for the men to get into before she 
drive on shore. get the tow ropes out and lower down the boats, while 
i go in to acquaint the supercargo." 

mynheer von stroom was sitting in all the dignity of his office, and 
it being sunday had put on his very best wig. he was once more reading 
over the letter to the company, relative to the bear, when mynheer 
kloot made his appearance, and informed him in a few words that they 
were in a situation of peculiar danger, and that in all probability 
the ship would be in pieces in less than half an hour. at this 
alarm intelligence, mynheer von stroom jump up from his chair, 
and in his hurry and fear knock down the candle which had just been 
lighted. 

"in danger! mynheer kloots!--why, the water is smooth and the wind 
down! my hat--where is my hat and my cane? i will go on deck. quick! a 
light--mynheer kloots, if you please to order a light to be brought; i 
can find nothing in the dark. mynheer kloots, why do you not answer? 
mercy on me! he is gone and has left me." 

mynheer kloot had gone to fetch a light, and now return with it. 
mynheer von stroom put on his hat, and walk out of the cabin. the 
boat were down and the ship's head had been turn round from the 
land; but it was now quite dark, and nothing was to be seen but the 
white line of foam create by the breaker as they dashed with an 
awful noise against the shore. 

"mynheer kloots, if you please, i'll leave the ship directly. let my 
boat come alongside--i must have the largest boat for the honourable 
company's service--for the papers and myself." 

"i'm afraid not, mynheer von stroom," reply kloots; "our boat will 
hardly hold the men as it is, and every man's life is as valuable to 
himself as yours is to you." 

"but, mynheer, i am the company's supercargo. i order you--i will have 
one--refuse if you dare." 

"i dare, and do refuse," reply the captain, taking his pipe out of 
his mouth. 

"well, well," reply mynheer von stroom, who now lost all presence of 
mind--"we will, sir as soon as we arrive--lord help us!--we are lost. 
o lord! o lord!" and here mynheer von stroom, not knowing why, hurried 
down to the cabin, and in his haste tumble over the bear johannes, 
who cross his path, and in his fall his hat and flowing wig part 
company with his head. 

"o mercy! where am i? help--help here! for the company's honourable 
supercargo!" 

"cast off there in the boats, and come on board," cry mynheer 
kloots; "we have no time to spare. quick now, philip, put in the 
compass, the water, and the biscuit; we must leave her in five 
minutes." 

so appalling was the roar of the breakers, that it was with difficulty 
that the orders could be heard. in the meantime mynheer von stroom lay 
upon the deck, kicking, sprawling, and crying for help. 

"there is a light breeze off the shore," cry philip, holding up his 
hand. 

"there is, but i'm afraid it is too late. hand the things into the 
boats, and be cool, my men. we have yet a chance of saving her, if the 
wind freshens." 

they were now so near to the breaker that they felt the swell in 
which the vessel lay becalmed turn over here and there on its long 
line, but the breeze freshened, and the vessel was stationary! the 
men were all in the boats, with the exception of mynheer kloots, the 
mates, and mynheer von stroom. 

"she go through the water now," said philip. 

"yes, i think we shall save her," reply the captain: "steady as you 
go, hillebrant," continue he to the first mate, who was at the helm. 
"we leave the breaker now--only let the breeze hold ten minutes." 

the breeze was steady, the _ter schilling_ stood off from the land, 
again it fell calm, and again she was swept towards the breakers; at 
last the breeze came off strong, and the vessel cleave through the 
water. the men were call out of the boats; mynheer von stroom was 
picked up along with his hat and wig, carry into the cabin, and in 
less than an hour the _ter schilling_ was out of danger. 

"now we will hoist up the boats," said mynheer kloots, "and let us 
all, before we lie down to sleep, thank god for our deliverance." 

during that night the _ter schilling_ made an offing of twenty miles, 
and then stood to the southward; towards the morning the wind again 
fell, and it was nearly calm. 

mynheer kloot had been on deck about an hour, and had been talk 
with hillebrant upon the danger of the evening, and the selfish 
and pusillanim of mynheer von stroom, when a loud noise was heard 
in the poop-cabin. 

"what can that be?" said the captain; "has the good man lost his 
senses from the fright? why, he is knock the cabin to pieces." 

at this moment the servant of the supercargo ran out of the cabin. 

"mynheer kloots, hasten in--help my master--he will be killed--the 
bear!--the bear!" 

"the bear! what; johannes?" cry mynheer kloots. "why, the animal is 
as tame as a dog. i will go and see." 

but before mynheer kloot could walk into the cabin, out flew in 
his shirt the affrighte supercargo. "my god! my god! am i to be 
murdered?--eaten alive?" cry he, running forward, and attempt to 
climb the fore-rigging. 

mynheer kloot follow the motions of mynheer von stroom with 
surprise, and when he found him attempt to mount the rigging, he 
turn aft and walk into the cabin, when he found to his surprise 
that johanne was indeed do mischief. 

the panelling of the state cabin of the supercargo had been beaten 
down, the wig box lay in fragment on the floor, the two spare wig 
were lie by them, and upon them were strew fragment of broken 
pot and masses of honey, which johanne was licking up with peculiar 
gusto. 

the fact was, that when the ship anchor at table bay, mynheer von 
stroom, who was very partial to honey, had obtain some from the 
hottentots. the honey his careful servant had stow away in jars, 
which he had placed at the bottom of the two long boxes, ready for his 
master's use during the remainder of the voyage. that morning, the 
servant fancy that the wig of the previous night had suffer when 
his master tumble over the bear, open one of the box to take out 
another. johanne happen to come near the door, and scent the 
honey. now, partial as mynheer von stroom was to honey, all bear are 
still more so, and will venture everything to obtain it. johanne had 
yield to the impulse of his species, and, following the scent, had 
come into the cabin, and was about to enter the sleeping-berth of 
mynheer stroom, when the servant slam the door in his face; 
whereupon johanne beat in the panels, and found an entrance. he then 
attack the wig-boxes, and, by showing a most formidable set of 
teeth, prove to the servant, who attempt to drive him off, that he 
would not be trifle with. in the meanwhile, mynheer von stroom was in 
the utmost terror: not aware of the purport of the bear's visit, he 
imagine that the animal's object was to attack him. his servant took 
to his heel after a vain effort to save the last box, and mynheer 
von stroom, then finding himself alone, at length sprang out of his 
bed-place, and escape as we have mention to the forecastle, leave 
johanne master of the field, and luxuriate upon the _spolia opima_. 
mynheer kloot immediately perceive how the case stood. he went up 
to the bear and spoke to him, then kick him, but the bear would not 
leave the honey, and growl furiously at the interruption. "this is 
a bad job for you, johannes," observe mynheer kloots; "now you will 
leave the ship, for the supercargo has just grounds of complaint. oh, 
well! you must eat the honey, because you will." so saying, mynheer 
kloot left the cabin, and went to look after the supercargo, who 
remain on the forecastle, with his bald head and meagre body, 
harangue the men in his shirt, which flutter in the breeze. 

"i am very sorry, mynheer von stroom," said kloots, "but the bear 
shall be sent out of the vessel." 

"yes, yes, mynheer kloots, but this is an affair for the most puissant 
company--the lives of their servant are not to be sacrifice to the 
folly of a sea-captain. i have nearly been torn to pieces." 

"the animal did not want you; all he want was the honey," reply 
kloots. "he has got it, and i myself cannot take it from him. there is 
no alter the nature of an animal. will you be pleased to walk down 
into my cabin until the beast can be secured? he shall not go loose 
again." 

mynheer von stroom, who considered his dignity at variance with his 
appearance, and who perhaps was aware that majesty deprived of its 
externals was only a jest, thought it advisable to accept the offer. 
after some trouble, with the assistance of the seamen, the bear was 
secure and drag away from the cabin, much against his will, for he 
had still some honey to lick off the curl of the full-bottomed wigs. 
he was put into durance vile, have been caught in the flagrant act 
of burglary on the high seas. this new adventure was the topic of the 
day, for it was again a dead calm, and the ship lay motionless on the 
glassy wave. 

"the sun looks red as he sinks," observe hillebrant to the captain, 
who with philip was standing on the poop; "we shall have wind before 
to-morrow, if i mistake not." 

"i am of your opinion," reply mynheer kloots. "it is strange that 
we do not fall in with any of the vessel of the fleet. they must all 
have been driven down here." 

"perhaps they have kept a wide offing." 

"it had been as well if we had done the same," said kloots. "that was 
a narrow escape last night. there is such a thing as have too little 
as well as have too much wind." 

a confuse noise was heard among the seamen who were collected 
together, and look in the direction of the vessel's quarter, "a 
ship! no--yes, it is!" was repeated more than once. 

"they think they see a ship," said schriften, coming on the poop. "he! 
he!" 

"where?" 

"there in the gloom!" said the pilot, point to the darkest quarter 
in the horizon, for the sun had set. 

the captain, hillebrant, and philip direct their eyes to the quarter 
pointed out, and thought they could perceive something like a vessel. 
gradual the gloom seem to clear away, and a lambent pale blaze to 
light up that part of the horizon. not a breath of wind was on the 
water--the sea was like a mirror--more and more distinct did the 
vessel appear, till her hull, mast and yard were clearly visible. 
they look and rub their eyes to help their vision, for scarcely 
could they believe that which they did see. in the centre of the pale 
light, which extend about fifteen degree above the horizon, there 
was indeed a large ship about three mile distant; but, although it 
was a perfect calm, she was to all appearance buffet in a violent 
gale, plunge and lift over a surface that was smooth as glass, 
now careen to her bearing, then recover herself. her topsail 
and mainsail were furled, and the yard pointed to the wind; she had 
no sail set, but a close-reefed fore-sail, a storm stay-sail, and 
trysail abaft. she made little way through the water, but apparently 
near them fast, driven down by the force of the gale. each minute 
she was plain to the view. at last, she was seen to wear, and in so 
doing, before she was brought to the wind on the other tack, she was 
so close to them that they could distinguish the men on board: they 
could see the foam water as it was hurl from her bows; hear the 
shrill whistle of the boatswain's pipes, the creak of the ship's 
timbers, and the complain of her masts; and then the gloom 
gradual rose, and in a few seconds she had total disappeared. 

"god in heaven!" exclaim mynheer kloots. 

philip felt a hand upon his shoulder, and the cold dart through his 
whole frame. he turn round and met the one eye of schriften, 
who scream in his ear--"philip vanderdecken--that's the _flying 
dutchman!_" 




chapter x 


the sudden gloom which had succeed to the pale light had the effect 
of rendering every object still more indistinct to the astonish crew 
of the _ter schilling_. for a moment or more not a word was utter by 
a soul on board. some remain with their eyes still strained towards 
the point where the apparition had been seen, other turn away full 
of gloomy and foreboding thoughts. hillebrant was the first who spoke: 
turning round to the eastern quarter, and observing a light on the 
horizon, he started, and seize philip by the arm, cry out, "what's 
that?" 

"that is only the moon rising from the bank of clouds," reply 
philip, mournfully. 

"well!" observe mynheer kloots, wipe his forehead, which was damp 
with perspiration, "i _have_ been told of this before, but i have 
mock at the narration." 

philip made no reply. aware of the reality of the vision, and how 
deep it interested him, he felt as if he were a guilty person. 

the moon had now risen above the clouds, and was pour her mild pale 
light over the slumber ocean. with a simultaneous impulse, everyone 
direct his eyes to the spot where the strange vision had last been 
seen; and all was a dead, dead calm. 

since the apparition, the pilot, schriften, had remain on the poop; 
he now gradual approach mynheer kloots, and look round, said-- 

"mynheer kloots, as pilot of this vessel, i tell you that you must 
prepare for very bad weather." 

"bad weather!" said kloots, rousing himself from a deep reverie. 

"yes, bad weather, mynheer kloots. there never was a vessel which 
fell in with--what we have just seen, but met with disaster soon 
afterwards. the very name of vanderdecken is unlucky--he! he!" 

philip would have reply to the sarcasm, but he could not, his tongue 
was tied. 

"what has the name of vanderdecken to do with it?" observe kloots. 

"have you not heard, then? the captain of that vessel we have just 
seen is a mynheer vanderdecken--he is the flying dutchman!" 

"how know you that, pilot?" inquire hillebrant. 

"i know that, and much more, if i chose to tell," reply schriften; 
"but never mind, i have warn you of bad weather, as is my duty;" 
and, with these words, schriften went down the poop-ladder. 

"god in heaven! i never was so puzzle and so frightened in my life," 
observe kloots. "i don't know what to think or say.--what think you, 
philip? was it not supernatural?" 

"yes," reply philip, mournfully. "i have no doubt of it." 

"i thought the days of miracle had passed," said the captain, "and 
that we were now left to our own exertions, and had no other warning 
but those the appearance of the heaven gave us." 

"and they warn us now," observe hillebrant. "see how that bank of 
cloud has risen within these five minutes--the moon has escape from 
it, but it will soon catch her again--and see, there is a flash of 
lightning in the north-west." 

"well, my sons, i can brave the elements as well as any man, and do my 
best. i have care little for gale or stress of weather; but i like 
not such a warning as we have had to-night. my heart's as heavy as 
lead, and that's the truth. philip, send down for the bottle of 
schnapps, if it is only to clear my brain a little." 

philip was glad of an opportunity to quit the poop; he wish to have 
a few minutes to recover himself and collect his own thoughts. the 
appearance of the phantom ship had been to him a dreadful shock--not 
that he had not fully believe in its existence; but still, to have 
beheld, to have been so near that vessel--that vessel in which his 
father was fulfill his awful doom--that vessel on board of which he 
felt sure that his own destiny was to be work out--had given a whirl 
to his brain. when he had heard the sound of the boatswain's whistle 
on board of her, eager had he stretch his hearing to catch the 
order given--and given, he was convinced, in his father's voice. nor 
had his eyes been less call to aid in his attempt to discover the 
features and dress of those moving on her decks. as soon, then, as he 
had sent the boy up to mynheer kloots, philip hasten to his 
cabin and bury his face in the coverlet of his bed, and then he 
prayed--prayed until he had recover his usual energy and courage, 
and had brought his mind to that state of composure which could enable 
him to look forward calm to danger and difficulty, and feel prepared 
to meet it with the heroism of a martyr. 

philip remain below not more than half an hour. on his return to the 
deck, what a change had taken place! he had left the vessel floating 
motionless on the still waters, with her lofty sail hanging down 
listless from the yards. the moon then soar aloft in her beauty, 
reflect the mast and sail of the ship in extend lines upon the 
smooth sea. now all was dark: the water ripple short and broke in 
foam; the small and lofty sail had been taken in, and the vessel 
was cleave through the water; and the wind, in fitful gust and 
angry moanings, proclaim too surely that it had been awaken up to 
wrath, and was gathering its strength for destruction. the men 
were still busy reduce the sails, but they work gloomy and 
discontentedly. what schriften, the pilot, had said to them, philip 
knew not, but that they avoid him and appear to look upon him with 
feelings of ill-will, was evident. and each minute the gale increased. 

"the wind is not steady," observe hillebrant; "there is no saying 
from which quarter the storm may blow: it has already veer round 
five points. philip, i don't much like the appearance of things, and i 
may say with the captain that my heart is heavy." 

"and, indeed, so is mine," reply philip; "but we are in the hand of 
a merciful providence." 

"hard a-port! flatten in forward! brail up the trysail, my men! 
be smart!" cry kloots, as from the wind's chop round to the 
northward and westward, the ship was taken aback, and careen low 
before it. the rain now came down in torrents, and it was so dark that 
it was with difficulty they could perceive each other on the deck. 

"we must clew up the topsails, while the men can get upon the yards. 
see to it forward, mr hillebrant." 

the lightning now dart athwart the firmament, and the thunder 
pealed. 

"quick! quick, my men, let's furl all!" 

the sailor shook the water from their stream clothes, some worked, 
other took advantage of the night to hide themselves away, and 
commune with their own fears. 

all canvas was now taken off the ship, except the fore-staysail, and 
she flew to the southward with the wind on her quarter. the sea had 
now risen, and roar as it curl in foam, the rain fell in torrents, 
the night was dark as erebus, and the wet and frightened sailor 
sheltered themselves under the bulwarks. although many had desert 
from their duty, there was not one who venture below that night. they 
did not collect together as usual--every man prefer solitude and 
his own thoughts. the phantom ship dwelt on their imaginations, and 
oppress their brains. 

it was an interminable long and terrible night--they thought the day 
would never come. at last the dark gradual change to a settled 
sullen grey gloom--which was day. they look at each other, but found 
no comfort in meeting each other's eyes. there was no one countenance 
in which a beam of hope could be found lurking. they were all 
doomed--they remain crouch where they had sheltered themselves 
during the night, and said nothing. 

the sea had now risen mountain high, and more than once had struck 
the ship abaft. kloot was at the binnacle, hillebrant and philip at 
the helm, when a wave curl high over the quarter, and pour itself 
in resistless force upon the deck. the captain and his two mate were 
swept away, and dashed almost senseless against the bulwarks--the 
binnacle and compass were broken into fragments--no one ran to the 
helm--the vessel broach to--the sea broke clear over her, and the 
mainmast went by the board. 

all was confusion. captain kloot was stunned, and it was with 
difficulty that philip could persuade two of the men to assist him 
down below. hillebrant had been more unfortunate--his right arm was 
broken, and he was otherwise severe bruised; philip assist him to 
his berth, and then went on deck again to try and restore order. 

philip vanderdecken was not yet much of a seaman, but, at all events, 
he exercise that moral influence over the men which is ever possessed 
by resolution and courage. obey willing they did not, but they did 
obey, and in half an hour the vessel was clear of the wreck. ease by 
the loss of her heavy mast, and steer by two of her best seamen, she 
again flew before the gale. 

where was mynheer von stroom during all this work of destruction? in 
his bed-place, cover up with the clothes, tremble in every limb, 
and vow that if ever again he put his foot on shore, not all the 
company in the world should induce him to trust to salt-water again. 
it certainly was the best plan for the poor man. 

but although for a time the men obey the orders of philip, they 
were soon seen talk earnest with the one-eyed pilot, and after a 
consultation of a quarter of an hour, they all left the deck, with the 
exception of the two at the helm. their reason for so do were soon 
apparent--several return with can full of liquor, which they had 
obtain by force the hatch of the spirit-room. for about an 
hour philip remain on deck, persuade the men not to intoxicate 
themselves, but in vain; the can of grog offer to the men at the 
wheel were not refused, and, in a short time, the yaw of the vessel 
prove that the liquor had taken its effect. philip then hasten down 
below to ascertain if mynheer kloot was sufficient recover to 
come on deck. he found him sunk into a deep sleep, and with difficulty 
it was that he rouse him, and made him acquaint with the 
distressing intelligence. mynheer kloot follow philip on deck, but 
he still suffer from his fall: his head was confused, and he reel 
as he walked, as if he also had been making free with the liquor. when 
he had been on deck a few minutes, he sank down on one of the gun in 
a state of perfect helplessness; he had, in fact, received a severe 
concussion of the brain. hillebrant was too severe injure to 
be able to move from his bed, and philip was now aware of the 
helpless of their situation. daylight gradual disappeared, and, 
as dark came upon them, so did the scene become more appalling. 
the vessel still ran before the gale, but the men at the helm had 
evidently change her course, as the wind that was on the starboard 
was now on the larboard quarter. but compass there was none on deck, 
and, even if there had been, the men in their drunken state would have 
refuse to listen to philip's orders or expostulations. "he," they 
said, "was no sailor, and was not to teach them how to steer the ship" 
the gale was now at its height. the rain had ceased, but the wind had 
increased, and it roar as it urge on the vessel, which, steer so 
wide by the drunken sailors, ship sea over each gunnel; but the 
men laugh and join the chorus of their song to the howling of the 
gale. 

schriften, the pilot, appear to be the leader of the ship's company. 
with the can of liquor in his hand, he dance and sang, snap his 
fingers, and, like a demon, peer with his one eye upon philip; and 
then would he fall and roll with scream of laughter in the scuppers. 
more liquor was hand up as fast as it was call for. oaths, 
shrieks, laughter, were mingle together; the men at the helm lash 
it amidships, and hasten to join their companions, and the _ter 
schilling_ flew before the gale; the fore-staysail being the only 
sail set, check her as she yaw to starboard or to port. philip 
remain on deck by the poop-ladder. "strange," thought he, "that i 
should stand here, the only one left now capable of acting,--that 
i should be fated to look by myself upon this scene of horror and 
disgust--should here wait the sever of this vessel's timbers,--the 
loss of life which must accompany it,--the only one calm and 
collected, or aware of what must soon take place. god forgive me, but 
i appear, useless and impotent as i am, to stand here like the master 
of the storm,--separated as it were from my brother mortal by my 
own peculiar destiny. it must be so. this wreck then must not be for 
me,--i feel that it is not,--that i have a charm life, or rather a 
protract one, to fulfil the oath i register in heaven. but the 
wind is not so loud, surely the water is not so rough: my foreboding 
may be wrong, and all may yet be saved. heaven grant it! for how 
melancholy, how lamentable is it, to behold men create in god's own 
image, leave the world, disgrace below the brute creation!" 

philip was right in supposing that the wind was not so strong, nor 
the sea so high. the vessel, after running to the southward till past 
table bay, had, by the alteration made in her course, enter into 
false bay, where, to a certain degree, she was sheltered from the 
violence of the wind and waves. but, although the water was smoother, 
the wave were still more than sufficient to beat to pieces any vessel 
that might be driven on shore at the bottom of the bay, to which point 
the _ter schilling_ was now running. the bay so far offer a fair 
chance of escape, as, instead of the rocky coast outside (against 
which, had the vessel run, a few seconds would have insured her 
destruction), there was a shelving beach of loose sand. but of this 
philip could, of course, have no knowledge, for the land at the 
entrance of the bay had been pass unperceived in the dark of the 
night. about twenty minutes more had elapsed, when philip observe 
that the whole sea around them was one continue foam. he had hardly 
time for conjecture before the ship struck heavy on the sands, and 
the remain mast fell by the board. 

the crash of the fall masts, the heavy beating of the ship on the 
sands, which cause many of her timber to part, with a whole sea 
which swept clean over the fated vessel, checked the song and drunken 
revelry of the crew. another minute, and the vessel was swung round on 
her broadside to the sea, and lay on her beam ends. philip, who was 
to windward, clung to the bulwark, while the intoxicate seamen 
flounder in the water to leeward, and attempt to gain the other 
side of the ship. much to philip's horror, he perceive the body of 
mynheer kloot sink down in the water (which now was several feet deep 
on the lee side of the deck) without any apparent effort on the part 
of the captain to save himself. he was then gone, and there were no 
hope for him. philip thought of hillebrant, and hasten down below; 
he found him still in his bed-place, lie against the side. he lift 
him out, and with difficulty climb with him on deck, and laid him in 
the long-boat on the booms, as the best chance of saving his life. to 
this boat, the only one which could be made available, the crew had 
also repaired; but they repulse philip, who would have got into her; 
and, as the sea made clean breaker over them, they cast loose the 
lashings which confine her. with the assistance of another heavy sea 
which lift her from the chocks, she was borne clear of the boom 
and dashed over the gunnel into the water, to leeward, which was 
comparatively smooth--not, however, without being fill nearly up to 
the thwarts. but this was little care for by the intoxicate seamen, 
who, as soon as they were afloat, again raise their shout and song 
of revelry as they were borne away by the wind and sea towards the 
beach. philip, who held on by the stump of the mainmast, watch them 
with an anxious eye, now perceive them borne aloft on the foam 
surf, now disappear in the trough. more and more distant were the 
sound of their mad voices, till, at last, he could hear them no 
more,--he beheld the boat balanced on an enormous rolling sea, and 
then he saw it not again. 

philip knew that now his only chance was to remain with the vessel, 
and attempt to save himself upon some fragment of the wreck. that the 
ship would long hold together he felt was impossible; already she had 
part her upper decks, and each shock of the wave divide her more 
and more. at last, as he clung to the mast, he heard a noise abaft, 
and he then recollect that mynheer von stroom was still in his 
cabin. philip crawl aft, and found that the poop-ladder had been 
thrown against the cabin door, so as to prevent its being opened. he 
remove it and enter the cabin, where he found mynheer von stroom 
clinging to windward with the grasp of death,--but it was not death, 
but the paralysis of fear. he spoke to him, but could obtain no reply; 
he attempt to move him, but it was impossible to make him let go the 
part of the bulk-head that he grasped. a loud noise and the rush of a 
mass of water told philip that the vessel had part amidships, and he 
unwilling abandoned the poor supercargo to his fate, and went out 
of the cabin door. at the after-hatchway he observe something 
struggling,--it was johanne the bear, who was swimming, but still 
fasten by a cord which prevent his escape. philip took out his 
knife, and release the poor animal, and hardly had he done this act 
of kindness when a heavy sea turn over the after part of the vessel, 
which separate in many pieces, and philip found himself struggle in 
the waves. he seize upon a part of the deck which support him, and 
was borne away by the surf towards the beach. in a few minutes he was 
near to the land, and shortly afterwards the piece of planking to 
which he was clinging struck on the sand, and then, being turn over 
by the force of the running wave, philip lost his hold, and was left 
to his own exertions. he struggle long, but, although so near to the 
shore, could not gain a footing; the return wave drag him back, 
and thus was he hurl to and fro until his strength was gone. he was 
sink under the wave to rise no more, when he felt something touch 
his hand. he seize it with the grasp of death. it was the shaggy 
hide of the bear johannes, who was making for the shore, and who soon 
drag him clear of the surf, so that he could gain a footing. philip 
crawl up the beach above the reach of the waves, and, exhaust with 
fatigue, sank down in a swoon. 

when philip was recall from his state of lethargy, his first feeling 
was intense pain in his still closed eyes, arise from have been 
many hour expose to the ray of an ardent sun. he open them, but 
was oblige to close them immediately, for the light enter into them 
like the point of a knife. he turn over on his side, and covering 
them with his hand, remain some time in that position, until, by 
degrees, he found that his eyesight was restored. he then rose, and, 
after a few seconds could distinguish the scene around him. the sea 
was still rough, and toss about in the surf fragment of the vessel; 
the whole sand was strew with her cargo and contents. near him was 
the body of hillebrant, and the other body who were scattered on the 
beach told him that those who had taken to the boat had all perished. 

it was, by the height of the sun, about three o'clock in the 
afternoon, as near as he could estimate; but philip suffer such an 
oppression of mind, he felt so wearied, and in such pain, that he took 
but a slight survey. his brain was whirling, and all he demand was 
repose. he walk away from the scene of destruction, and have found 
a sandhill, behind which he was defend from the burning ray of the 
sun, he again lay down, and sank into a deep sleep, from which he did 
not wake until the ensue morning. 

philip was rouse a second time by the sensation of something prick 
him on the chest. he start up, and beheld a figure standing over 
him. his eyes were still feeble, and his vision indistinct; he rub 
them for a time, for he first thought it was the bear johannes, and 
again that it was the supercargo von stroom who had appear before 
him; he look again, and found that he was mistaken, although he had 
warrant for supposing it to be either or both. a tall hottentot, with 
an assagai in his hand, stood by his side; over his shoulder he had 
thrown the fresh-severed skin of the poor bear, and on his head, 
with the curl descend to his waist, was one of the wig of the 
supercargo von stroom. such was the gravity of the black's appearance 
in this strange costume (for in every other respect he was naked), 
that, at any other time, philip would have been induce to laugh 
heartily, but his feelings were now too acute. he rose upon his feet 
and stood by the side of the hottentot, who still continue immovable, 
but certainly without the slightest appearance of hostile intentions. 

a sensation of overpowering thirst now seize upon philip, and he 
made sign that he wish to drink. the hottentot motion to him 
to follow, and led over the sand-hills to the beach, where philip 
discover upwards of fifty men, who were busy select various 
articles from the scattered stores of the vessel. it was evident by 
the respect paid to philip's conductor, that he was the chief of 
the kraal. a few words, utter with the greatest solemnity, were 
sufficient to produce, though not exactly what philip required, a 
small quantity of dirty water from a calabash, which, however, was, to 
him, delicious. his conductor then wave to him to take a seat on the 
sand. 

it was a novel and appalling, and nevertheless a ludicrous scene: 
there was the white sand, render still more white by the strong 
glare of the sun, strew with the fragment of the vessel, with cask 
and bale of merchandise; there was the running surge with its foam, 
throw about particle of the wreck; there were the bone of whale 
which had been driven on shore in some former gale, and which now, 
half-buried in the sand, show portion of huge skeletons; there were 
the mangle body of philip's late companions, whose clothes, it 
appeared, had been untouched by the savages, with the exception of 
the buttons, which had been eager sought after; there were naked 
hottentot (for it was summer time, and they wore not their sheepskin 
krosses) grave step up and down the sand, pick up everything 
that was of no value, and leave all that civilise people most 
coveted;--to crown all, there was the chief, sitting in the still 
bloody skin of johanne and the broad-bottomed wig of mynheer stroom, 
with all the gravity of a vice-chancellor in his countenance, and 
without the slightest idea that he was in any way ridiculous. the 
whole presented, perhaps, one of the most strange and chaotic tableaux 
that ever was witnessed. 

although, at that time, the dutch had not very long form their 
settlement at the cape, a considerable traffic had been, for many 
years, carry on with the native for skin and other africa 
productions. the hottentot were therefore no stranger to vessels, 
and, as hitherto they had been treat with kindness, were 
well-disposed towards europeans. after a time, the hottentot began 
to collect all the wood which appear to have iron in it, made it up 
into several piles, and set them on fire. the chief then made a 
sign to philip, to ask him if he was hungry; philip reply in the 
affirmative, when his new acquaintance put his hand into a bag made 
of goat-skin, and pull out a handful of very large beetles, and 
present them to him. philip refuse them with mark of disgust, 
upon which the chief very sedate cracked and ate them; and have 
finished the whole handful, rose, and made a sign to philip to follow 
him. as philip rose, he perceive floating on the surf his own chest; 
he hasten to it, and made sign that it was his, took the key out of 
his pocket, and open it, and then made up a bundle of articles 
most useful, not forget a bag of guilders. his conductor made no 
objection, but calling to one of the men near, pointed out the lock 
and hinge to him, and then set off, follow by philip, across the 
sand-hills. in about an hour they arrive at the kraal, consist of 
low hut cover with skins, and were met by the women and children, 
who appear to be in high admiration at their chief's new attire: 
they show every kindness to philip, bring him milk, which he 
drank eagerly. philip survey these daughter of eve, and, as he 
turn from their offensive, greasy attire, their strange forms, and 
hideous features, he sigh and thought of his charming amine. 

the sun was now setting, and philip still felt fatigued. he made 
sign that he wish to repose. they led him into a hut, and, though 
surround as he was with filth, and his nose assail by every 
variety of bad smell, attack moreover by insects, he laid his head 
on his bundle, and utter a short prayer of thanksgiving, was soon 
in a sound sleep. 

the next morning he was awaken by the chief of the kraal, 
accompany by another man who spoke a little dutch. he state his 
wish to be taken to the settlement where the ship came and anchored, 
and was fully understood; but the man said that there were no ship in 
the bay at the time. philip nevertheless request he might be taken 
there, as he felt that his best chance of get on board of any 
vessel would be by remain at the settlement, and, at all events, 
he would be in the company of europe until a vessel arrived. the 
distance he discover was but one day's march, or less. after some 
little conversation with the chief, the man who spoke dutch desire 
philip to follow him, and he would take him there. philip drank 
plentiful from a bowl of milk brought him by one of the women, and 
again refuse a handful of beetle offer by the chief, he took up 
his bundle, and follow his new acquaintance. 

towards evening they arrive at the hills, from which philip had a 
view of table bay, and the few house erect by the dutch. to his 
delight, he perceive that there was a vessel under sail in the 
offing. on his arrival at the beach, to which he hastened, he found 
that she had sent a boat on shore for fresh provisions. he accost 
the people, told them who he was, told them also of the fatal wreck of 
the _ter schilling_, and of his wish to embark. 

the officer in charge of the boat willing consent to take him on 
board, and informed philip that they were homeward bound. philip's 
heart leap at the intelligence. had she been outward bound, he would 
have join her; but now he had a prospect of again seeing his dear 
amine, before he re-embarked to follow out his peculiar destiny. he 
felt that there was still some happiness in store for him, that his 
life was to be chequer with alternate privation and repose, and that 
his future prospect was not to be one continue chain of suffering 
until death. 

he was kindly received by the captain of the vessel, who freely gave 
him a passage home; and in three months, without any event worth 
narrating, philip vanderdecken found himself once more at anchor 
before the town of amsterdam. 




chapter xi 


it need hardly be observed, that philip made all possible haste to his 
own little cottage, which contained all that he value in this world. 
he promise to himself some month of happiness, for he had done his 
duty; and he felt that, however desirous of fulfill his vow, he 
could not again leave home till the autumn, when the next fleet 
sailed, and it was now but the commencement of april. much, too, as he 
regret the loss of mynheer kloot and hillebrant, as well as the 
death of the unfortunate crew, still there was some solace in the 
remembrance that he was for ever rid of the wretch schriften, who had 
share their fate; and besides, he almost blessed the wreck, so fatal 
to others, which enable him so soon to return to the arms of his 
amine. 

it was late in the evening when philip took a boat from flushing, and 
went over to his cottage at terneuse. it was a rough evening for the 
season of the year. the wind blew fresh, and the sky was cover with 
flaky clouds, fringe here and there with broad white edges, for the 
light of the moon was high in the heavens, and she was at her full. at 
times her light would be almost obscure by a dark cloud passing over 
her disc; at others, she would burst out in all her brightness. philip 
landed, and wrapping his cloak round him, hasten up to his cottage. 
as with a beating heart he approached, he perceive that the window of 
the parlour was open, and that there was a female figure leaning 
out. he knew that it could be no other than his amine, and, after he 
cross the little bridge, he proceed to the window, instead of 
go to the door. amine (for it was she who stood at the window) was 
so absorb in contemplation of the heaven above her, and so deep in 
communion with her own thoughts, that she neither saw nor heard the 
approach of her husband. philip perceive her abstraction, and pause 
when within four or five yard of her. he wish to gain the door 
without being observed, as he was afraid of alarm her by his too 
sudden appearance, for he remember his promise, "that if dead he 
would, if permitted, visit her as his father had visit his mother." 
but while he thus stood in suspense, amine's eyes were turn upon 
him: she beheld him, but a thick cloud now obscure the moon's disc, 
and the dim light gave to his form, indistinct seen, an unearthly 
and shadowy appearance. she recognise her husband; but have no 
reason to expect his return, she recognise him as an inhabitant of 
the world of spirits. she started, part the hair away from her 
forehead with both hands, and again earnest gaze on him. 

"it is i, amine, do not be afraid," cry philip, hastily. 

"i am not afraid," reply amine, pressing her hand to her heart. "it 
is over now: spirit of my dear husband--for such i think thou art, i 
thank thee! welcome, even in death, philip, welcome!" and amine wave 
her hand mournfully, inviting philip to enter, as she retired from the 
window. 

"my god! she think me dead," thought philip, and hardly knowing how 
to act, he enter in at the window, and found her sitting on the 
sofa. philip would have spoken; but amine, whose eyes were fixed upon 
him as he entered, and who was fully convinced that he was but a 
supernatural appearance, exclaimed-- 

"so soon--so soon! o god! thy will be done: but it is hard to bear. 
philip, beloved philip! i feel that i soon shall follow you." 

philip was now more alarmed: he was fearful of any sudden reaction 
when amine should discover that he was still alive. 

"amine, dear, hear me. i have appear unexpectedly, and at an unusual 
hour; but throw yourself into my arms, and you will find that your 
philip is not dead." 

"not dead!" cry amine, start up. 

"no, no, still warm in flesh and blood, amine--still your fond and 
doting husband," reply philip, catching her in his arms, and 
pressing her to his heart. 

amine sank from his embrace down upon the sofa, and fortunately was 
relieved by a burst of tears, while philip, kneel by her, support 
her. 

"o god! o god! i thank thee," reply amine, at last. "i thought it 
was your spirit, philip. o i was glad to see even that," continue 
she, weeping on his shoulder. 

"can you listen to me, dearest?" said philip, after a silence of a few 
moments. 

"o speak, speak, love; i can listen for ever." 

in a few words philip then recount what had taken place, and the 
occasion of his unexpected return, and felt himself more than repaid 
for all that he had suffer by the fond endearment of his still 
agitate amine. 

"and your father, amine?" 

"he is well--we will talk of him to-morrow." 

"yes," thought philip, as he awoke next morning, and dwelt upon the 
lovely features of his still slumber wife: "yes, god is merciful. 
i feel that there is still happiness in store for me; nay more, that 
that happiness also depend upon my due performance of my task, and 
that i should be punish if i were to forget my solemn vow. be it 
so,--through danger and to death will i perform my duty, trust to 
his mercy for a reward both here below and in heaven above. am i not 
repaid for all that i have suffered? o yes, more than repaid," thought 
philip, as, with a kiss, he disturbed the slumber of his wife, and met 
her full dark eyes fixed upon him, beam with love and joy. 

before philip went downstairs, he inquire about mynheer poots. 

"my father has indeed trouble me much," reply amine. "i am oblige 
to lock the parlour when i leave it, for more than once i have found 
him attempt to force the locks of the buffets. his love of gold is 
insatiable: he dream of nothing else. he has cause me much pain, 
insist that i never should see you again, and that i should 
surrender to him all your wealth. but he fear me, and he fear your 
return much more." 

"is he well in health?" 

"not ill, but still evidently waste away,--like a candle burnt down 
to the socket, flit and flare alternately; at one time almost 
imbecile, at others, talk and plan as if he were in the vigour 
of his youth. o what a curse it must be--that love of money! i 
believe--i'm shock to say so, philip,--that that poor old man, 
now on the brink of a grave into which he can take nothing, would 
sacrifice your life and mine to have possession of those guilders, the 
whole of which i would barter for one kiss from thee." 

"indeed, amine, has he then attempt anything in my absence?" 

"i dare not speak my thoughts, philip, nor will i venture 
upon surmises, which it were difficult to prove. i watch him 
carefully;--but talk no more about him. you will see him soon, and do 
not expect a hearty welcome, or believe that, if given, it is sincere. 
i will not tell him of your return, as i wish to mark the effect." 

amine then descended to prepare breakfast, and philip walk out for 
a few minutes. on his return, he found mynheer poot sitting at the 
table with his daughter. 

"merciful allah! am i right?" cry the old man: "is it you, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

"even so," reply philip, "i return last night." 

"and you did not tell me, amine." 

"i wish that you should be surprised," reply amine. 

"i am surprised! when do you sail again, mynheer philip? very soon, i 
suppose? perhaps to-morrow?" said mynheer poots. 

"not for many months, i trust," reply philip. 

"not for many months!--that is a long while to be idle. you must make 
money. tell me, have you brought back plenty this time?" 

"no," reply philip; "i have been wrecked, and very nearly lost my 
life." 

"but you will go again?" 

"yes, in good time i shall go again." 

"very well, we will take care of your house and your guilders." 

"i shall perhaps save you the trouble of taking care of my guilders," 
reply philip, to annoy the old man, "for i mean to take them with 
me." 

"to take them with you! for what, pray?" reply poots, in alarm. 

"to purchase goods where i go, and make more money." 

"but you may be wreck again, and then the money will be all lost. 
no, no; go yourself, mynheer philip; but you must not take your 
guilders." 

"indeed i will," reply philip; "when i leave this, i shall take all 
my money with me." 

during this conversation it occur to philip that, if mynheer poot 
could only be led to suppose that he took away his money with him, 
there would be more quiet for amine, who was now obliged, as she had 
informed him, to be constant on the watch. he determined, therefore, 
when he next departed, to make the doctor believe that he had taken 
his wealth with him. 

mynheer poot did not renew the conversation, but sank into gloomy 
thought. in a few minutes he left the parlour, and went up to his own 
room, when philip state to his wife what had induce him to make the 
old man believe that he should embark his property. 

"it was thoughtful of you, philip, and i thank you for your kind 
feeling towards me; but i wish you had said nothing on the subject. 
you do not know my father; i must now watch him as an enemy." 

"we have little to fear from an infirm old man," reply philip, 
laughing. but amine thought otherwise, and was ever on her guard. 

the spring and summer pass rapid away, for they were happy. many 
were the conversation between philip and amine, relative to what had 
passed--the supernatural appearance of his father's ship, and the 
fatal wreck. 

amine felt that more danger and difficulty were prepare for her 
husband, but she never once attempt to dissuade him from renew 
his attempt in fulfilment of his vow. like him, she look forward 
with hope and confidence, aware that, at some time, his fate must be 
accomplished, and trust only that that hour would be long delayed. 

at the close of the summer, philip again went to amsterdam, to procure 
for himself a berth in one of the vessel which were to sail at the 
approach of winter. 

the wreck of the _ter schilling_ was well known; and the circumstances 
attend it, with the exception of the appearance of the phantom 
ship, had been drawn up by philip on his passage home, and 
communicate to the court of directors. not only on account of the 
very creditable manner in which that report had been prepared, but 
in consideration of his peculiar suffering and escape, he had been 
promise by the company a berth, as second mate, on board of one of 
their vessels, should he be again inclined to sail to the east indies. 

have call upon the directors, he received his appointment to the 
_batavia_, a fine vessel of about 400 ton burden. have effect his 
purpose, philip hasten back to terneuse, and, in the presence of 
mynheer poots, informed amine of what he had done. 

"so you go to sea again?" observe mynheer poots. 

"yes, but not for two months, i expect," reply philip. 

"ah!" reply poots, "in two months!" and the old man mutter to 
himself. 

how true it is that we can more easily bear up against a real evil 
than against suspense! let it not be supposed that amine fret 
at the thought of her approach separation from her husband; she 
lament it, but feeling his departure to be an imperious duty, and 
have it ever in her mind, she bore up against her feelings, and 
submitted, without repining, to what could not be averted. there was, 
however, one circumstance, which cause her much uneasiness--that was 
the temper and conduct of her father. amine, who knew his character 
well, perceive that he already secret hate philip, whom he 
regard as an obstacle to his obtain possession of the money in 
the house; for the old man was well aware that, if philip were dead, 
his daughter would care little who had possession of, or what became 
of it. the thought that philip was about to take that money with him 
had almost turn the brain of the avaricious old man. he had been 
watch by amine, and she had seen him walk for hour mutter to 
himself, and not, as usual, attend to his profession. 

a few evenings after his return from amsterdam, philip, who had taken 
cold, complain of not being well. 

"not well!" cry the old man, start up; "let me see--yes, your 
pulse is very quick. amine, your poor husband is very ill. he must go 
to bed, and i will give him something which will do him good. i shall 
charge you nothing, philip--nothing at all." 

"i do not feel so very unwell, mynheer poots," reply philip; i have 
had a bad headache certainly." 

"yes, and you have fever also, philip, and prevention is better than 
cure; so go to bed, and take what i send you, and you will be well 
to-morrow." 

philip went upstairs, accompany by amine; and mynheer poot went 
into his own room to prepare the medicine. so soon as philip was in 
bed, amine went downstairs, and was met by her father, who put a 
powder into her hand to give to her husband, and then left the 
parlour. 

"god forgive me if i wrong my father," thought amine; "but i have my 
doubts. philip is ill, more so than he will acknowledge; and if he 
do not take some remedies, he may be worse--but my heart misgive 
me--i have a foreboding. yet surely he cannot be so diabolical 
wicked." 

amine examine the contents of the paper: it was a very small quantity 
of dark brown powder, and, by the directions of mynheer poots, to be 
given in a tumbler of warm wine. mynheer poot had offer to heat the 
wine. his return from the kitchen broke amine's meditations. 

"here is the wine, my child; now give him a whole tumbler of wine, and 
the powder, and let him be cover up warm, for the perspiration will 
soon burst out, and it must not be checked. watch him, amine, and keep 
the clothes on, and he will be well to-morrow morning." and mynheer 
poot quit the room, saying, "good-night, my child." 

amine pour out the powder into one of the silver mug upon the 
table, and then proceed to mix it up with the wine. her suspicion 
had, for the time, been remove by the kind tone of her father's 
voice. to do him justice as a medical practitioner, he appear always 
to be most careful of his patients. when amine mixed the powder, she 
examine and perceive that there was no sediment, and the wine was as 
clear as before. this was unusual, and her suspicion revived. 

"i like it not," said she; "i fear my father--god help me!--i hardly 
know what to do--i will not give it to philip. the warm wine may 
produce perspiration sufficient." 

amine paused, and again reflected. she had mixed the powder with so 
small a portion of wine that it did not fill a quarter of the cup; she 
put it on one side, fill another up to the brim with the warm wine, 
and then went up to the bedroom. 

on the landing-place she was met by her father, whom she supposed to 
have retired to rest. 

"take care you do not spill it, amine. that is right, let him have a 
whole cupful. stop, give it to me; i will take it to him myself." 

mynheer poot took the cup from amine's hands, and went into philip's 
room. 

"here, my son, drink this off, and you will be well," said mynheer 
poots, whose hand tremble so that he spilt the wine on the coverlet. 
amine, who watch her father, was more than ever pleased that she had 
not put the powder into the cup. philip rose on his elbow, drank off 
the wine, and mynheer poot then wish him good-night. 

"do not leave him, amine, i will see all right," said mynheer poots, 
as he left the room. and amine, who had intended to go down for the 
candle left in the parlour, remain with her husband, to whom she 
confide her feelings, and also the fact that she had not given him 
the powder. 

"i trust that you are mistaken, amine," reply philip, "indeed i 
feel sure that you must be. no man can be so bad as you suppose your 
father." 

"you have not live with him as i have; you have not seen what i have 
seen," reply amine. "you know not what gold will tempt people to do 
in this world--but, however, i may be wrong. at all events, you must 
go to sleep, and i shall watch you, dearest. pray do not speak--i feel 
i cannot sleep just now--i wish to read a little--i will lie down 
by-and-bye." 

philip made no further objections, and was soon in a sound sleep, and 
amine watch him in silence till midnight long had passed. 

"he breathe heavily," thought amine; "but had i given him that 
powder, who know if he had ever awoke again? my father is so deep 
skilled in the eastern knowledge, that i fear him. too often has he, 
i well know, for a purse well fill with gold, prepared the sleep of 
death. another would shudder at the thought; but he, who has dealt out 
death at the will of his employers, would scruple little to do so even 
to the husband of his own daughter; and i have watch him in his 
moods, and know his thought and wishes. what a foreboding of mishap 
has come over me this evening!--what a fear of evil! philip is ill, 
'tis true, but not so very ill. no! no! besides, his time is not yet 
come; he has his dreadful task to finish. i would it were morning. how 
sound he sleeps! and the dew is on his brow. i must cover him 
up warm, and watch that he remains so. some one knock at the 
entrance-door. now will they wake him. 'tis a summons for my father." 

amine left the room, and hasten downstairs. it was, as she supposed, 
a summons for mynheer poot to a woman taken in labour. 

"he shall follow you directly," said amine; "i will now call him up." 
amine went upstairs to the room where her father slept, and knocked; 
hearing no answer, as usual, she knock again. 

"my father is not use to sleep in this way," thought amine, when she 
found no answer to her second call. she open the door and went in. 
to her surprise, her father was not in bed. "strange," thought she; 
"but i do not recollect have heard his footstep coming up after he 
went down to take away the lights." and amine hasten to the parlour, 
where, stretch on the sofa, she discover her father apparently 
fast asleep; but to her call he gave no answer. "merciful heaven! is 
he dead?" thought she, approach the light to her father's face. 
yes, it was so! his eyes were fixed and glazed--his lower jaw had 
fallen. 

for some minutes, amine leant against the wall in a state of 
bewilderment; her brain whirled; at last she recover herself. 

"'tis to be prove at once," thought she, as she went up to the table, 
and look into the silver cup in which she had mixed the powder--it 
was empty! "the god of righteous hath punish him!" exclaim 
amine; "but, o! that this man should have been my father! yes! it is 
plain. frightened at his own wicked, damn intentions, he pour out 
more wine from the flagon, to blunt his feelings of remorse; and not 
knowing that the powder was still in the cup, he fill it up, and 
drank himself--the death he meant for another! for another!--and for 
whom? one wedded to his own daughter!--philip! my husband! wert thou 
not my father," continue amine, look at the dead body, "i would 
spit upon thee, and curse thee! but thou art punished, and may god 
forgive thee! thou poor, weak, wicked creature!" 

amine then left the room, and went upstairs, where she found philip 
still fast asleep, and in a profuse perspiration. most women would 
have awaken their husbands, but amine thought not of herself; philip 
was ill, and amine would not arouse him to agitate him. she sat down 
by the side of the bed, and with her hand pressed upon her forehead, 
and her elbow rest on her knees, she remain in deep thought 
until the sun had risen and pour his bright beam through the 
casement. 

she was rouse from her reflection by another summons at the door of 
the cottage. she hasten down to the entrance, but did not open the 
door. 

"mynheer poot is require immediately," said the girl, who was the 
messenger. 

"my good therese," reply amine, "my father has more need of 
assistance than the poor woman; for his travail in this world, i fear, 
is well over. i found him very ill when i went to call him, and he 
has not been able to quit his bed. i must now entreat you to do my 
message, and desire father seysen to come hither; for my poor father 
is, i fear, in extremity." 

"mercy on me!" reply therese. "is it so? fear not but i will do your 
bidding, mistress amine." 

the second knock had awaken philip, who felt that he was much 
better, and his headache had left him. he perceive that amine had not 
taken any rest that night, and he was about to expostulate with her, 
when she at once told him what had occurred. 

"you must dress yourself, philip," continue she, "and must assist me 
to carry up his body, and place it in his bed, before the arrival of 
the priest. god of mercy! had i given you that powder, my dearest 
philip--but let us not talk about it. be quick, for father seysen will 
be here soon." 

philip was soon dressed, and follow amine down into the parlour. the 
sun shone bright, and his ray were dart upon the haggard face of 
the old man, whose fist were clenched, and his tongue fixed between 
the teeth on one side of his mouth. 

"alas! this room appear to be fatal. how many more scene of horror 
are to pass within it?" 

"none, i trust," reply amine; "this is not, to my mind, the scene of 
horror. it was when that old man (now call away--and a victim of his 
own treachery) stood by your bedside, and with every mark of interest 
and kindness, offer you the cup--_that_ was the scene of horror," 
said amine, shuddering--"one which long will haunt me." 

"god forgive him! as i do," reply philip, lift up the body, and 
carry it up the stairs to the room which had been occupy by 
mynheer poots. 

"let it at least be supposed that he die in his bed, and that his 
death was natural," said amine. "my pride cannot bear that this 
should be known, or that i should be pointed at as the daughter of a 
murderer! o philip!" 

amine sat down, and burst into tears. 

her husband was attempt to console her, when father seysen knock 
at the door. philip hasten down to open it. 

"good morning, my son. how is the sufferer?" 

"he has cease to suffer, father." 

"indeed!" reply the good priest, with sorrow in his countenance; "am 
i then too late? yet have i not tarried." 

"he went off suddenly, father, in a convulsion," reply philip, 
leading the way upstairs. 

father seysen look at the body and perceive that his offices were 
needless, and then turn to amine, who had not yet checked her tears. 

"weep, my child, weep! for you have cause," said the priest. "the 
loss of a father's love must be a severe trial to a dutiful and 
affectionate child. but yield not too much to your grief, amine; you 
have other duties, other ties, my child--you have your husband." 

"i know it, father," reply amine; "still must i weep, for i was 
_his_ daughter." 

"did he not go to bed last night, then, that his clothes are still 
upon him? when did he first complain?" 

"the last time that i saw him, father," reply philip, "he came into 
my room, and gave me some medicine, and then he wish me good-night. 
upon a summons to attend a sick-bed, my wife went to call him, and 
found him speechless." 

"it has been sudden," reply the priest; "but he was an old man, and 
old men sink at once. were you with him when he died?" 

"i was not, sir," reply philip; "before my wife had summon me and 
i had dress myself, he had left this world." 

"i trust, my children, for a better." amine shuddered. "tell me, 
amine," continue the priest, "did he show sign of grace before 
he died? for you know full well that he has long been look on as 
doubtful in his creed, and little attentive to the rite of our holy 
church." 

"there are times, holy father," reply amine, "when even a sincere 
christian can be excused, even if he give no sign. look at his 
clench hands, witness the agony of death on his face, and could you, 
in that state, expect a sign?" 

"alas! 'tis but too true, my child; we must then hope for the best. 
kneel with me, my children, and let us offer up a prayer for the soul 
of the departed." 

philip and amine knelt with the priest, who pray fervently; and 
as they rose, they exchange a glance which fully reveal what was 
passing in the mind of each. 

"i will send the people to do their offices for the dead, and prepare 
the body for interment," said father seysen; "but it were as well not 
to say that he was dead before i arrived, or to let it be supposed 
that he was call away without receiving the consolation of our holy 
creed." 

philip motion his head in assent as he stood at the foot of the 
bed, and the priest departed. there had always been a strong feeling 
against mynheer poot in the village;--his neglect of all religious 
duties--the doubt whether he was even a member of the church--his 
avarice and extortion--had create for him a host of enemies; but, at 
the same time, his great medical skill, which was fully acknowledged, 
render him of importance. had it been known that his creed (if he 
had any) was mahometan, and that he had die in attempt to poison 
his son-in-law, it is certain that christian burial would have been 
refuse him, and the finger of scorn would have been pointed at his 
daughter. but as father seysen, when questioned, said, in a mild 
voice, that "he had departed in peace," it was presume that mynheer 
poot had die a good christian, although he had act little up to 
the tenet of christianity during his life. the next day the remains 
of the old man were consign to the earth with the usual rites; 
and philip and amine were not a little relieved in their mind at 
everything have pass off so quietly. 

it was not until after the funeral had taken place that philip, in 
company with amine, examine the chamber of his father-in-law. the 
key of the iron chest was found in his pocket; but philip had not yet 
look into this darling repository of the old man. the room was full 
of bottle and box of drugs, all of which were either thrown away, 
or, if the utility of them was known to amine, remove to a spare 
room. his table contained many drawers, which were now examined, 
and among the heterogeneous contents were many writings in 
arabic--probably prescriptions. box and papers were also found, with 
arabic character written upon them; and in the box which they first 
took up was a powder similar to that which mynheer poot had given to 
amine. there were many articles and writings which made it appear that 
the old man had dabble in the occult sciences, as they were practised 
at that period, and those they hasten to commit to the flames. 

"had all these been seen by father seysen!" observe amine, 
mournfully. "but here are some print papers, philip!" 

philip examine them, and found that they were acknowledgment of 
shares in the dutch east india company. 

"no, amine, these are money, or what is as good--these are eight 
shares in the company's capital, which will yield us a handsome income 
every year. i had no idea that the old man made such use of his money. 
i had some intention of do the same with a part of mine before i 
went away, instead of allow it to remain idle." 

the iron chest was now to be examined. when philip first open it, he 
imagine that it contained but little; for it was large and deep, and 
appear to be almost empty; but when he put his hand down to the 
bottom, he pull out thirty or forty small bags, the contents of 
which, instead of being silver guilders, were all coin of gold; there 
was only one large bag of silver money. but this was not all: several 
small box and packet were also discovered, which, when opened, were 
found to contain diamond and other precious stones. when everything 
was collected, the treasure appear to be of great value. 

"amine, my love, you have indeed brought me an unexpected dower," said 
philip. 

"you may well say _unexpected_" reply amine. "these diamond and 
jewel my father must have brought with him from egypt. and yet how 
penurious we were living until we came to this cottage! and with all 
this treasure he would have poison my philip for more! god forgive 
him!" 

have count the gold, which amount to nearly fifty thousand 
guilders, the whole was replaced, and they left the room. 

"i am a rich man," thought philip, after amine had left him; "but 
of what use are riches to me? i might purchase a ship and be my own 
captain, but would not the ship be lost? that certainly do not 
follow; but the chance are against the vessel; therefore i will have 
no ship. but is it right to sail in the vessel of other with this 
feeling?--i know not; this, however, i know, that i have a duty to 
perform, and that all our lives are in the hand of a kind providence, 
which call us away when he think fit. i will place most of my money 
in the shares of the company, and if i sail in their vessels, and they 
come to misfortune by meeting with my poor father, at least i shall 
be a common sufferer with the rest. and now to make my amine more 
comfortable." 

philip immediately made a great alteration in their style of living. 
two female servant were hired: the rooms were more comfortable 
furnished; and in everything in which his wife's comfort and 
convenience were concerned, he spare no expense. he wrote to 
amsterdam and purchase several shares in the company's stock. the 
diamond and his own money he still left in the hand of amine. in 
making these arrangement the two month pass rapid away, and 
everything was complete when philip again received his summons, by 
letter, to desire that he would join his vessel. amine would have 
wish philip to go out as a passenger instead of go as an officer, 
but philip prefer the latter, as otherwise he could give no reason 
for his voyage to india. 

"i know not why," observe philip, the evening before his departure, 
"but i do not feel as i did when i last went away; i have no 
foreboding of evil this time." 

"nor have i," reply amine; "but i feel as if you would be long away 
from me, philip; and is not that an evil to a fond and anxious wife?" 

"yes, love, it is; but--" 

"o yes, i know it is your duty, and you must go," reply amine, 
bury her face in his bosom. 

the next day philip part from his wife, who behave with more 
fortitude than on their first separation. "_all_ were lost, but _he_ 
was saved," thought amine. "i feel that he will return to me. god of 
heaven, thy will be done!" 

philip soon arrive at amsterdam; and have purchase many things 
which he thought might be advantageous to him in case of accident, to 
which he now look forward as almost certain, he embark on board 
the _batavia_, which was lie at single anchor, and ready for sea. 




chapter xii 


philip had not been long on board, ere he found that they were not 
likely to have a very comfortable passage; for the _batavia_ was 
charter to convey a large detachment of troops to ceylon and java, 
for the purpose of recruit and strengthen the company's forces 
at those places. she was to quit the fleet off madagascar, and run 
direct for the island of java; the number of soldier on board being 
presume sufficient to insure the ship against any attack or accident 
from pirate or enemies' cruisers. the _batavia_, moreover, mount 
thirty guns, and had a crew of seventy-five men. besides military 
stores, which form the principal part of her cargo, she had on board 
a large quantity of specie for the indian market. the detachment of 
soldier was embark when philip went on board, and in a few minutes 
the deck were so crowded that it was hardly possible to move. philip, 
who had not yet spoken to the captain, found out the first mate, 
and immediately enter upon his duty, with which, from his close 
application to it during his former voyage and passage home, he was 
much better acquaint than might have been imagined. 

in a short time all trace of hurry and confusion began to disappear, 
the baggage of the troops was stow away, and the soldier have 
been told off in parties, and station with their mess utensil 
between the gun of the main deck, room was thus afford for working 
the ship. philip show great activity as well as method in the 
arrangement proposed, and the captain, during a pause in his own 
arduous duties, said to him-- 

"i thought you were taking it very easy, mr vanderdecken, in not 
join the ship before, but, now you are on board, you are making up 
for lost time. you have done more during the forenoon than i could 
have expected. i am glad that you are come, though very sorry you were 
not here when we were stow the hold, which, i am afraid, is not 
arrange quite so well as it might be. mynheer struys, the first mate, 
has had more to do than he could well give attention to." 

"i am sorry that i should not have been here, sir," reply philip; 
"but i came as soon as the company sent me word." 

"yes, and as they know that you are a married man, and do not forget 
that you are a great shareholder, they would not trouble you too soon. 
i presume you will have the command of a vessel next voyage. in fact, 
you are certain of it, with the capital you have invest in their 
funds. i had a conversation with one of the senior accountant on the 
subject this very morning." 

philip was not very sorry that his money had been put out to such 
good interest, as to be the captain of a ship was what he earnest 
desired. he replied, that, "he certainly did hope to command a ship 
after the next voyage, when he trust that he should feel himself 
quite competent to the charge." 

"no doubt, no doubt, mr vanderdecken. i can see that clearly. you must 
be very fond of the sea." 

"i am," reply philip; "i doubt whether i shall ever give it up." 

"_never_ give it up! you think so now. you are young, active, and full 
of hope: but you will tire of it by-and-bye, and be glad to lay by for 
the rest of your days." 

"how many troops do we embark?" inquire philip. 

"two hundred and forty-five rank and file, and six officers. poor 
fellows! there are but few of them will ever return: nay, more than 
one-half will not see another birthday. it is a dreadful climate. i 
have landed three hundred men at that horrid hole, and in six months, 
even before i had sailed, there were not one hundred left alive." 

"it is almost murder to send them there," observe philip. 

"psha! they must die somewhere, and if they die a little sooner, what 
matter? life is a commodity to be bought and sold like any other. we 
send so much manufacture goods and so much money to barter for indian 
commodities. we also send out so much life, and it give a good return 
to the company." 

"but not to the poor soldiers, i am afraid." 

"no; the company buy it cheap and sell it dear," reply the captain, 
who walk forward. 

true, thought philip, they do purchase human life cheap, and make a 
rare profit of it, for without these poor fellow how could they hold 
their possession in spite of native and foreign enemies? for what a 
paltry and cheap annuity do these men sell their lives? for what a 
miserable pittance do they dare all the horrors of a most deadly 
climate, without a chance, a hope of return to their native land, 
where they might haply repair their exhaust energies, and take a 
new lease of life! good god! if these men may be thus heartless 
sacrifice to mammon, why should i feel remorse if, in the fulfilment 
of a sacred duty impose on me by him who deal with us as he think 
meet, a few mortal perish? not a sparrow falls to the ground without 
his knowledge, and it is for him to sacrifice or save. i am but the 
creature of his will, and i but follow my duty,--but obey the command 
of one whose ways are inscrutable. still, if for my sake this ship 
be also doomed, i cannot but wish that i had been appoint to some 
other, in which the waste of human life might have been less. 

it was not until a week after philip arrive on board that the 
_batavia_ and the remainder of the fleet were ready for sea. 

it would be difficult to analyse the feelings of philip vanderdecken 
on this his second embarkation. his mind was so continual direct 
to the object of his voyage, that although he attend to his 
religious duty, yet the business of life pass before him as a dream. 
assured of again meeting with the phantom ship, and almost equally 
assured that the meeting would be follow by some untoward event, in 
all probability by the sacrifice of those who sail with him, his 
thought prey upon him, and wore him down to a shadow. he hardly 
ever spoke, except in the execution of his duty. he felt like a 
criminal; as one who, by embark with them, had doom all around 
him to death, disaster, and peril; and when _one_ talk of his 
wife, and _another_ of his children--when they would indulge in 
anticipations, and canvass happy projects, philip would feel sick at 
heart, and would rise from the table and hasten to the solitude of the 
deck. at one time he would try to persuade himself that his senses had 
been work upon in some moment of excitement, that he was the victim 
of an illusion; at another he would call to mind all the past--he 
would feel its terrible reality--and then the thought would suggest 
itself that with this supernatural vision heaven had nothing to do; 
that it was but the work and jugglery of satan. but then the relic--by 
such means the devil would not have worked. a few days after he had 
sailed, he bitter repent that he had not state the whole of 
his circumstances to father seysen, and taken his advice upon the 
propriety of following up his search; but it was now too late; already 
was the good ship _batavia_ more than a thousand mile from the port 
of amsterdam, and his duty, whatever it might be, _must_ be fulfilled. 

as the fleet approach the cape, his anxiety increase to such a 
degree that it was remark by all who were on board. the captain and 
officer commanding the troops embarked, who all felt interested in 
him, vain attempt to learn the cause of his anxiety. philip would 
plead ill-health; and his haggard countenance and sunken eyes silent 
prove that he was under acute suffering. the major part of the night 
he pass on deck, strain his eyes in every quarter, and watch 
each change in the horizon, in anticipation of the appearance of the 
phantom ship; and it was not till the day dawn that he sought a 
perturb repose in his cabin. after a favourable passage, the fleet 
anchor to refresh at table bay, and philip felt some small relief, 
that up to the present time the supernatural visitation had not again 
occurred. 

as soon as the fleet had watered, they again made sail, and again 
did philip's agitation become perceptible. with a favour breeze, 
however, they round the cape, pass by madagascar, and arrive in 
the indian seas, when the _batavia_ part company with the rest of 
the fleet, which steer to cambroon and ceylon. "and now," thought 
philip, "will the phantom ship make her appearance. it has only wait 
till we should be left without a consort to assist us in distress." but 
the _batavia_ sail in a smooth sea and under a cloudless sky, and 
nothing was seen. in a few week she arrive off java, and, previous 
to enter the splendid road of batavia, hove-to for the night. this 
was the last night they would be under sail, and philip stir not 
from the deck, but walk to and fro, anxious wait for the 
morning. the morning broke--the sun rose in splendour, and the 
_batavia_ steer into the roads. before noon she was at anchor, and 
philip, with his mind relieved, hasten down to his cabin, and took 
that repose which he so much required. 

he awoke refreshed, for a great weight had been taken off his mind. 
"it do not follow, then," thought he, "that because i am on board 
the vessel therefore the crew are doom to perish; it do not follow 
that the phantom ship is to appear because i seek her. if so, i have 
no further weight upon my conscience. i seek her, it is true, and wish 
to meet with her; i stand, however, but the same chance as others; and 
it is no way certain that because i seek, i am sure to find. that she 
bring disaster upon all she meets, may be true, but not that i bring 
with me the disaster of meeting her. heaven i thank thee! now i can 
prosecute my search without remorse." 

philip, restore to composure by these reflections, went on deck. the 
debark of the troops was already taking place, for they were as 
anxious to be relieved from their long confinement as the seamen were 
to regain a little space and comfort. he survey the scene. the town 
of batavia lay about one mile from them, low on the beach; from behind 
it rose a lofty chain of mountains, brilliant with verdure, and, here 
and there, people with country seats, belong to the residents, 
delightful embosomed in forest of trees. the panorama was 
beautiful; the vegetation was luxuriant, and, from its vivid green, 
refreshing to the eye. near to the town lay large and small vessels, 
a forest of masts; the water in the bay was of a bright blue, and 
ripple to a soft breeze; here and there small islet (like tuft of 
fresh verdure) broke the uniform of the water-line; even the town 
itself was pleasing to the eye, the white colour of the house being 
oppose to the dark foliage of the trees, which grew in the gardens, 
and line the streets. 

"can it be possible," observe philip to the captain of the _batavia_, 
who stood by him, "that this beautiful spot can be so unhealthy? i 
should form a very different opinion from its appearance." 

"even," reply the captain, "as the venomous snake of the country 
start up from among its flowers, so do death stalk about in this 
beautiful and luxuriant landscape. do you feel better, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

"much better," reply philip. 

"still, in your enfeeble state, i should recommend you to go on 
shore." 

"i shall avail myself of your permission, with thanks. how long shall 
we stay here?" 

"not long, as we are ordered to run back. our cargo is all ready for 
us, and will be on board soon after we have discharged." 

philip took the advice of his captain; he had no difficulty in finding 
himself received by a hospitable merchant, who had a house at some 
distance from the town, and in a healthy situation. there he remain 
two months, during which he re-established his health, and then 
re-embarked a few days previous to the ship being ready for sea. the 
return voyage was fortunate, and in four month from the date of their 
quit batavia, they found themselves abreast of st helena; for 
vessels, at that period, generally made what is call the eastern 
passage, running down the coast of africa, instead of keeping towards 
the america shores. again they had pass the cape without meeting 
with the phantom ship; and philip was not only in excellent health, 
but in good spirits. as they lay becalmed, with the island in sight, 
they observe a boat pull towards them, and in the course of three 
hour she arrive on board. the crew were much exhaust from have 
been two days in the boat, during which time they had never cease 
pull to gain the island. they state themselves to be the crew of a 
small dutch indiaman, which had founder at sea two days before; she 
had start one of her planks, and fill so rapid that the men had 
hardly time to save themselves. they consist of the captain, mates, 
and twenty men belong to the ship, and an old portugal catholic 
priest, who had been sent home by the dutch governor, for have 
oppose the dutch interests in the island of japan. he had live with 
the natives, and been secrete by them for some time, as the japan 
government was equally desirous of capture him, with the intention 
of taking away his life. eventually he found himself oblige to throw 
himself into the arms of the dutch, as being the less cruel of his 
enemies. 

the dutch government decided that he should be sent away from the 
country; and he had, in consequence, been put on board of the indiaman 
for a passage home. by the report of the captain and crew, one person 
only had been lost; but he was a person of consequence, have for 
many years held the situation of president in the dutch factory at 
japan. he was return to dutch with the riches which he had 
amassed. by the evidence of the captain and crew, he had insisted, 
after he was put into the boat, upon go back to the ship to secure 
a casket of immense value, contain diamond and other precious 
stones, which he had forgotten; they added, that while they were 
wait for him the ship sudden plunge her bowsprit under, and 
went down head foremost, and that it was with difficulty they had 
themselves escaped. they had wait for some time to ascertain if he 
would rise again to the surface, but he appear no more. 

"i knew that something would happen," observe the captain of the 
sunken vessel, after he had been sitting a short time in the cabin 
with philip and the captain of the _batavia_; "we saw the fiend or 
devil's ship, as they call her, but three days before." 

"what! the _flying dutchman_, as they name her?" ask philip. 

"yes; that, i believe, is the name they give her," reply the 
captain. "i have often heard of her; but it never was my fate to fall 
in with her before, and i hope it never will be again; for i am a 
ruin man, and must begin the world afresh." 

"i have heard of that vessel," observe the captain of the _batavia_. 
"pray, how did she appear to you?" 

"why, the fact is, i did not see anything but the loom of her hull," 
reply the other. "it was very strange; the night was fine, and the 
heaven clear; we were under top-gallant sails, for i do not carry on 
during the night, or else we might have put the royal on her; she 
would have carry them with the breeze. i had turn in, when about 
two o'clock in the morning the mate call me to come on deck. i 
demand what was the matter, and he reply he could hardly tell, but 
that the men were much frightened, and that there was a ghost ship, as 
the sailor term it, in sight. i went on deck; all the horizon was 
clear, but on our quarter was a sort of fog, round as a ball, and not 
more than two cables' length from us. we were go about four knot 
and a half free, and yet we could not escape from this mist. 'look 
there,' said the mate. 'why, what the devil can it be?' said i, 
rubbing my eyes. 'no bank up to windward, and yet a fog in the middle 
of a clear sky, with a fresh breeze, and with water all around it;' 
for you see the fog did not cover more than a dozen cables' length, as 
we could perceive by the horizon on each side of it. 'hark, sir!' 
said the mate--'they are speak again.' 'speaking!' said i, and i 
listened; and from out this ball of fog i heard voices. at last, one 
cry out, 'keep a sharp look-out forward, d'ye hear?' 'ay, ay, sir!' 
reply another voice. 'ship on the starboard bow, sir.' 'very well; 
strike the bell there forward.' and then we heard the bell toll. 'it 
must be a vessel,' said i to the mate. 'not of this world, sir,' 
reply he. 'hark!' 'a gun ready forward.' 'ay, ay, sir!' was now 
heard out of the fog, which appear to near us; 'all ready, sir.' 
'fire!' the report of the gun sound on our ear like thunder, and 
then--" 

"well, and then?" said the captain of the _batavia_, breathless. 

"and then," reply the other captain, solemnly, "the fog and all 
disappear as if by magic, the whole horizon was clear, and there was 
nothing to be seen." 

"is it possible?" 

"there are twenty men on deck to tell the story," reply the captain. 
"and the old catholic priest to boot, for he stood by me the whole 
time i was on deck. the men said that some accident would happen; and 
in the morning watch, on sound the well, we found four feet water. 
we took to the pumps, but it gain upon us, and we went down, as i 
have told you. the mate say that the vessel is well known--it is 
call the _flying dutchman_." 

philip made no remark at the time, but he was much pleased at what 
he had heard. "if," thought he, "the phantom ship of my poor father 
appear to other as well as to me, and they are sufferers, my being 
on board can make no difference. i do but take my chance of fall 
in with her, and do not risk the lives of those who sail in the same 
vessel with me. now my mind is relieved, and i can prosecute my search 
with a quiet conscience." 

the next day philip took an opportunity of making the acquaintance of 
the catholic priest, who spoke dutch and other language as well as 
he did portuguese. he was a venerable old man, apparently about sixty 
years of age, with a white flowing beard, mild in his demeanour, and 
very pleasing in his conversation. 

when philip kept his watch that night, the old man walk with him, 
and it was then, after a long conversation, that philip confide to 
him that he was of the catholic persuasion. 

"indeed, my son, that is unusual in a hollander." 

"it is so," reply philip; "nor is it known on board--not that i am 
ashamed of my religion, but i wish to avoid discussion." 

"you are prudent, my son. alas! if the reform religion produce no 
better fruit than what i have witness in the east, it is little 
better than idolatry." 

"tell me, father," said philip--"they talk of a miraculous vision--of 
a ship not manned by mortal men. did you see it?" 

"i saw what other saw," reply the priest; "and certainly, as far as 
my senses would enable me to judge, the appearance was most unusual--i 
may say supernatural; but i had heard of this phantom ship before, and 
moreover that its appearance was the precursor of disaster. so did it 
prove in our case, although, indeed, we had one on board, now no more, 
whose weight of guilt was more than sufficient to sink any vessel; 
one, the swallow up of whom, with all that wealth from which he 
anticipate such enjoyment in his own country, has manifest that 
the almighty will, even in this world, sometimes wreak just and awful 
retribution on those who have merit his vengeance." 

"you refer to the dutch president who went down with the ship when it 
sank." 

"i do; but the tale of that man's crime is long; to-morrow night i 
will walk with you, and narrate the whole. peace be with you, my son, 
and good-night." 

the weather continue fine, and the _batavia_ hove-to in the evening 
with the intention of anchor the next morning in the roadstead of 
st helena. philip, when he went on deck to keep the middle watch, 
found the old priest at the gangway wait for him. in the ship all 
was quiet; the men slumber between the guns, and philip, with his 
new acquaintance, went aft, and seating themselves on a hencoop, the 
priest commence as follows:-- 

"you are not, perhaps, aware that the portuguese, although anxious to 
secure for themselves a country discover by their enterprise and 
courage, and the possession of which, i fear, has cost them many 
crimes, have still never lost sight of one point dear to all good 
catholics--that of spread wide the true faith, and plant the 
banner of christ in the regions of idolatry. some of our countrymen 
have been wreck on the coast, we were made acquaint with the 
island of japan; and seven years afterwards, our holy and blessed st 
francis, now with god, landed on the island of ximo, where he remain 
for two years and five months, during which he preach our religion 
and made many converts. he afterwards embark for china, his original 
destination, but was not permit to arrive there; he die on his 
passage, and thus closed his pure and holy life. after his death, 
notwithstanding the many obstacle thrown in our way by the priest of 
idolatry, and the persecution with which they occasional visit 
the member of our faith, the convert to our holy religion increase 
greatly in the japan islands. the religion spread fast, and many 
thousand worship the true god. 

"after a time, the dutch form a settlement at japan, and when they 
found that the japan christian around the factory would deal 
only with the portuguese, in whom they had confidence, they became our 
enemies; and the man of whom we have spoken, and who at that period 
was the head of the dutch factory, determined, in his lust for gold, 
to make the christian religion a source of suspicion to the emperor 
of the country, and thus to ruin the portugal and their adherents. 
such, my son, was the conduct of one who professed to have embrace 
the reform religion as being of greater purity than our own. 

"there was a japan lord of great wealth and influence who live 
near us, and who, with two of his sons, had embrace christianity, and 
had been baptised. he had two other sons, who live at the emperor's 
court. this lord had made us a present of a house for a college and 
school of instruction: on his death, however, his two son at court, 
who were idolaters, insist upon our quit this property. we 
refused, and thus afford the dutch principal an opportunity of 
inflame these young noblemen against us: by this means he persuade 
the japan emperor that the portugal and christian had form a 
conspiracy against his life and throne; for, be it observed, that when 
a dutchman was ask if he was a christian, he would reply, 'no; i am 
a hollander.' 

"the emperor, believe in this conspiracy, gave an immediate order 
for the extirpate of the portuguese, and then of all the japan 
who had embrace the christian faith. he raise an army for this 
purpose, and gave the command of it to the young noblemen i have 
mentioned, the son of the lord who had given us the college. the 
christians, aware that resistance was their only chance, flew to arms, 
and chose as their general the other two son of the japan lord, 
who, with their father, had embrace christianity. thus were the two 
army command by four brothers, two on the one side and two on the 
other. 

"the christian army amount to more than 40,000 men, but of this the 
emperor was not aware, and he sent a force of about 25,000 to conquer 
and exterminate them. the army met, and after an obstinate combat 
(for the japan are very brave) the victory was on the part of the 
christians, and, with the exception of a few who save themselves in 
the boats, the army of the emperor was cut to pieces. 

"this victory was the occasion of making more converts, and our army 
was soon increase to upwards of 50,000 men. on the other hand, the 
emperor, perceive that his troops had been destroyed, ordered new 
levy and raise a force of 150,000 men, give directions to his 
general to give no quarter to the christians, with the exception 
of the two young lords who command them, whom he wish to secure 
alive, that he might put them to death by slow torture. all offer of 
accommodation were refused, and the emperor took the field in person. 
the army again met, and on the first day's battle the victory was on 
the part of the christians; still they had to lament the loss of one 
of their generals, who was wound and taken prisoner, and, no quarter 
have been given, their loss was severe. 

"the second day's combat was fatal to the christians. their general 
was killed; they were overpower by numbers, and fell to a man. the 
emperor then attack the camp in the rear, and put to the sword every 
old man, woman, and child. on the field of battle, in the camp, and by 
subsequent torture, more than 60,000 christian perished. but this 
was not all; a rigorous search for christian was made throughout the 
island for many years; and they were, when found, put to death by 
the most cruel torture. it was not until fifteen years ago that 
christianity was entire rooted out of the japan empire, and 
during a persecution of somewhat more than sixteen years, it is 
supposed that upwards of 400,000 christian were destroyed; and all 
this slaughter, my son, was occasion by the falsehood and avarice 
of that man who met his just punishment but a few days ago. the dutch 
company, pleased with his conduct, which procure for them such 
advantages, continue him for many years as the president of their 
factory at japan. he was a young man when he first went there, but his 
hair was grey when he thought of return to his own country. he had 
amass immense wealth,--immense, indeed, must it have been to have 
satisfy avarice such as his! all has now perish with him, and he 
has been summon to his account. reflect a little, my son. is it 
not better to follow up our path of duty, to eschew the riches and 
pleasure of this world, and, at our summons hence, to feel that we 
have hope of bliss hereafter?" 

"most true, holy father," reply philip, musing. 

"i have but a few years to live," continue the old man, "and god 
know i shall quit this world without reluctance." 

"and so could i," reply philip. 

"_you_, my son!--no. you are young, and should be full of hopes. you 
have still to do your duty in that station to which it shall please 
god to call you." 

"i know that i have a duty to perform," reply philip. "father, the 
night air is too keen for one so age as you. retire to your bed, and 
leave me to my watch and my own thoughts." 

"i will, my son! may heaven guard you! take an old man's blessing. 
good-night." 

"good-night," reply philip, glad to be alone. "shall i confess all 
to him?" thought philip. "i feel i could confess to him.--but no. i 
would not to father seysen,--why to him? i should put myself in his 
power, and he might order me--no, no! my secret is my own. i need no 
advisers." and philip pull out the relic from his bosom, and put it 
reverent to his lips. 

the _batavia_ wait a few days at st helena, and then continue her 
voyage. in six week philip again found himself at anchor in the 
zuyder zee, and have the captain's permission, he immediately set 
off for his own home, taking with him the old portugal priest 
mathias, with whom he had form a great intimacy, and to whom he had 
offer his protection for the time he might wish to remain in the low 
countries. 




chapter xiii 


"far be it from me to wish to annoy you, my son," said father mathias, 
as with difficulty he kept pace with the rapid stride of philip, who 
was now within a quarter of a mile of his home; "but still recollect 
that this is but a transitory world, and that much time has elapse 
since you quit this spot. for that reason i would fain desire you, 
if possible, to check these bound aspiration after happiness, 
these joyful anticipation in which you have indulge since we quit 
the vessel. i hope and trust in the mercy of god, that all will be 
right, and that in a few minutes you will be in the arms of your 
much-loved wife: but still, in proportion as you allow your hope 
to be raised, so will you inevitable have them crush should 
disappointment cross your path. at flush we were told that there 
has been a dreadful visitation in this land, and death may not have 
spare even one so young and fair." 

"let us haste on, father," reply philip. "what you say is true, and 
suspense become most dreadful." 

philip increase his speed, leave the old man to follow him: he 
arrive at the bridge with its wooden gate. it was then about seven 
o'clock in the morning, for they had cross the scheldt at the dawn 
of day. 

philip observe that the lower shutter were still closed. 

"they might have been up and stirring before this," thought he, as he 
put his hand to the latch of the door. it was not fastened. philip 
entered! there was a light burning in the kitchen; he pushed open 
the door, and beheld a maid-servant leaning back in her chair in a 
profound sleep. before he had time to go in and awaken her, he heard a 
voice at the top of the stairs, saying, "marie, is that the doctor?" 

philip wait no longer; in three bounds he was on the landing-place 
above, and brush by the person who had spoken, he open the door 
of amine's room. 

a floating wick in a tumbler of oil gave but a faint and glimmer 
light; the curtains of the bed were drawn, and by the side of it 
was kneel a figure that was well known to philip--that of father 
seysen. philip recoiled; the blood retreat to his heart; he could 
not speak: pant for breath, he support himself against the wall, 
and at last vent his agony of feeling by a deep groan, which arouse 
the priest, who turn his head, and perceive who it was, rose from 
his knees, and extend his hand in silence. 

"she is dead, then!" at last exclaim philip. 

"no, my son, not dead; there is yet hope. the crisis is at hand; 
in one more hour her fate will be decided: then either will she be 
restore to your arms, or follow the many hundred whom this fatal 
epidemic has consign to the tomb." 

father seysen then led philip to the side of the bed, and withdrew the 
curtain. amine lay insensible, but breathing heavily; her eyes were 
closed. philip seize her burning hand, knelt down, pressed it to his 
lips, and burst into a paroxysm of tears. as soon as he had become 
somewhat composed, father seysen persuade him to rise and sit with 
him by the side of the bed. 

"this is a melancholy sight to witness at your return, philip," said 
he; "and to you who are so ardent, so impetuous, it must be doubly so; 
but god's will be done. remember there is yet hope--not strong hope, i 
grant, but still there is hope, for so told me the medical man who has 
attend her, and who will return, i expect, in a few minutes. her 
disease is a typhus fever, which has swept off whole family within 
these last two months, and still rage violently; fortunate, indeed, 
is the house which has to mourn but one victim. i would that you had 
not arrive just now, for it is a disease easily communicated. many 
have flee from the country for security. to add to our misfortunes, 
we have suffer from the want of medical advice, for physician and 
patient have been swept away together." 

the door was now slow opened, and a tall, dark man, in a brown 
cloak, holding to his nose a sponge saturate with vinegar, enter 
the room. he bowed his head to philip and the priest, and then went 
to the bedside. for a minute he held his finger to the pulse of the 
sufferer, then lay down her arm, he put his hand to her forehead, 
and cover her up with the bedclothes. he hand to philip the sponge 
and vinegar, making a sign that he should use it, and beckon father 
seysen out of the room. 

in a minute the priest returned. "i have received his directions, my 
son; he think that she may be saved. the clothes must be kept on her, 
and replace if she should throw them off; but everything will depend 
upon quiet and calm after she recover her senses." 

"surely we can promise her that," reply philip. 

"it is not the knowledge of your return, or even the sight of you, 
which alarm me. joy seldom kills, even when the shock is great, but 
there are other cause for uneasiness." 

"what are they, holy father?" 

"philip, it is now thirteen days that amine has raved, and during 
that period i have seldom quit her but to perform the duty of my 
office to other who require it. i have been afraid to leave her, 
philip, for in her ravings she has told such a tale, even unconnected 
as it has been, as has thrill my soul with horror. it evidently has 
long lain heavy on her mind, and must retard her recovery. philip 
vanderdecken, you may remember that i would once have had the secret 
from you--the secret which forced your mother to her tomb, and which 
now may send your young wife to follow her, for it is evident that she 
know all. is it not true?" 

"she do know all," reply philip, mournfully. 

"and she has in her delirium told all. nay, i trust she has told more 
than all; but of that we will not speak now: watch her, philip. i will 
return in half an hour, for by that time, the doctor tell me, the 
symptom will decide whether she will return to reason, or be lost to 
you for ever." 

philip whisper to the priest that he had been accompany by father 
mathias, who was to remain as his guest, and request him to explain 
the circumstances of his present position to him, and see that he was 
attend to. father seysen then quit the room, when philip sat down 
by the bedside, and drew back the curtain. 

perhaps there is no situation in life so agonising to the feelings 
as that in which philip was now placed. his joyful emotion when 
expect to embrace in health and beauty the object of his warmest 
affections, and of his continual thought during his long absence, 
sudden checked by disappointment, anxiety, and grief, at finding 
her lie emaciated, changed, corrupt with disease--her mind 
overthrown--her eyes unconscious of his presence--her existence 
hanging by a single hair--her frame prostrate before the king of 
terror who hover over her with uplift dart, and long for the fiat 
which should permit him to pierce his unconscious victim. 

"alas!" thought philip, "is it thus we meet, amine? truly did father 
mathia advise me, as i hurried so impetuous along, not (as i fondly 
thought) to happiness, but to misery. god of heaven! be merciful and 
forgive me. if i have love this angel creature of thy formation, 
even more than i have thee--spare her--good heaven, spare her--or i am 
lost for ever." 

philip cover up his face, and remain for some time in prayer. he 
then bent over his amine, and impress a kiss upon her burning lips. 
they were burning, but still there was moisture upon them, and philip 
perceive that there was also moisture on her forehead. he felt her 
hand, and the palm of it was moist; and careful covering her with 
the bedclothes, he watch her with anxiety and hope. 

in a quarter of an hour he had the delight of perceive that amine 
was in a profuse perspiration; gradual her breathing became less 
heavy, and instead of the passive state in which she had remained, she 
moved, and became restless. philip watched, and replace the clothes 
as she threw them off, until she at last appear to have fallen into 
a profound and sweet sleep. shortly after, father seysen and the 
physician made their appearance. philip stated, in few words, what 
had occurred. the doctor went to the bedside, and in half a minute 
returned. 

"your wife is spare to you, mynheer, but it is not advisable that she 
should see you so unexpectedly; the shock may be too great in her 
weak state; she must be allow to sleep as long as possible; on her 
awake she will have return to reason. you must leave her then to 
father seysen." 

"may i not remain in the room until she wakes? i will then hasten away 
unobserved." 

"that will be useless; the disease is contagious, and you have been 
here too long already. remain below; you must change your clothes, and 
see that they prepare a bed for her in another room, to which she must 
be transport as soon as you think she can bear it; and then 
let these window be thrown open, that the room may be properly 
ventilated. it will not do to have a wife just rescue from the 
jaws of death run the risk of fall a sacrifice to the attention 
necessary to a sick husband." 

philip perceive the prudence of this advice, and quit the room 
with the medical man, he went and change his clothes, and then join 
father mathias, whom he found in the parlour below. 

"you were right, father," said philip, throw himself on the sofa. 

"i am old and suspicious, you are young and buoyant, philip; but i 
trust all may yet be well." 

"i trust so too," reply philip. he then remain silent and absorb 
in thought, for now that the imminent danger was over, he was 
reflect upon what father seysen had communicate to him relative 
to amine's have reveal the secret whilst in a state of mental 
aberration. the priest perceive that his mind was occupied, did not 
interrupt him. an hour had thus passed, when father seysen enter the 
room. 

"return thanks to heaven, my son. amine has awakened, and is perfectly 
sensible and collected. there is now little doubt of her recovery. she 
has taken the restorative ordered by the doctor, though she was so 
anxious to repose once more, that she could hardly be persuade to 
swallow it. she is now again fast asleep, and watch by one of the 
maidens, and in all probability will not move for many hours; but 
every moment of such sleep is precious, and she must not be disturbed. 
i will now see to some refreshment, which must be needful to us all. 
philip, you have not introduce me to your companion, who, i perceive, 
is of my own calling." 

"forgive me, sir," reply philip; "you will have great pleasure in 
making acquaintance with father mathias, who has promise to reside 
with me, i trust, for some time. i will leave you together, and see to 
the breakfast being prepared, for the delay of which i trust father 
mathia will accept my apology." 

philip then left the room, and went into the kitchen. have ordered 
what was requisite, to be taken into the parlour, he put on his hat 
and walk out of the house. he could not eat; his mind was in a state 
of confusion; the event of the morning had been too harass and 
exciting, and he felt as if the fresh air was necessary to his 
existence. 

as he proceeded, careless in which direction, he met many with whom he 
had been acquainted, and from whom he had received condolence at his 
supposed bereavement, and congratulations when they learnt from him 
that the danger was over; and from them he also learnt how fatal had 
been the pestilence. 

not one-third of the inhabitant of terneuse and the surrounding 
country remain alive, and those who had recover were in a state 
of exhaustion which prevent them from return to their accustomed 
occupations. they had combat disease, but remain the prey of 
misery and want; and philip mental vow that he would appropriate 
all his savings to the relief of those around him. it was not until 
more than two hour had pass away that philip return to the 
cottage. 

on his arrival he found that amine still slumbered, and the two 
priest were in conversation below. 

"my son," said father seysen, "let us now have a little explanation. 
i have had a long conference with this good father, who hath much 
interested me with his account of the extension of our holy religion 
among the pagans. he hath communicate to me much to rejoice at and 
much to grieve for; but, among other question put to him, i have (in 
consequence of what i have learnt during the mental alienation of your 
wife) interrogate him upon the point of a supernatural appearance of 
a vessel in the eastern seas. you observe, philip, that your secret is 
known to me, or i could not have put that question. to my surprise, he 
hath state a visitation of the kind to which he was eye-witness, 
and which cannot reasonably be account for, except by supernatural 
interposition. a strange and certainly most awful visitation! philip, 
would it not be better (instead of leave me in a maze of doubt) that 
you now confide to us both all the fact connected with this strange 
history, so that we may ponder on them, and give you the benefit of 
the advice of those who are old than yourself, and who, by their 
calling may be able to decide more correct whether this supernatural 
power has been exercise by a good or evil intelligence?" 

"the holy father speak well, philip vanderdecken," observe mathias. 

"if it be the work of the almighty, to whom should you confide and by 
whom should you be guided, but by those who do his service on this 
earth? if of the evil one, to whom but to those whose duty and wish it 
is to counteract his baneful influence? and reflect, philip, that this 
secret may sit heavy on the mind of your cherish wife, and may bow 
her to the grave, as it did your (i trust) sainted mother. with you, 
and support by your presence, she may bear it well; but, recollect 
how many are the lonely days and nights that she must pass during your 
absence, and how much she must require the consolation and help of 
others. a secret like this must be as a gnawing worm, and, strong as 
she may be in courage, must shorten her existence, but for the support 
and the balm she may receive from the minister of our faith. it was 
cruel and selfish of you, philip, to leave her, a lone woman, to bear 
up against your absence, and at the same time oppress with so fatal 
a knowledge." 

"you have convinced me, holy father," reply philip. "i feel that 
i should, before this, have made you acquaint with this strange 
history. i will now state the whole of the circumstances which have 
occurred, but with little hope your advice can help me, in a case so 
difficult, and in a duty so peremptory, yet so perplexing." 

philip then enter into a minute detail of all that had pass from 
the few days previous to his mother's death, until the present time, 
and when he had concluded, he observed-- 

"you see, father, that i have bound myself by a solemn vow--that that 
vow has been record and accepted; and it appear to me that i have 
nothing now to do but to follow my peculiar destiny." 

"my son, you have told us strange and startle things--things not of 
this world--if you are not deceived. leave us now. father mathia and 
i will consult upon this serious matter, and when we are agreed, you 
shall know our decision." 

philip went upstairs to see amine; she was still in a deep sleep: he 
dismiss the servant, and watch by the bedside. for nearly two 
hour did he remain there, when he was summon down to meet the two 
priests. 

"we have had a long conversation, my son," said father seysen, "upon 
this strange, and perhaps supernatural occurrence. i say _perhaps_, 
for i would have reject the frenzied communications of your mother, 
as the imagine of a heated brain; and for the same reason i 
should have been equally inclined to suppose that the high state 
of excitement that you were in at the time of her death may have 
disorder your intellect; but, as father mathia positively asserts, 
that a strange, if not supernatural, appearance of a vessel did take 
place, on his passage home, and which appearance tally with and 
corroborate the legend, if so i may call it, to which you have 
given evidence; i say that it is not impossible but that it is 
supernatural." 

"recollect that the same appearance of the phantom ship has been 
permit to me and to many others," reply philip. 

"yes," reply father seysen; "but who is there alive of those who saw 
it but yourself? but that is of little importance. we will admit 
that the whole affair is not the work of man, but of a superior 
intelligence." 

"superior, indeed!" reply philip. "it is the work of heaven!" 

"that is a point not so easily admitted; there is another power as 
well as that which is divine--that of the devil!--the arch-enemy of 
mankind! but as that power, inferior to the power of god, cannot act 
without his permission, we may indirect admit that it is the will of 
heaven that such sign and portent should be allow to be given on 
certain occasions." 

"then our opinion are the same, good father." 

"nay, not exactly, my son. elymas, the sorcerer, was permit to 
practise his arts--gained from the devil--that it might be proved, by 
his overthrow and blindness, how inferior was his master to the divine 
ruler; but it do not therefore follow that sorcery generally was 
permitted. in this instance it may be true that the evil one has been 
permit to exercise his power over the captain and crew of that 
ship, and, as a warning against such heavy offences, the supernatural 
appearance of the vessel may be permitted. so far we are justifiable 
in believing. but the great question are, first, whether it be your 
father who is thus doomed? and, secondly, how far you are necessitate 
to follow up this mad pursuit, which, it appear to me--although it 
may end in your destruction--cannot possibly be the means of rescue 
your father from his state of unhallowed abeyance? do you understand 
me, philip?" 

"i certainly understand what you would say, father; but--" 

"answer me not yet. it is the opinion of this holy father as well 
as of myself, that, allow the fact to be as you suppose, the 
revelation made to you are not from on high, but the suggestion of 
the devil, to lead you into danger and ultimately to death; for if it 
were your task, as you suppose, why did not the vessel appear on this 
last voyage, and how can you (allowing that you met her fifty times) 
have communication with that, or with those which are but phantom and 
shadows, things not of this world? now what we propose is, that you 
should spend a proportion of the money left by your father, in masses 
for the repose of his soul, which your mother, in other circumstances, 
would certainly have done; and that have so done, you should remain 
quiet on shore until some new sign should be given to you which may 
warrant our supposing that you are really chosen for this strange 
pursuit?" 

"but my oath, father--my record vow?" 

"from that, my son, the holy church hath power to absolve you; and 
that absolution you shall receive. you have put yourself into our 
hands, and by our decision you must be guided. if there be wrong, it 
is we, and not you, who are responsible; but, at present, let us say 
no more. i will now go up, and so soon as your wife awakens, prepare 
her for your meeting." 

when father seysen had quit the room, father mathia debate 
the matter with philip. a long discussion ensued, in which similar 
argument were made use of by the priest; and philip, although not 
convinced, was, at least, doubtful and perplexed. he left the cottage. 

"a new sign--a corroborative sign," thought philip; "surely there have 
been sign and wonders enough. still it may be true that masses for 
my father's soul may relieve him from his state of torture. at all 
events, if they decide for me, i am not to blame. well then, let us 
wait for a new sign of the divine will--if so it must be;" and philip 
walk on, occasional thinking on the argument of father seysen, 
and often thinking of amine. 

it was now evening, and the sun was fast descending. philip wander 
on, until at last he arrive at the very spot where he had knelt down 
and pronounced his solemn vow. he recognise it; he look at the 
distant hills. the sun was just at the same height; the whole scene, 
the place, and the time were before him. again philip knelt down, took 
the relic from his bosom and kiss it. he watch the sun; he bowed 
himself to the earth. he wait for a sign; but the sun sank down and 
the veil of night spread over the landscape. there was no sign; and 
philip rose and walk home towards the cottage, more inclined than 
before to follow the suggestion of father seysen. 

on his return, philip went soft upstairs and enter the room of 
amine, whom he found awake and in conversation with the priests. the 
curtain was closed, and he was not perceived. with a beating heart he 
remain near the wall at the head of the bed. 

"reason to believe that my husband has arrived!" said amine, in a 
faint voice. "oh tell me, why so?" 

"his ship is arrived, we know; and one who had seen her said that all 
were well." 

"and why is he not here, then? who should bring the news of his return 
but himself? father seysen, either he has not arrive or he is here--i 
know he must be, if he is safe and well. i know my philip too well. 
say! is he not here? fear not, if you say yes; but if you say no, you 
kill me!" 

"he is here, amine," reply father seysen--"here and well." 

"o god! i thank you; but where is he? if he is here, he must be in 
this room, or else you deceive me. oh, this suspense is death!" 

"i am here," cry philip, opening the curtains. 

amine rose with a shriek, held out her arms, and then fell senseless 
back. in a few seconds, however, she was restored, and prove the 
truth of the good father's assertion, "that joy do not kill." 

we must now pass over the few days during which philip watch the 
couch of his amine, who rapid regain her strength. as soon as she 
was well enough to enter upon the subject, philip narrate all that 
had pass since his departure; the confession which he had made to 
father seysen, and the result. amine, too glad that philip should 
remain with her, add her persuasion to those of the priests, and, 
for some little time, philip talk no more of go to sea. 




chapter xiv 


six week had flown away, and amine, restore to health, wander over 
the country, hanging on the arm of her adore philip, or nestle by 
his side in their comfortable home. father mathia still remain 
their guest; the masses for the repose of the soul of vanderdecken had 
been paid for, and more money had been confide to the care of father 
seysen to relieve the suffering of the afflict poor. it may be 
easily supposed that one of the chief topic of conversation between 
philip and amine was the decision of the two priest relative to the 
conduct of philip. he had been absolve from his oath, but, at the 
same time that he submit to his clerical advisers, he was by no 
means satisfied. his love for amine, her wish for his remain 
at home, certainly add weight to the fiat of father seysen; but, 
although he in consequence obey it more willingly, his doubt of the 
propriety of his conduct remain the same. the argument of amine, 
who, now that she was support by the opinion of the priests, had 
become oppose to philip's departure; even her caresses, with which 
those argument were mingled, were effective but for the moment. no 
soon was philip left to himself, no soon was the question, for 
a time, dismissed, than he felt an inward accusation that he was 
neglect a sacred duty. amine perceive how often the cloud was 
upon his brow; she knew too well the cause, and constant did she 
recommence her argument and caresses, until philip forgot that there 
was aught but amine in the world. 

one morning, as they were seat upon a green bank pick the flower 
that blossom round them, and toss them away in pure listlessness, 
amine took the opportunity that she had often wait for, to enter 
upon a subject hitherto unmentioned. 

"philip," said she, "do you believe in dreams? think you that we may 
have supernatural communications by such means?" 

"of course we may," reply philip; "we have proof abundant of it in 
the holy writings." 

"why, then, do you not satisfy your scruple by a dream?" 

"my dearest amine, dream come unbidden; we cannot command or prevent 
them--" 

"we can command them, philip; say that you would dream upon the 
subject nearest to your heart, and you _shall_!" 

"i shall?" 

"yes! i have that power, philip, although i have not spoken of it. 
i had it from my mother, with much more that of late i have never 
thought of. you know, philip, i never say that which is not. i tell 
you, that, if you choose, you shall dream upon it." 

"and to what good, amine? if you have power to make me dream, that 
power must be from somewhere." 

"it is, of course: there are agency you little think of, which, in 
my country, are still call into use. i have a charm, philip, which 
never fails." 

"a charm, amine! do you, then, deal in sorcery? for such powers cannot 
be from heaven." 

"i cannot tell. i only know the power is given." 

"it must be from the devil, amine." 

"and why so, philip? may i not use the argument of your own priests, 
who say, 'that the power of the devil is only permit to be use 
by divine intelligence, and that it cannot be use without that 
permission?' allow it then to be sorcery, or what you please, unless 
by heaven permitted, it would fail. but i cannot see why we should 
suppose that it is from an evil source. we ask for a warning in a 
dream to guide our conduct in doubtful circumstances. surely the evil 
one would rather lead us wrong than right!" 

"amine, we may be warn in a dream, as the patriarch were of old; 
but to use mystic or unholy charm to procure a vision, is making a 
compact with the devil." 

"which compact the devil could not fulfil if not permit by a higher 
power. philip, your reasoning is false. we are told that, by certain 
means, duly observed, we may procure the dream we wish. our 
observance of these means is certainly the least we can attend to, to 
prove our sincerity. forgive me, philip, but are not observance as 
necessary in your religion--which i have embraced? are we not told 
that the omission of the mere ceremony of water to the infant will 
turn all future chance of happiness to misery eternal?" 

philip answer not for some time. "i am afraid, amine," said he, at 
last, in a low tone; "i--" 

"i fear nothing, philip, when my intentions are good," reply amine. 
"i follow certain means to obtain an end. what is that end? it is 
to find out (if possible) what may be the will of heaven in this 
perplex case. if it should be through the agency of the devil--what 
then? he become my servant, and not my master; he is permit by 
heaven to act against himself;" and amine's eyes dart fire, as she 
thus bold express herself. 

"did your mother often exercise her art?" inquire philip, after a 
pause. 

"not to my knowledge; but it was said that she was most expert. she 
die young (as you know), or i should have known much more. think 
you, philip, that this world is solely people by such dross as 
we are?--things of clay--perishable and corruptible? lords over 
beasts--and ourselves but little better. have you not, from your 
own sacred writings, repeated acknowledgment and proof of higher 
intelligence mix up with mankind, and acting here below? why 
should what was then, not be now! and what more harm is there to apply 
for their aid now, than a few thousand years ago? why should you 
suppose that they were permit on the earth then--and not permit 
now? what has become of them? have they perished? have they been 
ordered back--to where--to heaven? if to heaven--the world and mankind 
have been left to the mercy of the devil and his agents. do you 
suppose that we, poor mortals, have been thus abandoned? i tell you 
plainly, i think not. we no long have the communications with 
those intelligence that we once had, because, as we become more 
enlightened, we become more proud, and seek them not; but that they 
still exist--a host of good against a host of evil, invisible oppose 
each other--is my conviction. but, tell me, philip, do you in your 
conscience believe that all that has been reveal to you is a mere 
dream of the imagination?" 

"i do not believe so, amine: you know well i wish i could." 

"then is my reasoning proved: for if such communications can be made 
to you, why cannot others? you cannot tell by what agency; your 
priest say it is that of the evil one; you think it is from on high. 
by the same rule, who is to decide from whence the dream shall come?" 

"'tis true, amine; but are you certain of your power?" 

"certain of this: that if it please superior intelligence to 
communicate with you, _that_ communication may be rely upon. either 
you will not dream, but pass away the hour in deep sleep, or what you 
dream will be connected with the question at issue." 

"then, amine, i have made up my mind--i will dream: for at present 
my mind is rack by contend and perplex doubts. i would know 
whether i am right or wrong. this night your art shall be employed." 

"not this night, nor yet to-morrow night, philip. think you one moment 
that, in propose this, i serve you against my own wishes? i feel as 
if the dream will decide against me, and that you will be command 
to return to your duty; for i tell you honestly, i think not with the 
priests; but i am your wife, philip, and it is my duty that you should 
not be deceived. have the means, as i suppose, to decide your 
conduct, i offer them. promise me that, if i do this, you will grant 
me a favour which i shall ask as my reward." 

"it is promised, amine, without its being known," reply philip, 
rising from the turf; "and now let us go home." 

we observe that philip, previous to his sailing in the _batavia_, had 
invest a large proportion of his funds in dutch east india stock: 
the interest of the money was more than sufficient for the wants of 
amine, and, on his return, he found that the funds left in her charge 
had accumulated. after pay to father seysen the sum for the 
masses, and for the relief of the poor, there was a considerable 
residue, and philip had employ this in the purchase of more shares 
in the india stock. 

the subject of their conversation was not renewed. philip was rather 
averse to amine practise those mystical arts, which, if known to the 
priests, would have obtain for her, in all probability, the anathema 
of the church. he could not but admire the bold and power of 
amine's reasonings, but still he was averse to reduce them into 
practice. the third day had pass away, and no more had been said 
upon the subject. 

philip retired to bed, and was soon fast asleep; but amine slept not. 
so soon as she was convinced that philip would not be awakened, she 
slip from the bed and dress herself. she left the room, and in a 
quarter of an hour returned, bring in her hand a small brazier of 
light charcoal, and two small pieces of parchment, roll up and 
fixed by a knot to the centre of a narrow fillet. they exactly 
resemble the philactery that were once worn by the jewish nation, 
and were similarly applied. one of them she gently bound upon the 
forehead of her husband, and the other upon his left arm. she threw 
perfume into the brazier, and as the form of her husband was becoming 
indistinct from the smoke which fill the room, she mutter a few 
sentences, wave over him a small sprig of some shrub which she held 
in her white hand, and then close the curtains, and remove the 
brazier she sat down by the side of the bed. 

"if there be harm," thought amine, "at least the deed is not his--'tis 
mine; they cannot say that he has practised arts that are unlawful 
and forbidden by his priests. on my head be it!" and there was a 
contemptuous curl on amine's beautiful arch lip, which did not say 
much for her devotion to her new creed. 

morning dawned, and philip still slumbered. "'tis enough," said amine, 
who had been watch the rising of the sun, as she beheld his upper 
limb appear above the horizon. again she wave her arm over philip, 
holding the sprig in her hand; and cried, "philip, awake!" 

philip start up, open his eyes, and shut them again to avoid the 
glare of the broad daylight, rest upon his elbow, and appear to be 
collect his thoughts. 

"where am i?" exclaim he. "in my own bed? yes!" he pass his hand 
across his forehead, and felt the scroll. "what is this?" continue 
he, pull it off, and examine it. "and amine, where is she? good 
heavens, what a dream! another?" cry he, perceive the scroll tie 
to his arm. "i see it now. amine, this is your doing." and philip 
threw himself down, and bury his face in the pillow. 

amine, in the meantime, had slip into bed, and had taken her place 
by philip's side. "sleep, philip, dear! sleep!" said she, putt her 
arms round him; "we will talk when we wake again." 

"are you there, amine?" reply philip, confused. "i thought i was 
alone; i have dreamed--" and philip again was fast asleep before 
he could complete his sentence. amine, too, tired with watching, 
slumber and was happy. 

father mathia had to wait a long while for his breakfast that 
morning; it was not till two hour later than usual that philip and 
amine made their appearance. 

"welcome, my children," said he; "you are late." 

"we are, father," reply amine; "for philip slept, and i watch till 
break of day." 

"he hath not been ill, i trust," reply the priest. 

"no, not ill; but i could not sleep," reply amine. 

"then didst thou do well to pass the night--as i doubt not thou hast 
done, my child--in holy watchings." 

philip shuddered; he knew that the watching, had its cause been known, 
would have been, in the priest's opinion, anything but holy. amine 
quick replied-- 

"i have, indeed, commune with higher powers, as far as my poor 
intellect hath been able." 

"the blessing of our holy church upon thee, my child!" said the old 
man, putt his hand upon her head; "and on thee too, philip." 

philip, confused, sat down to the table; amine was collected as ever. 
she spoke little, it is true, and appear to commune with her own 
thoughts. 

as soon as the repast was finished, the old priest took up his 
breviary, and amine beckon to philip, they went out together. they 
walk in silence until they arrive at the green spot where amine had 
first propose to him that she should use her mystic power. she sat 
down, and philip, fully aware of her purpose, took his seat by her in 
silence. 

"philip," said amine, taking his hand, and look earnest in his 
face, "last night you dreamed." 

"i did, indeed, amine," reply philip, gravely. 

"tell me your dream; for it will be for me to expound it." 

"i fear it needs but little exposition, amine. all i would know is, 
from what intelligence the dream has been received?" 

"tell me your dream," reply amine, calmly. 

"i thought," reply philip, mournfully, "that i was sailing as 
captain of a vessel round the cape: the sea was calm and the breeze 
light; i was abaft; the sun went down, and the stars were more than 
usually brilliant; the weather was warm, and i lay down on my cloak, 
with my face to the heavens, watch the gem twinkling in the sky 
and the occasional fall meteors. i thought that i fell asleep, 
and awoke with a sensation as if sink down. i look around me; the 
masts, the rigging, the hull of the vessel--_all_ had disappeared, and 
i was floating by myself upon a large, beautiful shaped shell on the 
wide waste of waters. i was alarmed, and afraid to move, lest i should 
overturn my frail bark and perish. at last, i perceive the fore-part 
of the shell pressed down, as if a weight were hanging to it; and 
soon afterwards a small white hand, which grasp it. i remain 
motionless, and would have call out that my little bark would sink, 
but i could not. gradual a figure raise itself from the waters, and 
lean with both arms over the fore-part of the shell, where i first 
had seen but the hand. it was a female, in form beautiful to excess; 
the skin was white as driven snow; her long loose hair cover her, 
and the end float in the water; her arms were round and like 
ivory: she said, in a soft sweet voice-- 

"'philip vanderdecken, what do you fear? have you not a charm life?' 

"'i know not,' reply i, 'whether my life be charm or not; but this 
i know, that it is in danger.' 

"'in danger!' reply she; 'it might have been in danger when you were 
trust to the frail works of men, which the wave love to rend to 
fragments--your _good_ ships, as you call them, which but float about 
upon sufferance; but where can be the danger when in a mermaid's 
shell, which the mountain wave respects, and upon which the crest 
surge dare not throw its spray? philip vanderdecken, you have come to 
seek your father?' 

"'i have,' reply i; 'is it not the will of heaven?' 

"'it is your destiny--and destiny rule all above and below. shall we 
seek him together? this shell is mine; you know not how to navigate 
it; shall i assist you?' 

"'will it bear us both?' 

"'you will see," reply she, laughing, as she sank down from the 
fore-part of the shell, and immediately afterwards appear at the 
side, which was not more than three inch above the water. to my 
alarm, she raise herself up, and sat upon the edge, but her weight 
appear to have no effect. as soon as she was seat in this way--for 
her feet still remain in the water--the shell move rapid along, 
and each moment increase its speed, with no other propel power 
than that of her volition. 

"'do you fear now, philip vanderdecken?' 

"'no!' reply i. 

"she pass her hand across her forehead, threw aside the tresses 
which had partly conceal her face, and said-- 

"'then look at me.' 

"i looked, amine, and i beheld you!" 

"me!" observe amine, with a smile upon her lips. 

"yes, amine, it was you. i call you by your name, and threw my arms 
round you. i felt that i could remain with you and sail about the 
world for ever." 

"proceed, philip," said amine, calmly. 

"i thought we ran thousand and thousand of miles--we pass by 
beautiful islands, set like gem on the ocean bed; at one time 
bound against the ripple current, at other close to the 
shore--skimming on the murmur wave which ripple on the sand, 
whilst the cocoa-tree on the beach wave to the cool breeze." 

"'it is not in smooth sea that your father must be sought,' said she, 
'we must try elsewhere.' 

"by degree the wave rose, until at last they were rage in their 
fury, and the shell was toss by the tumultuous waters; but still not 
a drop entered, and we sail in security over billow which would 
have swallow up the proudest vessel. 

"'do you fear now, philip?' said you to me. 

"'no,' reply i; 'with you, amine, i fear nothing.' 

"'we are now off the cape again,' said she; 'and here you may find 
your father. let us look well round us, for if we meet a ship it must 
be _his_. none but the phantom ship could swim in a gale like this.' 

"away we flew over the mountainous waves--skimming from crest to crest 
between them, our little bark sometimes wholly out of the water; 
now east, now west, north, south, in every quarter of the compass, 
change our course each minute. we pass over hundred of miles: at 
last we saw a vessel, toss by the furious gale. 

"'there,' cry she, point with her finger, 'there is your father's 
vessel, philip.' 

"rapidly did we approach--they saw us from on board, and brought 
the vessel to the wind. we were alongside--the gangway was clearing 
away--for though no boat could have boarded, our shell was safe. i 
look up. i saw my father, amine! yes, saw him, and heard him as he 
gave his orders. i pull the relic from my bosom, and held it out 
to him. he smiled, as he stood on the gunnel, holding on by the main 
shrouds. i was just rising to mount on board, for they had hand to 
me the man-ropes, when there was a loud yell, and a man jump from 
the gangway into the shell. you shrieked, slip from the side, and 
disappear under the wave, and in a moment the shell, guide by the 
man who had taken your place, flew away from the vessel with the 
rapid of thought. i felt a deadly chill pervade my frame. i turn 
round to look at my new companion--it was the pilot schriften!--the 
one-eyed wretch who was drown when we were wreck in table bay! 

"'no! no! not yet!' cry he. 

"in an agony of despair and rage i hurl him off his seat on the 
shell, and he float on the wild waters. 

"'philip vanderdecken,' said he, as he swam, 'we shall meet again!' 

"i turn away my head in disgust, when a wave fill my bark, and 
down it sank. i was struggle under the water, sink still deep 
and deeper, but without pain, when i awoke. 

"now, amine," said philip, after a pause, "what think you of my 
dream?" 

"does it not point out that i am your friend, philip, and that the 
pilot schriften is your enemy?" 

"i grant it; but he is dead." 

"is that so certain?" 

"he hardly could have escape without my knowledge." 

"that is true, but the dream would imply otherwise. philip, it is 
my opinion that the only way in which this dream is to be expound 
is--that you remain on shore for the present. the advice is that of 
the priests. in either case you require some further intimation. in 
your dream, _i_ was your safe guide--be guide now by me again." 

"be it so, amine. if your strange art be in opposition to our holy 
faith, you expound the dream in conformity with the advice of its 
ministers." 

"i do. and now, philip, let us dismiss the subject from our thoughts. 
should the time come, your amine will not persuade you from your duty; 
but recollect, you have promise to grant _one_ favour when i ask it." 

"i have: say, then, amine, what may be your wish?" 

"o! nothing at present. i have no wish on earth but what is gratified. 
have i not you, dear philip?" reply amine, fondly throw herself 
on her husband's shoulder. 




chapter xv 

it was about three month after this conversation that amine and 
philip were again seat upon the mossy bank which we have mentioned, 
and which had become their favourite resort. father mathia had 
contract a great intimacy with father seysen, and the two priest 
were almost as inseparable as were philip and amine. have determined 
to wait a summons previous to philip's again enter upon his strange 
and fearful task; and, happy in the possession of each other, the 
subject was seldom revived. philip, who had, on his return, express 
his wish to the director of the company for immediate employment, 
and, if possible, to have the command of a vessel, had, since that 
period, taken no further steps, nor had any communication with 
amsterdam. 

"i am fond of this bank, philip," said amine; "i appear to have form 
an intimacy with it. it was here, if you recollect, that we debate 
the subject of the lawful of induce dreams; and it was here, 
dear philip, that you told me your dream, and that i expound it." 

"you did so, amine; but if you ask the opinion of father seysen, you 
will find that he would give rather a strong decision against you--he 
would call it heretic and damnable." 

"let him, if he pleases. i have no objection to tell him." 

"i pray not, amine; let the secret remain with ourselves only." 

"think you father mathia would blame me?" 

"i certainly do." 

"well, i do not; there is a kindness and liberality about the old man 
that i admire. i should like to argue the question with him." 

as amine spoke, philip felt something touch his shoulder, and a sudden 
chill ran through his frame. in a moment his idea revert to the 
probable cause: he turn round his head, and, to his amazement, 
beheld the (supposed to be drowned) mate of the _ter schilling_, the 
one-eyed schriften, who stood behind him, with a letter in his hand. 
the sudden appearance of this malignant wretch induce philip to 
exclaim, "merciful heaven! is it possible?" 

amine, who had turn her head round at the exclamation of philip, 
cover up her face, and burst into tears. it was not fear that cause 
this unusual emotion on her part, but the conviction that her husband 
was never to be at rest but in the grave. 

"philip vanderdecken," said schriften, "he! he! i've a letter for 
you--it is from the company." 

philip took the letter, but, previous to opening it, he fixed his eyes 
upon schriften. "i thought," said he, "that you were drown when the 
ship was wreck in false bay. how did you escape?" 

"how did i escape?" reply schriften. "allow me to ask how did you 
escape?" 

"i was thrown up by the waves," reply philip; "but--" 

"but," interrupt schriften, "he! he! the wave ought _not_ to have 
thrown me up." 

"and why not, pray? i did not say that." 

"no! but i presume you wish it had been so; but, on the contrary, 
i escape in the same way that you did--i was thrown up by the 
waves--he! he! but i can't wait here. i have done my bidding." 

"stop," reply philip; answer me one question. "do you sail in the 
same vessel with me this time?" 

"i'd rather be excused," reply schriften; "i am not look for the 
phantom ship, mynheer vanderdecken;" and, with this reply, the little 
man turn round and went away at a rapid pace. 

"is not this a summons, amine?" said philip, after a pause, still 
holding the letter in his hand, with the seal unbroken. 

"i will not deny it, dearest philip. it is most surely so; the hateful 
messenger appear to have risen from the grave that he might deliver 
it. forgive me, philip; but i was taken by surprise. i will not again 
annoy you with a woman's weakness." 

"my poor amine," reply philip, mournfully. "alas! why did i not 
perform my pilgrimage alone? it was selfish of me to link you with 
so much wretchedness, and join you with me in bearing the fardel of 
never-ending anxiety and suspense." 

"and who should bear it with you, my dearest philip, if it is not the 
wife of your bosom? you little know my heart if you think i shrink 
from the duty. no, philip, it is a pleasure, even in its most acute 
pangs; for i consider that i am, by partake with, relieve you of a 
portion of your sorrow, and i feel proud that i am the wife of one who 
has been select to be so peculiarly tried. but, dearest, no more of 
this. you must read the letter." 

philip did not answer. he broke the seal, and found that the letter 
intimate to him that he was appoint as first mate to the _vrow 
katerina_, a vessel which sail with the next fleet; and request 
he would join as quick as possible, as she would soon be ready to 
receive her cargo. the letter which was from the secretary, further 
informed him that, after this voyage, he might be certain of have 
the command of a vessel as captain, upon conditions which would be 
explain when he call upon the board. 

"i thought, philip, that you had request the command of a vessel for 
this voyage," observe amine, mournfully. 

"i did," reply philip; "but not have follow up my application, 
it appear not to have been attend to. it has been my own fault." 

"and now it is too late?" 

"yes, dearest, most assured so: but it matter not; i would as 
willingly, perhaps rather, sail this voyage as first mate." 

"philip, i may as well speak now. that i am disappointed, i must 
confess; i fully expect that you would have had the command of a 
vessel, and you may remember that i exact a promise from you, on 
this very bank upon which we now sit, at the time that you told me 
your dream. that promise i shall still exact, and i now tell you what 
i had intended to ask. it was, my dear philip, permission to sail 
with you. with you, i care for nothing. i can be happy under every 
privation or danger; but to be left alone for so long, brood over 
my painful thoughts, devour by suspense, impatient, restless, and 
incapable of apply to any one thing--that, dear philip, is the 
height of misery, and that is what i feel when you are absent. 
recollect, i have your promise, philip. as captain, you have the means 
of receiving your wife on board. i am bitter disappointed in being 
left this time; do, therefore, to a certain degree, console me by 
promising that i shall sail with you next voyage, if heaven permit 
your return." 

"i promise it, amine, since you are so earnest. i can refuse you 
nothing; but i have a foreboding that yours and my happiness will be 
wreck for ever. i am not a visionary, but it do appear to me that, 
strange mixed up as i am, at once with this world and the next, some 
little portion of futurity is open to me. i have given my promise, 
amine, but from it i would fain be released." 

"and if ill _do_ come, philip, it is our destiny. who can avert fate?" 

"amine, we are free agents, and to a certain extent are permit to 
direct our own destinies." 

"ay, so would father seysen fain have made me believe; but what he 
said in support of his assertion was to me incomprehensible. and yet 
he said that it was a part of the catholic faith. it may be so--i am 
unable to understand many other points. i wish your faith were made 
more simple. as yet the good man--for good he really is--has only led 
me into doubt." 

"passing through doubt, you will arrive at conviction, amine." 

"perhaps so," reply amine; "but it appear to me that i am as yet 
but on the outset of my journey. but come, philip, let us return. you 
must to amsterdam, and i will go with you. after your labour of the 
day, at least until you sail, your amine's smile must still enliven 
you. is it not so?" 

"yes, dearest, i would have propose it. i wonder much how schriften 
could come here. i did not see his body it is certain, but his escape 
is to me miraculous. why did he not appear when saved? where could he 
have been? what think you, amine?" 

"what i have long thought, philip. he is a ghoul with an evil eye, 
permit for some cause to walk the earth in human form; and, is, 
certainly, in some way, connected with your strange destiny. if it 
require anything to convince me of the truth of all that has passed, 
it is his appearance--the wretched afrit! oh, that i had my mother's 
powers!--but i forget; it displease you, philip, that i ever talk of 
such things, and i am silent." 

philip reply not; and absorb in their own meditation they walk 
back in silence to the cottage. although philip had made up his own 
mind, he immediately sent the portugal priest to summon father 
seysen, that he might communicate with them and take their opinion as 
to the summons he had received. have enter into a fresh detail of 
the supposed death of schriften, and his reappear as a messenger, 
he then left the two priest to consult together, and went upstairs to 
amine. it was more than two hour before philip was call down, and 
father seysen appear to be in a state of great perplexity. 

"my son," said he, "we are much perplexed. we had hope that our idea 
upon this strange communication were correct, and that, allow all 
that you have obtain from your mother and have seen yourself to have 
been no deception, still that it was the work of the evil one; and, if 
so, our prayer and masses would have destroy this power. we advise 
you to wait another summons, and you have received it. the letter 
itself is of course nothing, but the reappear of the bearer of the 
letter is the question to be considered. tell me, philip, what is your 
opinion on this point? it is possible he might have been saved--why 
not as well as yourself?" 

"i acknowledge the possibility, father," reply philip; "he may have 
been cast on shore and have wander in another direction. it is 
possible, although anything but probable; but since you ask me 
my opinion, i must say candidly that i consider he is no earthly 
messenger--nay, i am sure of it. that he is mysterious connected 
with my destiny is certain. but who he is, and what he is, of course i 
cannot tell." 

"then, my son, we have come to the determination, in this instance, 
not to advise. you must act now upon your own responsibility and your 
own judgment. in what way soever you may decide we shall not blame 
you. our prayer shall be that heaven may still have you in its holy 
keeping." 

"my decision, holy father, is to obey the summons." 

"be it so, my son; something may occur which may assist to work 
out the mystery,--a mystery which i acknowledge to be beyond my 
comprehension, and of too painful a nature for me to dwell upon." 

philip said no more, for he perceive that the priest was not at all 
inclined to converse. father mathia took this opportunity of thank 
philip for his hospitality and kindness, and state his intention of 
return to lisbon by the first opportunity that might offer. 

in a few days amine and philip took leave of the priests, and quit 
for amsterdam--father seysen taking charge of the cottage until 
amine's return. on his arrival, philip call upon the director of 
the company, who promise him a ship on his return from the voyage he 
was about to enter upon, making a condition that he should become part 
owner of the vessel. to this philip consented, and then went down to 
visit the _vrow katerina_, the ship to which he had been appoint as 
first mate. she was still unrigged, and the fleet was not expect 
to sail for two months. only part of the crew were on board, and the 
captain, who live at dort, had not yet arrived. 

so far as philip could judge, the _vrow katerina_ was a very inferior 
vessel; she was large than many of the others, but old, and badly 
constructed; nevertheless, as she had been several voyages to the 
indies, and had return in safety, it was to be presume that she 
would not have been taken up by the company if they had not been 
satisfy as to her seaworthiness. have given a few directions to 
the men who were on board, philip return to the hostelry where he 
had secure apartments for himself and amine. 

the next day, as philip was superintend the fitting of the rigging, 
the captain of the _vrow katerina_ arrived, and, step on board of 
her by the plank which communicate with the quay, the first thing 
that he did was to run to the mainmast and embrace it with both arms, 
although there was no small portion of tallow on it to smear the cloth 
of his coat. "oh; my dear vrow, my katerina!" cry he, as if he were 
speak to a female. "how do you do? i'm glad to see you again; you 
have been quite well, i hope? you do not like being laid up in this 
way. never mind, my dear creature! you shall soon be handsome again." 

the name of this personage who thus made love to his vessel, was 
wilhelm barentz. he was a young man, apparently not thirty years of 
age, of diminutive stature and delicate proportions. his face was 
handsome, but womanish. his movements were rapid and restless, and 
there was that appearance in his eye which would have warrant the 
supposition that he was a little flighty, even if his conduct had not 
fully prove the fact. 

no soon were the ecstacy of the captain over than philip 
introduce himself to him, and informed him of his appointment. "oh! 
you are the first mate of the _vrow katerina_. sir, you are a very 
fortunate man. next to being captain of her, first mate is the most 
enviable situation in the world." 

"certainly not on account of her beauty," observe philip; "she may 
have many other good qualities." 

"not on account of her beauty! why, sir, i say (as my father has said 
before me, and it was his vrow before it was mine) that she is the 
handsomest vessel in the world. at present you cannot judge; and 
besides being the handsomest vessel, she has every good quality under 
the sun." 

"i am glad to hear it, sir," reply philip; "it prove that one 
should never judge by appearances. but is she not very old?" 

"old! not more than twenty-eight years--just in her prime. stop, my 
dear sir, till you see her dance on the waters, and then you will do 
nothing all day but discourse with me upon her excellence, and i have 
no doubt that we shall have a very happy time together." 

"provided the subject be not exhausted," reply philip. 

"that it never will be, on my part: and, allow me to observe, mr 
vanderdecken, that any officer who find fault with the _vrow 
katerina_ quarrel with me. i am her knight, and i have already fought 
three men in her defence,--i trust, i shall not have to fight a 
fourth." 

philip smiled: he thought that she was not worth fight for; but 
he act upon the suggestion, and, from that time forward, he never 
venture to express an opinion against the beautiful _vrow katerina_. 

the crew were soon complete, the vessel rigged, her sail bent, 
and she was anchor in the stream, surround by the other ship 
compose the fleet about to be despatched. the cargo was then 
received on board, and, as soon as her hold was full, there came, to 
philip's great vexation, an order to receive on board 150 soldier and 
other passengers, many of whom were accompany by their wives and 
families. philip work hard, for the captain did nothing but praise 
the vessel, and, at last, they had embark everything, and the fleet 
was ready to sail. 

it was now time to part with amine, who had remain at the hostelry, 
and to whom philip had dedicated every spare moment that he could 
obtain. the fleet was expect to sail in two days, and it was 
decided, that on the morrow they should part. amine was cool and 
collected. she felt convinced that she should see her husband again, 
and with that feeling, she embrace him as they separate on the 
beach, and he step into the boat in which he was to be pull on 
board. 

"yes," thought amine, as she watch the form of her husband, as the 
distance between them increased--"yes, i know that we shall meet 
again. it is not this voyage which is to be fatal to you or me; but i 
have a dark foreboding that the next, in which i shall join you, will 
separate us for ever--in which way, i know not--but it is destined. 
the priest talk of free-will. is it free-will which take him away 
from me? would he not rather remain on shore with me? yes. but he is 
not permitted, for he must fulfil his destiny. free-will! why, if it 
were not destiny it were tyranny. i feel, and have felt, as if these 
priest are my enemies; but why i know not: they are both good men, 
and the creed they teach is good. good-will and charity, love to all, 
forgiveness of injuries, not judge others. all this is good; and yet 
my heart whisper to me that--but the boat is alongside, and philip 
is climb up the vessel. farewell, farewell, my dearest husband. i 
would i were a man! no, no! 'tis better as it is." 

amine watch till she could no long perceive philip, and then 
walk slow to the hostelry. the next day, when she arose, she found 
that the fleet had sail at daylight, and the channel, which had been 
so crowded with vessels, was now untenanted. 

"he is gone," mutter amine; "now for many month of patient, calm 
enduring,--i cannot say of living, for i exist but in his presence." 




chapter xvi 


we must leave amine to her solitude, and follow the fortune of 
philip. the fleet had sail with a flowing sheet, and bore gallant 
down the zuyder zee; but they had not been under way an hour before 
the _vrow katerina_ was left a mile or two astern. mynheer barentz 
found fault with the setting and trimming of the sails, and with the 
man at the helm, who was repeatedly changed; in short, with everything 
but his dear _vrow katerina_: but all would not do; she still drop 
astern, and prove to be the worst-sailing vessel in the fleet. 

"mynheer vanderdecken," said he, at last, "the _vrow_, as my father 
use to say, is not so very _fast before_ the wind. vessel that are 
good on a wind seldom are: but this i will say, that, in every other 
point of sailing, there is no other vessel in the fleet equal to the 
_vrow katerina_." 

"besides," observe philip, who perceive how anxious his captain was 
on the subject, "we are heavy laden, and have so many troops on 
deck." 

the fleet clear the sands and were then close-hauled, when the _vrow 
katerina_ prove to sail even more slow than before. 

"when we are so _very_ close-hauled," observe mynheer barentz, "the 
_vrow_ do not do so well; but a point free, and then you will see 
how she will show her stern to the whole fleet. she is a fine vessel, 
mynheer vanderdecken, is she not?" 

"a very fine, roomy vessel," reply philip, which was all that, in 
conscience, he could say. 

the fleet sail on, sometimes on a wind, sometimes free, but let the 
point of sailing be what it might, the _vrow katerina_ was invariable 
astern, and the fleet had to heave-to at sunset to enable her to keep 
company; still, the captain continue to declare that the point of 
sailing on which they happen to be, was the only point in which the 
_vrow katerina_ was deficient. unfortunately, the vessel had other 
points quite as bad as her sailing; she was crank, leaky, and did not 
answer the helm well: but mynheer barentz was not to be convinced. he 
adore his ship, and, like all men desperate in love, he could 
see no fault in his mistress. but other were not so blind, and the 
admiral, finding the voyage so much delay by the bad sailing of one 
vessel, determined to leave her to find her way by herself so soon 
as they had pass the cape. he was, however, spare the cruelty of 
desert her, for a heavy gale came on which disperse the whole 
fleet, and on the second day the good ship _vrow katerina_ found 
herself alone, labour heavy in the trough of the sea, leak so 
much as to require hand constant at the pumps, and drift before 
the gale as fast to leeward almost as she usually sailed. for a 
week the gale continued, and each day did her situation become more 
alarming. crowded with troops, encumber with heavy stores, she 
groan and laboured, while whole sea wash over her, and the men 
could hardly stand at the pumps. philip was active, and exert 
himself to the utmost, encourage the worn-out men, secure where 
aught had given way, and little interfere with by the captain, who 
was himself no sailor. 

"well," observe the captain to philip, as they held on by the 
belaying-pins, "you'll acknowledge that she is a fine weather vessel 
in a gale--is she not? softly, my beauty, softly," continue he, 
speak to the vessel, as she plunge heavy into the waves, and 
every timber groaned. "softly, my dear, softly! how those poor 
devil in the other ship must be knock about now. heh! mynheer 
vanderdecken, we have the start of them this time: they must be a 
terrible long way down to leeward. don't you think so?" 

"i really cannot pretend to say," reply philip, smiling. 

"why, there's not one of them in sight. yes, by heavens, there is! 
look on our lee beam. i see one now. well, she must be a capital 
sailor at all events: look there, a point abaft the beam. mercy on me! 
how stiff she must be to carry such a press of canvas!" 

philip had already seen her. it was a large ship on a wind, and on the 
same tack as they were. in a gale in which no vessel could carry the 
topsails, the _vrow katerina_ being under close-reefed foresail and 
staysails, the ship seen to leeward was standing under a press of 
sail--top-gallant-sail, royals, flying-jib, and every stitch of canvas 
which could be set in a light breeze. the wave were running mountain 
high, bearing each minute the _vrow katerina_ down to the gunwale: and 
the ship seen appear not to be affected by the tumultuous waters, 
but sail steady and smooth on an even keel. at once philip knew 
it must be the phantom ship, in which his father's doom was being 
fulfilled. 

"very odd, is it not?" observe mynheer barentz. 

philip felt such an oppression on his chest that he could not reply. 
as he held on with one hand, he cover up his eyes with the other. 

but the seamen had now seen the vessel, and the legend was too well 
known. many of the troops had climb on deck when the report was 
circulated, and all eyes were now fixed upon the supernatural vessel; 
when a heavy squall burst over the _vrow katerina_, accompany with 
peal of thunder and heavy rain, rendering it so thick that nothing 
could be seen. in a quarter of an hour it clear away, and, when they 
look to leeward, the stranger was no long in sight. 

"merciful heaven! she must have been upset, and has gone down in the 
squall," said mynheer barentz. "i thought as much, carry such a 
press of sail. there never was a ship that could carry more than the 
_vrow katerina_. it was madness on the part of the captain of that 
vessel; but i suppose he wish to keep up with us. heh, mynheer 
vanderdecken?" 

philip did not reply to these remarks, which fully prove the madness 
of his captain. he felt that his ship was doomed, and when he thought 
of the numbers on board who might be sacrificed, he shuddered. after a 
pause, he said-- 

"mynheer barentz, this gale is likely to continue, and the best ship 
that ever was built cannot, in my opinion, stand such weather. i 
should advise that we bear up, and run back to table bay to refit. 
depend upon it, we shall find the whole fleet there before us." 

"never fear for the good ship, _vrow katerina_," reply the captain; 
"see what weather she make of it." 

"cursed bad," observe one of the seamen, for the seamen had gather 
near to philip to hear what his advice might be. "if i had known that 
she was such an old, crazy beast, i never would have trust myself on 
board. mynheer vanderdecken is right; we must back to table bay ere 
worse befall us. that ship to leeward has given us warning--she is not 
seen for nothing,--ask mr vanderdecken, captain; he know that well, 
for he _is_ a sailor." 

this appeal to philip made him start; it was, however, made without 
any knowledge of philip's interest in the phantom ship. 

"i must say," reply philip, "that, whenever i have fallen in with 
that vessel, mischief has ever followed." 

"vessel! why, what was there in that vessel to frighten you? she 
carry too much sail, and she has gone down." 

"she never go down," reply one of the seamen. 

"no! no!" exclaim many voices; "but we shall, if we do not run 
back." 

"pooh! nonsense! mynheer vanderdecken, what say you?" 

"i have already state my opinion," reply philip, who was anxious, 
if possible, to see the ship once more in port, "that the best thing 
we can do, is to bear up for table bay." 

"and, captain," continue the old seaman who had just spoken, "we are 
all determined that it shall be so, whether you like it or not; so 
up with the helm, my hearty, and mynheer vanderdecken will trim the 
sails." 

"why! what is this?" cry captain barentz. "a mutiny on board of the 
_vrow katerina_? impossible! the _vrow katerina_ the best ship, the 
fastest in the whole fleet!" 

"the dullest old rotten tub," cry one of the seamen. 

"what!" cry the captain, "what do i hear? mynheer vanderdecken, 
confine that lie rascal for mutiny." 

"pooh! nonsense! he's mad," reply the old seaman. "never mind him; 
come, mynheer vanderdecken, we will obey you; but the helm must be up 
immediately." 

the captain stormed, but philip, by acknowledge the superior 
of his vessel, at the same time that he blame the seamen for their 
panic, pointed out to him the necessity of compliance, and mynheer 
barentz at last consented. the helm was put up, the sail trimmed, 
and the _vrow katerina_ roll heavy before the gale. towards the 
evening the weather moderated, and the sky clear up; both sea and 
wind subside fast; the leak decreased, and philip was in hope 
that in a day or two they would arrive safe in the bay. 

as they steer their course, so did the wind gradual decrease, 
until, at last, it fell calm; nothing remain of the tempest but a 
long heavy swell which set to the westward, and before which the _vrow 
katerina_ was gradual drifting. this was a respite to the worn-out 
seamen, and also to the troops and passengers, who had been coop 
below or drench on the main-deck. 

the upper deck was crowded; mother bask in the warm sun with their 
children in their arms; the rigging was fill with the wet clothes, 
which were hung up to dry on every part of the shrouds; and the seamen 
were busy employ in repair the injury of the gale. by their 
reckoning, they were not more than fifty mile from table bay, and 
each moment they expect to see the land to the southward of it. all 
was again mirth, and everyone on board, except philip, considered that 
danger was no more to be apprehended. 

the second mate, whose name was krantz, was an active, good seaman, 
and a great favourite with philip, who knew that he could trust to 
him, and it was on the afternoon of this day that he and philip were 
walking together on the deck. 

"what think you, vanderdecken, of the strange vessel we saw?" 

"i have seen her before, krantz; and--" 

"and what?" 

"whatever vessel i have been in when i have seen her, that vessel has 
never return into port--others tell the same tale." 

"is she, then, the ghost of a vessel?" 

"i am told so; and there are various story afloat concerning her: 
but of this, i assure you--that i am fully persuade than some 
accident will happen before we reach port, although everything, at 
this moment, appear so calm, and our port is so near at hand." 

"you are superstitious," reply krantz; "and yet i must say that, to 
me, the appearance was not like a reality. no vessel could carry such 
sail in the gale; but yet, there are madmen afloat who will sometimes 
attempt the most absurd things. if it was a vessel, she must have gone 
down, for when it clear up she was not to be seen. i am not very 
credulous, and nothing but the occurrence of the consequence 
which you anticipate will make me believe that there was anything 
supernatural in the affair." 

"well! i shall not be sorry if the event prove me wrong," reply 
philip; "but i have my forebodings--we are not in port yet." 

"no! but we are but a trifling distance from it, and there is every 
prospect of a continuance of fine weather." 

"there is no saying from what quarter the danger may come," reply 
philip; "we have other things to fear than the violence of the gale." 

"true," reply krantz; "but, nevertheless, don't let us croak. 
notwithstanding all you say, i prophesy that in two days, at the 
farthest, we are safe anchor in table bay." 

the conversation here dropped, and philip was glad to be left alone. a 
melancholy had seize him--a depression of spirits even greater than 
he had ever felt before. he leant over the gangway and watch the 
heave of the sea. 

"merciful heaven!" ejaculate he, "be pleased to spare this vessel; 
let not the wail of women, the shriek of the poor children, now 
embarked, be heard; the numerous body of men, trust to her 
planks,--let them not be sacrifice for my father's crimes." and 
philip mused. "the ways of heaven are indeed mysterious," thought 
he.--"why should other suffer because my father has sinned? and yet, 
is it not so everywhere? how many thousand fall on the field of 
battle in a war occasion by the ambition of a king, or the influence 
of a woman! how many million have been destroy for holding a 
different creed of faith! _he_ works in his own way, leave us to 
wonder and to doubt." 

the sun had set before philip had quit the gangway and gone down 
below. commend himself and those embark with him to the care of 
providence, he at last fell asleep; but, before the bell was struck 
eight times to announce midnight, he was awaken by a rude shove of 
the shoulder, and perceive krantz, who had the first watch, standing 
by him. 

"by the heaven above us! vanderdecken, you have prophesy right! 
up--quick! _the ship's on fire_!" 

"on fire!" exclaim vanderdecken, jump out of his berth--"where?" 

"the main-hold." 

"i will up immediately, krantz. in the meantime, keep the hatch on 
and rig the pumps." 

in less than a minute philip was on deck, where he found captain 
barentz, who had also been informed of the case by the second 
mate.--in a few words all was explain by krantz: there was a strong 
smell of fire proceeding from the main-hold; and, on remove one of 
the hatches, which he had done without calling for any assistance, 
from a knowledge of the panic it would create, he found that the hold 
was full of smoke; he had put it on again immediately, and had only 
made it known to philip and the captain. 

"thanks for your presence of mind," reply philip; "we have now time 
to reflect quiet on what is to be done. if the troops and the poor 
women and children knew their danger, their alarm would have much 
impede us: but how could she have taken fire in the main-hold?" 

"i never heard of the _vrow katerina_ taking fire before," observe 
the captain; "i think it is impossible. it must be some mistake--she 
is--" 

"i now recollect that we have, in our cargo, several case of vitriol 
in bottles," interrupt philip. "in the gale, they must have been 
disturbed and broken. i kept them above all, in case of accident: this 
rolling, gunwale under, for so long a time must have occasion one of 
them to fetch way." 

"that's it, depend upon it," observe krantz. 

"i did object to receive them, state that they ought to go out in 
some vessel which was not so encumber with troops, so that they 
might remain on the main-deck; but they replied, that the invoice 
were made out and could not be altered. but now to act. my idea is to 
keep the hatch on, so as to smother it if possible." 

"yes," reply krantz; and, at the same time, cut a hole in the deck 
just large enough to admit the hose, and pump as much water as we can 
down into the hold." 

"you are right, krantz; send for the carpenter, and set him to work. i 
will turn the hand up and speak to the men. i smell the fire now very 
strong; there is no time to lose.--if we can only keep the troops and 
the women quiet we may do something." 

the hand were turn up, and soon made their appearance on deck, 
wonder why they were summoned. the men had not perceive the state 
of the vessel, for, the hatch have been kept on, the little smoke 
that issue ascend the hatchway and did not fill the lower deck. 

"my lads," said philip, "i am sorry to say that we have reason to 
suspect that there is some danger of fire in the main-hold." 

"i smell it!" cry one of the seamen. 

"so do i," cry several others, with every show of alarm, and moving 
away as if to go below. 

"silence, and remain where you are, my men. listen to what i say: if 
you frighten the troops and passenger we shall do nothing; we must 
trust to ourselves; there is no time to be lost.--mr krantz and the 
carpenter are do all that can be done at present; and now, my men, 
do me the favour to sit down on the deck, every one of you, while i 
tell you what we must do." 

this order of philip's was obeyed, and the effect was excellent: it 
gave the men time to compose themselves after the first shock; for, 
perhaps, of all shock to the human frame, there is none which create 
a greater panic than the first intimate of fire on board of a 
vessel--a situation, indeed, pitiable, when it is considered that you 
have to choose between the two elements seek your destruction. 
philip did not speak for a minute or two. he then pointed out to the 
men the danger of their situation, what were the measure which he 
and krantz had decided upon taking, and how necessary it was that all 
should be cool and collected. he also remind them that they had but 
little powder in the magazine, which was far from the site of the 
fire, and could easily be remove and thrown overboard; and that, if 
the fire could not be extinguished, they had a quantity of spar on 
deck to form a raft, which, with the boats, would receive all on 
board, and that they were but a short distance from land. 

philip's address had the most beneficial effects; the men rose up when 
he ordered them; one portion went down to the magazine, and hand up 
the powder, which was pass along and thrown overboard; another went 
to the pumps; and krantz, coming up, report the hole to have been 
cut in the planking of the deck above the main-hold: the hose were 
fixed, and a quantity of water soon pour down, but it was impossible 
that the danger could be kept secret. the troops were sleep on 
the deck, and the very employment of the seamen pointed out what had 
occurred, even if the smoke, which now increase very much, and fill 
the lower deck, had not betray it. in a few minutes the alarm of 
_fire_! was heard throughout the vessel, and men, women, and children 
were seen, some hurry on their clothes, some running frightened 
about the decks, some shrieking, some praying, and the confusion and 
terror were hardly to be described. 

the judicious conduct of philip was then made evident: had the sailor 
been awaken by the appalling cry, they would have been equally 
incapable of acting, as were the troops and passengers. all 
subordinate would have ceased: some would have seize the boats, 
and left the majority to perish: other would have hasten to the 
spirit-room, and, by their drunkenness, add to the confusion and 
horror of the scene: nothing would have been effected, and almost all 
would, in all probability, have perish miserably. but this had been 
prevent by the presence of mind shown by philip and the second mate, 
for the captain was a cypher:--not wanting in courage certainly, but 
without conduct or a knowledge of his profession. the seamen continue 
steady to their duty, push the soldier out of the way as they 
perform their allot tasks: and philip perceive this, went 
down below, leave krantz in charge; and by reasoning with the most 
collected, by degree he brought the majority of the troops to a state 
of comparative coolness. 

the powder had been thrown overboard, and another hole have been cut 
in the deck on the other side, the other pump was rigged, and double 
the quantity of water pour into the hold; but it was evident to 
philip that the combustion increased. the smoke and steam now burst 
through the interstice of the hatchway and the hole cut in the 
deck, with a violence that prove the extent of the fire which rage 
below, and philip thought it advisable to remove all the women and 
children to the poop and quarter-deck of the ship, desire the 
husband of the women to stay with them. it was a melancholy sight, 
and the tear stood in philip's eyes as he look upon the group of 
females--some weeping and strain their children to their bosoms; 
some more quiet and more collected than the men: the elder children 
mute or crying because their mother cried, and the younger ones, 
unconscious of danger, play with the first object which attract 
their attention, or smile at their parents. the officer commanding 
the troops were two ensign newly entered, and very young men, 
ignorant of their duty and without any authority--for men in case 
of extreme danger will not obey those who are more ignorant than 
themselves--and, at philip's request, they remain with and 
superintend the women and children. 

so soon as philip had given his orders that the women and children 
should be properly clothe (which many of them were not), he went 
again forward to superintend the labour of the seamen, who already 
began to show symptom of fatigue, from the excess of their exertions; 
but many of the soldier now offer to work at the pumps, and their 
service were willing accepted. their effort were in vain. in about 
half an hour more the hatch were blown up with a loud noise, and a 
column of intense and searching flame dart up perpendicular from 
the hold, high as the lower mast-head. then was heard the loud shriek 
of the women, who pressed their children in agony to their breasts, 
as the seamen and soldier who had been working the pumps, in their 
precipitate retreat from the scorching flames, rush aft, and fell 
among the huddle crowd. 

"be steady, my lads--steady, my good fellows," exclaim philip; 
"there is no danger yet. recollect, we have our boat and raft, and 
although we cannot subdue the fire, and save the vessel, still we 
may, if you are cool and collected, not only save ourselves, but 
everyone--even the poor infants, who now appeal to you as men to 
exert yourself in their behalf. come, come, my lads, let us do our 
duty--we have the means of escape in our power if we lose no time. 
carpenter, get your axes, and cut away the boom-lashings. now, my men, 
let us get our boat out, and make a raft for these poor women and 
children; we are not ten mile from the land. krantz, see to the boat 
with the starboard watch; larboard watch with me, to launch over the 
booms. gunners, take any of the cordage you can, ready for lashing. 
come, my lads, there is no want of light--we can work without 
lanterns." 

the men obeyed, as philip, to encourage them, had almost jocular 
remark (for a joke is often well-timed, when apparently on the 
threshold of eternity), there was no want of light. the column of fire 
now ascend above the main-top--licking with its forky tongue the 
top-mast rigging--and embrace the mainmast in its folds: and the 
loud roar with which it ascend prove the violence and rapid of 
the combustion below, and how little time there was to be lost. the 
lower and main deck were now so fill with smoke that no one could 
remain there: some few poor fellows, sick in their cots, had long been 
smothered, for they had been forgotten. the swell had much subsided, 
and there was not a breath of wind: the smoke which rose from the 
hatchway ascend straight up in the air, which, as the vessel had 
lost all steerage way, was fortunate. the boat were soon in the 
water, and trusty men placed in them: the spar were launch over, 
arrange by the men in the boats, and lash together. all the 
grating were then collected and firm fixed upon the spar for the 
people to sit upon; and philip's heart was glad at the prospect which 
he now had of saving the numbers which were embarked. 




chapter xvii 


but their difficulty were not surmounted--the fire now had 
communicate to the main-deck, and burst out of the port-holes 
amidships--and the raft which had been form alongside was oblige 
to be drift astern, where it was more expose to the swell. this 
retarded their labour, and, in the meantime, the fire was making rapid 
progress; the mainmast, which had long been burning, fell over the 
side with the lurch of the vessel, and the flame out of the 
main-deck port soon show their points above the bulwarks, 
while volumes of smoke were pour in upon the upper deck, 
almost suffocate the numbers which were crowded there; for all 
communication with the fore-part of the ship had been, for some time, 
cut off by the flames, and everyone had retreat aft. the women and 
children were now carry on to the poop; not only to remove them 
farther from the suffocate smoke, but that they might be lower 
down to the raft from the stern. 

it was about four o'clock in the morning when all was ready, and by 
the exertion of philip and the seamen, notwithstanding the swell, 
the women and children were safe placed on the raft, where it was 
considered that they would be less in the way, as the men could 
relieve each other in pull when they were tired. 

after the women and children had been lower down, the troops were 
next ordered to descend by the ladders; some few were lost in the 
attempt, fall under the boat's bottom and not reappearing; but 
two-thirds of the men were safe put in the berth they were ordered 
to take by krantz, who had gone down to superintend this important 
arrangement. such had been the vigilance of philip, who had request 
captain barentz to stand over the spirit-room hatch, with pistols, 
until the smoke on the main-deck render the precaution unnecessary, 
that not a single person was intoxicated, and to this might be 
ascribe the order and regularity which had prevail during this 
try scene. but before one-third of the soldier had descended by 
the stern ladder, the fire burst out of the stern window with a 
violence that nothing could withstand; spout of vivid flame extend 
several feet from the vessel, roaring with the force of a blow-pipe; 
at the same time, the flame burst through all the after-ports of the 
main-deck, and those remain on board found themselves encircle 
with fire, and suffocate with smoke and heat. the stern ladder were 
consume in a minute and drop into the sea; the boat which had 
been receiving the men were obliged, also, to back astern from the 
intense heat of the flames; even those on the raft shriek as they 
found themselves scorch by the ignite fragment which fell on them 
as they were envelop in an opaque cloud of smoke, which hid from 
them those who still remain on the deck of the vessel. philip 
attempt to speak to those on board, but he was not heard. a scene 
of confusion took place which end in great loss of life. the only 
object appear to be who should first escape; though, except by 
jump overboard, there was no escape. had they waited, and (as 
philip would have pointed out to them) have one by one thrown 
themselves into the sea, the men in the boat were fully prepared 
to pick them up; or had they climb out to the end of the lateen 
mizen-yard which was lower down, they might have descended safe by 
a rope, but the scorching of the flame which surround them and the 
suffocate from the smoke was overpowering, and most of the soldier 
sprang over the taffrail at once, or as nearly so as possible. the 
consequence was that there were thirty or forty in the water at the 
same time, and the scene was as heart-rending as it was appalling; the 
sailor in the boat drag them in as fast as they could--the women 
on the raft, throw to them loose garment to haul them in; at one 
time a wife shriek as she saw her husband struggle and sink 
into eternity;--at another, curse and execrate from the swim 
who was grapple with by the drown man, and drag with him under 
the surface. of eighty men who were left of the troops on board at the 
time of the burst out of the flame from the stern windows, but 
twenty-five were saved. there were but few seamen left on board with 
philip, the major part have been employ in making the raft or 
man the three boats; those who were on board remain by his side, 
regulate their motions by his. after allow full time for the 
soldier to be picked up, philip ordered the men to climb out to the 
end of the lateen yard which hung on the taffrail, and either to lower 
themselves down on the raft if it was under, or to give notice to the 
boat to receive them. the raft had been drop farther astern by the 
seamen, that those on board of it might not suffer from the smoke and 
heat; and the sailors, one after another, lower themselves down 
and were received by the boats. philip desire captain barentz to go 
before him, but the captain refused. he was too much choke with smoke 
to say why, but no doubt but that it would have been something in 
praise of the _vrow katerina_. philip then climb out; he was 
follow by the captain, and they were both received into one of the 
boats. 

the rope which had hitherto held the raft to the ship, was now cast 
off, and it was taken in by the boats; and in a short time the _vrow 
katerina_ was borne to leeward of them; and philip and krantz now made 
arrangement for the better disposal of the people. the sailor were 
almost all put into boats, that they might relieve one another in 
pulling; the remainder were placed on the raft, along with the 
soldiers, the women, and the children. notwithstanding that the boat 
were all as much loaded as they could well bear, the numbers on the 
raft were so great that it sunk nearly a foot under water when the 
swell of the sea pour upon it; but stanchion and ropes to support 
those on board had been fixed, and the men remain at the sides, 
while the women and children were crowded together in the middle. 

as soon as these arrangement were made, the boat took the raft in 
tow, and just as the dawn of day appeared, pull in the direction of 
the land. 

the _vrow katerina_ was, by this time, one volume of flame; she had 
drift about half a mile to leeward, and captain barentz, who was 
watch her as he sat in the boat with philip, exclaimed--"well, 
there go a lovely ship, a ship that could do everything but 
speak--i'm sure that not a ship in the fleet would have made such a 
bonfire as she has--does she not burn beautifully--nobly? my poor 
_vrow katerina_! perfect to the last, we never shall see such a ship 
as you again! well, i'm glad my father did not live to see this sight, 
for it would have broken his heart, poor man." 

philip made no reply, he felt a respect even for captain barentz's 
misplace regard for the vessel. they made but little way, for the 
swell was rather against them, and the raft was deep in the water. the 
day dawned, and the appearance of the weather was not favourable; it 
promise the return of the gale. already a breeze ruffle the surface 
of the water, and the swell appear to increase rather than go down. 
the sky was overcast and the horizon thick. philip look out for the 
land but could not perceive it, for there was a haze on the horizon, 
so that he could not see more than five miles. he felt that to gain 
the shore before the coming night was necessary for the preservation 
of so many individuals, of whom more than sixty were women and 
children, who, without any nourishment, were sitting on a frail raft, 
immerse in the water. no land in sight--a gale coming on, and in 
all probability, a heavy sea and dark night. the chance was indeed 
desperate, and philip was miserable--most miserable--when he reflect 
that so many innocent being might, before the next morning, 
be consign to a watery tomb,--and why?--yes, there was the 
feeling--that although philip could reason against, he never could 
conquer; for his own life he care nothing--even the idea of his 
beloved amine was nothing in the balance at these moments. the only 
point which sustain him, was the knowledge that he had his duty to 
perform, and, in the full exercise of his duty, he recover himself. 

"land ahead!" was now cry out by krantz, who was in the headmost 
boat, and the news was received with a shout of joy from the raft and 
the boats. the anticipation and the hope the news gave was like manna 
in the wilderness; and the poor women on the raft, drench sometimes 
above the waist by the swell of the sea, clasp the children in their 
arms still closer, and cried--"my darling, you shall be saved." 

philip stood upon the stern-sheets to survey the land, and he had the 
satisfaction of finding that it was not five mile distant, and a ray 
of hope warm his heart. the breeze now had gradual increased, and 
ripple the water. the quarter from which the wind came was neither 
favourable nor adverse, being on the beam. had they had sail for the 
boats, it would have been otherwise, but they had been stow away and 
could not be procured. the sight of land naturally rejoice them all, 
and the seamen in the boat cheered, and double-banked the oar to 
increase their way; but the tow of a large raft sunk under water 
was no easy task; and they did not, with all their exertions, advance 
more than half a mile an hour. 

until noon they continue their exertions, not without success; 
they were not three mile from the land; but, as the sun pass the 
meridian, a change took place; the breeze blew strong; the swell of 
the sea rose rapidly; and the raft was often so deep immerse in the 
wave as to alarm them for the safety of those upon her. their way 
was proportional retarded, and by three o'clock they had not gain 
half-a-mile from where they had been at noon. the men not have had 
refreshment of any kind during the labour and excitement of so many 
hours, began to flag in their exertions. the wish for water was 
express by all--from the child who appeal to its mother, to the 
seaman who strained at the oar. philip did all he could to encourage 
the men; but finding themselves so near to the land, and so overcome 
with fatigue, and that the raft in tow would not allow them to 
approach their haven, they murmured, and talk of the necessity of 
casting loose the raft and look out for themselves. a feeling of 
self prevailed, and they were mutinous: but philip expostulate with 
them, and out of respect for him, they continue their exertion for 
another hour, when a circumstance occur which decided the question, 
upon which they had recommence a debate. 

the increase swell and the fresh breeze had so beat about and toss 
the raft, that it was with difficulty, for some time, that its 
occupant could hold themselves on it. a loud shout, mingle with 
screams, attract the attention of those in the boats, and philip, 
look back, perceive that the lashings of the raft had yield to 
the force of the waves, and that it had separate amidships. the 
scene was agonising; husband were separate from their wives and 
children--each floating away from each other--for the part of the raft 
which was still tow by the boat had already left the other far 
astern. the women rose up and screamed, and held up their children; 
some, more frantic, dashed into the water between them, and attempt 
to gain the floating wreck upon which their husband stood, and sank 
before they could be assisted. but the horror increased--one lashing 
have given way, all the rest soon followed; and, before the boat 
could turn and give assistance the sea was strew with the spar 
which compose the raft, with men, women, and children clinging to 
them. loud were the yell of despair, and the shriek of the women, 
as they embrace their offspring, and in attempt to save them were 
lost themselves. the spar of the raft still close together, were 
hurl one upon the other by the swell, and many found death by 
being jam between them. although all the boat hasten to their 
assistance, there was so much difficulty and danger in force them 
between the spars, that but few were saved, and even those few were 
more than the boat could well take in. the seamen and a few soldier 
were picked up, but all the female and the children had sank beneath 
the waves. 

the effect of this catastrophe may be imagined, but hardly described. 
the seamen who had debate as to casting them adrift to perish, wept 
as they pull towards the shore. philip was overcome, he cover his 
face, and remained, for some time, without give directions, and 
heedless of what passed. 

it was now five o'clock in the evening; the boat had cast off the 
tow-lines, and vie with each other in their exertions. before the sun 
had set they all had arrive at the beach, and were safe landed in 
the little sand bay into which they had steered; for the wind was off 
the shore, and there was no surf. the boat were haul up, and the 
exhaust men lay down on the sands, till warm with the heat of the 
sun, and forget that they had neither eaten nor drank for so long 
a time, they were soon fast asleep. captain barentz, philip, and 
krantz, as soon as they had seen the boat secured, held a short 
consultation, and were then glad to follow the example of the seamen; 
harass and worn out with the fatigue of the last twenty-four hours, 
their senses were soon drown in oblivion. 

for many hour they all slept soundly, dreamt of water, and awoke to 
the sad reality that they were torment with thirst, and were on a 
sandy beach with the salt wave mock them; but they reflect how 
many of their late companion had been swallow up, and felt thankful 
that they had been spared. it was early dawn when they all rose from 
the form which they had impress on the yielding sand; and, by the 
directions of philip, they separate in every direction, to look for 
the means of quench their agony of thirst. as they proceed over 
the sand-hills, they found grow in the sand a low spongy-leaf 
sort of shrub, something like what in our greenhouse is term the 
ice-plant; the thick leaves of which were cover with large drops 
of dew. they sank down on their knees, and proceed from one to the 
other licking off the moisture which was abundant, and soon felt 
a temporary relief. they continue their search till noon without 
success, and hunger was now add to their thirst; they then 
return to the beach to ascertain if their companion had been more 
successful. they had also quench their thirst with the dew of 
heaven, but had found no water or means of subsistence; but some of 
them had eaten the leaves of the plant which had contained the dew in 
the morning, and had found them, although acid, full of watery sap and 
grateful to the palate. the plant in question is the one provided by 
bounteous providence for the support of the camel and other beast 
in the arid desert, only to be found there, and devour by all 
ruminate animal with avidity. by the advice of philip they 
collected a quantity of this plant and put it into the boats, and then 
launched. 

they were not more than fifty mile from table bay, and although they 
had no sails, the wind was in their favour. philip pointed out to them 
how useless it was to remain, when before morning they would, in all 
probability, arrive at where they would obtain all they required. the 
advice was approve of and act upon; the boat were shove off and 
the oar resumed. so tired and exhaust were the men, that their oar 
dip mechanical into the water, for there was no strength left to 
be applied; it was not until the next morning at daylight, that they 
had arrive opposite false bay, and they had still many mile to pull. 
the wind in their favour had done almost all--the men could do little 
or nothing. 

encouraged, however, by the sight of land which they knew, they 
rallied; and at about noon they pull exhaust to the beach at the 
bottom of table bay, near to which were the houses, and the fort 
protect the settler who had for some few years reside there. they 
landed close to where a broad rivulet at that season (but a torrent 
in the winter) pour its stream into the bay. at the sight of fresh 
water, some of the men drop their oars, threw themselves into the 
sea when out of their depth--others when the water was above their 
waists--yet they did not arrive so soon as those who wait till the 
boat struck the beach, and jump out upon dry land. and then they 
threw themselves into the rivulet, which course over the shingle, 
about five or six inch in depth, allow the refreshing stream to 
pour into their mouth till they could receive no more, immerse 
their hot hands, and rolling in it with delight. 

despot and fanatic have exert their ingenuity to invent torment 
for their victims--how useless!--the rack, the boot, fire,--all that 
they have imagine are not to be compare to the torture of extreme 
thirst. in the extremity of agony the sufferer cry for water and 
it is not refused: they might have spare themselves their refined 
ingenuity of torment and the disgust exhibition of it, had they 
only confine the prisoner in his cell, and refuse him _water_. 

as soon as they had satisfy the most pressing of all wants, they 
rose dripping from the stream, and walk up to the house of the 
factory; the inhabitant of which, perceive that boat had landed, 
when there was no vessel in the bay, naturally conclude that some 
disaster had happened, and were walking down to meet them.--their 
tragic history was soon told. the thirty-six men that stood before 
them were all that were left of nearly three hundred soul embarked, 
and they had been more than two days without food. at this intimate 
no further question were ask by the considerate settlers, until the 
hunger of the sufferer had been appeased, when the narrative of their 
suffering was fully detailed by philip and krantz. 

"i have an idea that i have seen you before," observe one of the 
settlers; "did you come on shore when the fleet anchored?" 

"i did not," reply philip; "but i have been here." 

"i recollect, now," reply the man; "you were the only survivor of 
the _ter schilling_, which was lost in false bay." 

"not the only survivor," reply philip; "i thought so myself, but i 
afterwards met the pilot, a one-eyed man, of the name of schriften, 
who was my shipmate--he must have arrive here after me. you saw him, 
of course?" 

"no, i did not; no one belong to the _ter schilling_ ever came here 
after you, for i have been a settler here ever since, and it is not 
likely that i should forget such a circumstance." 

"he must, then, have return to dutch by some other means." 

"i know not how.--our ship never go near the coast after they leave 
the bay; it is too dangerous." 

"nevertheless, i saw him," reply philip, musing. 

"if you saw him, that is sufficient: perhaps some vessel had been 
blown down to the eastern side, and picked him up; but the native in 
that part are not likely to have spare the life of a european. the 
caffre are a cruel people." 

the information that schriften had not been seen at the cape, was a 
subject of meditation to philip. he had always an idea, as the reader 
knows, that there was something supernatural about the man, and this 
opinion was corroborate by the report of the settler. 

we must pass over the space of two months, during which the wreck 
seamen were treat with kindness by the settlers, and, at the 
expiration of which, a small brig arrive at the bay, and took in 
refreshments: she was homeward bound, with a full cargo, and being 
charter by the company, could not refuse to receive on board the 
crew of the _vrow katerina_. philip, krantz, and the seamen embarked, 
but captain barentz remain behind to settle at the cape. 

"should i go home," said he to philip, who argue with him, "i have 
nothing in this world to return for. i have no wife--no children--i 
had but one dear object, my _vrow katerina_, who was my wife, my 
child, my everything--she is gone, and i never shall find another 
vessel like her; and if i could, i should not love it as i did her. 
no, my affection are bury with her; are entomb in the deep sea. 
how beautiful she burnt! she went out of the world like a phoenix, 
as she was. no! no! i will be faithful to her--i will send for what 
little money i have, and live as near to her tomb as i can--i never 
shall forget her as long as i live. i shall mourn over her, and 'vrow 
katerina,' when i die, will be found engraven on my heart." 

philip could not help wish that his affection had been fixed upon 
a more deserving object, as then, probably, the tragic loss had 
not taken place; but he change the subject, feeling that, being no 
sailor, captain barentz was much better on shore, than in the command 
of a vessel. they shook hand and parted--philip promising to execute 
barentz's commission, which was to turn his money into articles most 
useful to a settler, and have them sent out by the first fleet which 
should sail from the zuyder zee. but this commission it was not 
philip's good fortune to execute. the brig, name the _wilhelmina_, 
sailed, and soon arrive at st helena. after water she proceed on 
her voyage. they had made the western isles, and philip was console 
himself with the anticipation of soon join his amine, when to the 
northward of the islands, they met with a furious gale, before which 
they were oblige to scud for many days, with the vessel's head to the 
south-east; and as the wind abate and they were able to haul to it, 
they fell in with a dutch fleet, of five vessels, command by an 
admiral, which had left amsterdam more than two months, and had been 
buffet about, by contrary gales, for the major part of that period. 
cold, fatigue, and bad provisions had brought on the scurvy, and the 
ship were so weak manned that they could hardly navigate them. when 
the captain of the _wilhelmina_ report to the admiral that he had 
part of the crew of the _vrow katerina_ on board, he was ordered 
to send them immediately to assist in navigate his cripple 
fleet--remonstrance was useless--philip had but time to write to 
amine, acquaint her with his misfortune and disappointment; and, 
confiding the letter to his wife, as well as his narrative of the loss 
of the _vrow katerina_ for the directors, to the charge of the captain 
of the _wilhelmina_, he hasten to pack up his effects, and repair 
on board of the admiral's ship, with krantz and the crew. to them were 
add six of the men belong to the _wilhelmina_, which the admiral 
insist on retaining; and the brig, have received the admiral's 
despatches, was then permit to continue her voyage. 

perhaps there is nothing more try to the seaman's feelings, than 
being unexpected forced to recommence another series of trials, at 
the very time when they anticipate repose from the former; yet, how 
often do this happen! philip was melancholy. "it is my destiny," 
thought he, use the words of amine, "and why should i not submit?" 
krantz was furious, and the seamen discontented and mutinous--but 
it was useless. might is right on the vast ocean, where there is no 
appeal--no trial or injunction to be obtained. 

but hard as their case appear to them, the admiral was fully 
justified in his proceeding. his ship were almost unmanageable with 
the few hand who could still perform their duty; and this small 
increase of physical power might be the means of saving hundred who 
lay helpless in their hammocks. in his own vessel, the _lion_, which 
was manned with two hundred and fifty men, when she sail from 
amsterdam, there were not more than seventy capable of do duty; and 
the other ship had suffer in proportion. 

the first captain of the _lion_ was dead, the second captain in his 
hammock, and the admiral had no one to assist him but the mate of the 
vessel, some of whom crawl up to their duty more dead than alive. 
the ship of the second in command, the _dort_, was even in a more 
deplorable plight. the commodore was dead; the first captain was still 
do his duty; but he had but one more officer capable of remain 
on deck. 

the admiral sent for philip into his cabin, and have heard his 
narrative of the loss of the _vrow katerina_, he ordered him to go on 
board of the commodore's ship as captain, give the rank of commodore 
to the captain at present on board of her; krantz was retain on 
board his own vessel, as second captain; for, by philip's narrative, 
the admiral perceive at once that they were both good officer and 
brave men. 




chapter xviii 


the fleet under admiral rymelandt's command was ordered to proceed to 
the east indy by the western route, through the straits of magellan 
into the pacific ocean--it being still imagined, notwithstanding 
previous failures, that this route offer facilities which might 
shorten the passage of the spice islands. 

the vessel compose the fleet were the _lion_ of forty-four guns, 
bearing the admiral's flag; the _dort_ of thirty-six guns, with the 
commodore's pendant--to which philip was appointed; the _zuyder zee_ 
of twenty; the _young frau_ of twelve, and a ketch of four guns, 
call the _schevelling_. 

the crew of the _vrow katerina_ were divide between the two large 
vessels; the others, being smaller, were easy work with few 
hands. every arrangement have been made, the boat were hoist 
up, and the ship made sail. for ten days they were baffle by light 
winds, and the victim to the scurvy increase considerably on board 
of philip's vessel. many die and were thrown overboard, and other 
were carry down to their hammocks. 

the newly-appointed commodore, whose name was avenhorn, went on board 
of the admiral, to report the state of the vessel, and to suggest, as 
philip had propose to him, that they should make the coast of south 
america, and endeavour, by bribery or by force, to obtain supplies 
either from the spain inhabitant or the natives. but to this the 
admiral would not listen. he was an imperious, bold, and obstinate 
man, not to be persuade or convinced, and with little feeling for 
the suffering of others. tenacious of being advised, he immediately 
reject a proposition which, had it originate with himself, would 
probably have been immediately act upon; and the commodore return 
on board his vessel, not only disappointed, but irritate by the 
language use towards him. 

"what are we to do, captain vanderdecken? you know too well our 
situation--it is impossible we can continue long at sea; if we do, the 
vessel will be drift at the mercy of the waves, while the crew die 
a wretched death in their hammocks. at present, we have forty men 
left; in ten days more we shall probably have but twenty; for as the 
labour become more severe, so do they drop down the faster. is it not 
better to risk our lives in combat with the spaniards, than die here 
like rotten sheep?" 

"i perfectly agree with you, commodore," reply philip; "but still we 
must obey orders. the admiral is an inflexible man." 

"and a cruel one. i have a great mind to part company in the night, 
and, if he find fault, i will justify myself to the director on my 
return." 

"do nothing rashly--perhaps, when day by day he find his own ship's 
company more weakened, he will see the necessity of following your 
advice." 

a week had pass away after this conversation, and the fleet had made 
little progress. in each ship the ravages of the fatal disease became 
more serious, and, as the commodore had predicted, he had but twenty 
men really able to do duty. nor had the admiral's ship and the other 
vessel suffer less. the commodore again went on board to reiterate 
his proposition. 

admiral rymelandt was not only a stern, but a vindictive man. he 
was aware of the propriety of the suggestion made by his second in 
command, but, have refuse it, he would not acquiesce; and he felt 
revengeful against the commodore, whose counsel he must now either 
adopt, or by refuse it be prevent from taking the steps so 
necessary for the preservation of his crew, and the success of his 
voyage. too proud to acknowledge himself in error, again did he 
decidedly refuse, and the commodore went back to his own ship. the 
fleet was then within three days of the coast, steer to the 
southward for the straits of magellan, and that night, after philip 
had retired to his cot, the commodore went on deck and ordered the 
course of the vessel to be alter some points more to the westward. 
the night was very dark, and the _lion_ was the only ship which 
carry a poop-lantern, so that the parting company of the _dort_ was 
not perceive by the admiral and the other ship of the fleet. when 
philip went on deck next morning, he found that their consort were 
not in sight. he look at the compass, and, perceive that the 
course was altered, inquire at what hour and by whose directions. 
finding that it was by his superior officer, he of course said 
nothing. when the commodore came on deck, he state to philip that he 
felt himself warrant in not comply with the admiral's orders, as 
it would have been sacrifice the whole ship's company. this was, 
indeed, true. 

in two days they made the land, and, running into the shore, perceive 
a large town and spaniard on the beach. they anchor at the mouth of 
the river, and hoist english colours, when a boat came on board to 
ask them who they were and what they required? the commodore reply 
that the vessel was english, for he knew that the hatred of the 
spain to the dutch was so great that, if known to belong to that 
nation, he would have had no chance of procure any supplies, except 
by force. he state that he had fallen in with a spain vessel, a 
complete wreck, from the whole of the crew being afflict with the 
scurvy; that he had taken the men out, who were now in their 
hammock below, as he considered it cruel to leave so many of his 
fellow-creatures to perish, and that he had come out of his course to 
land them at the first spain fort he could reach. he request that 
they would immediately send on board vegetable and fresh provisions 
for the sick men, whom it would be death to remove, until after a few 
days, when they would be a little restored; and added, that in return 
for their assist the spaniards, he trust the governor would also 
send supplies for his own people. 

this well made-up story was confirmed by the officer sent on board by 
the spain governor. being request to go down below and see the 
patients, the sight of so many poor fellow in the last stage of that 
horrid disease--their teeth fallen out, gum ulcerated, body full 
of tumour and sores--was quite sufficient, and, hurry up from the 
lower deck, as he would have done from a charnel-house, the officer 
hasten on shore and made his report. 

in two hour a large boat was sent off with fresh beef and vegetable 
sufficient for three days' supply for the ship's company, and these 
were immediately distribute among the men. a letter of thanks was 
return by the commodore, state that his health was so indifferent 
as to prevent his coming on shore in person to thank the governor, and 
forwarding a pretended list of the spaniard on board, in which he 
mention some officer and people of distinction, whom he imagine 
might be connected with the family of the governor, whose name and 
title he had received from the messenger sent on board; for the dutch 
knew full well the majority of the noble spain families--indeed, 
alliance had continual taken place between them, previous to their 
assertion of their independence. the commodore conclude his letter by 
express a hope that, in a day or two, he should be able to pay his 
respects and make arrangement for the landing of the sick, as he was 
anxious to proceed on his voyage of discovery. 

on the third day, a fresh supply of provisions was sent on board, and, 
so soon as they were received, the commodore, in an english uniform, 
went on shore and call upon the governor, gave a long detail of the 
suffering of the people he had rescued, and agree that they should 
be sent on shore in two days, and they would, by that time, be well 
enough to be moved. after many compliments, he went on board, the 
governor have state his intention to return his visit on the 
following day, if the weather were not too rough. fortunately, the 
weather was rough for the next two days, and it was not until the 
third that the governor made his appearance. this was precisely what 
the commodore wished. 

there is no disease, perhaps, so dreadful or so rapid in its effects 
upon the human frame, and at the same time so instantaneous checked, 
as the scurvy, if the remedy can be procured. a few days were 
sufficient to restore those, who were not able to turn in their 
hammocks, to their former vigour. in the course of the six days nearly 
all the crew of the _dort_ were convalescent and able to go on deck; 
but still they were not cured. the commodore wait for the arrival of 
the governor, received him with all due honours, and then, so soon 
as he was in the cabin, told him very polite that he and all 
his officer with him were prisoners. that the vessel was a dutch 
man-of-war, and that it was his own people, and not spaniards, who had 
been die of the scurvy. he console him, however, by point out 
that he had thought it preferable to obtain provisions by this _ruse_, 
than to sacrifice lives on both side by taking them by force, and 
that his excellency's captivity would endure no long than until he 
had received on board a sufficient number of live bullock and fresh 
vegetable to insure the recovery of the ship's company; and, in the 
meantime, not the least insult would be offer to him. whereupon the 
spain governor first look at the commodore and then at the file of 
armed men at the cabin door, and then to his distance from the town; 
and then call to mind the possibility of his being taken out to sea. 
weigh all these points in his mind, and the very moderate ransom 
demand (for bullock were not worth a dollar apiece in that 
country), he resolved, as he could not help himself, to comply with 
the commodore's terms. he call for pen and ink, and wrote an order 
to send on board immediately all that was demanded. before sunset the 
bullock and vegetable were brought off, and, so soon as they were 
alongside, the commodore, with many bow and many thanks, escort the 
governor to the gangway, compliment him with a salvo of great guns, 
as he had done before, on his arrival. the people on shore thought 
that his excellency had paid a long visit, but, as he did not like to 
acknowledge that he had been deceived, nothing was said about it at 
least, in his hearing, although the fact were soon well known. as 
soon as the boat were cleared, the commodore weigh anchor and made 
sail, well satisfy with have preserve his ship's company; and, as 
the falkland islands, in case of parting company, had been name as 
the rendezvous, he steer for them. in a fortnight he arrived, and 
found that his admiral was not yet there. his crew were now all 
recovered, and his fresh beef was not yet expended, when he perceive 
the admiral and the three other vessel in the offing. 

it appear that so soon as the _dort_ had part company, the admiral 
had immediately act upon the advice that the commodore had given 
him, and had run for the coast. not being so fortunate in a _ruse_ 
as his second in command, he had landed an armed force from the four 
vessels, and had succeed in obtain several head of cattle, at the 
expense of an equal number of men kill and wounded. but at the same 
time they had collected a large quantity of vegetable of one sort or 
another, which they had carry on board and distribute with great 
success to the sick, who were gradual recovering. 

immediately that the admiral had anchored, he made the signal for 
the commodore to repair on board, and tax him with disobedience of 
orders in have left the fleet. the commodore did not deny that he 
had so done, but excuse himself upon the plea of necessity, offering 
to lay the whole matter before the court of director so soon as they 
returned; but the admiral was vest with most extensive powers, not 
only of the trial, but the _condemnation_ and punishment of any person 
guilty of mutiny and insubordinate in his fleet. in reply, he told 
the commodore that he was a prisoner, and, to prove it, he confine 
him in irons under the half-deck. 

a signal was then made for all the captains: they went on board, and 
of course philip was of the number. on their arrival the admiral held 
a summary court-martial, prove to them by his instruction that he 
was so warrant to do. the result of the court-martial could be but 
one,--condemnation for a breach of discipline, to which philip was 
oblige reluctantly to sign his name. the admiral then gave philip the 
appointment of second in command, and the commodore's pendant, much to 
the annoyance of the captain commanding the other vessels,--but in 
this the admiral prove his judgment, as there was no one of them so 
fit for the task as philip. have so done, he dismiss them. philip 
would have spoken to the late commodore, but the sentry oppose it, 
as against his orders; and with a friendly nod, philip was oblige to 
leave him without the desire communication. 

the fleet remain three week at the falkland islands, to recruit the 
ships' companies. although there was no fresh beef, there was plenty 
of scurvy-grass and penguins. these bird were in myriad on some 
parts of the island, which, from the propinquity of their nests, built 
of mud, went by the name of _towns_. there they sat, close together 
(the whole area which they cover being bare of grass), hatching 
their egg and rear their young. the men had but to select as many 
egg and bird as they pleased, and so numerous were they, that, when 
they had supply themselves, there was no apparent diminution of the 
numbers. this food, although in a short time not very palatable to the 
seamen, had the effect of restore them to health, and, before the 
fleet sailed, there was not a man who was afflict with the scurvy. 
in the meantime the commodore remain in irons, and many were the 
conjecture concerning his ultimate fate. the power of life and death 
was known to be in the admiral's hands, but no one thought that such 
power would be exert upon a delinquent of so high a grade. the other 
captain kept aloof from philip, and he knew little of what was the 
general idea. occasional when on board of the admiral's ship, he 
venture to bring up the question, but was immediately silenced; and 
feeling that he might injure the late commodore (for whom he had a 
regard), he would risk nothing by importunity; and the fleet sail 
for the straits of magellan, without anybody being aware of what might 
be the result of the court-martial. 

it was about a fortnight after they had left the falkland islands, 
that they enter the straits. at first they had a leading wind which 
carry them half through, but this did not last, and they then had to 
contend not only against the wind, but against the current, and they 
daily lost ground. the crew of the ship also began to sicken from 
fatigue and cold. whether the admiral had before made up his mind, or 
whether, irritate by his fruitless endeavour to continue his voyage, 
it is impossible to say; but, after three weeks' useless struggle 
against the wind and currents, he hove-to and ordered all the captain 
on board, when he propose that the prisoner should receive his 
punishment--and that punishment was--_to be deserted_--that is, to be 
sent on shore with a day's food, where there was no means of obtain 
support, so as to die miserably of hunger. this was a punishment 
frequent resort to by the dutch at that period, as will be seen by 
reading an account of their voyages: but, at the same time, seldom, if 
ever, award to one of so high a rank as that of commodore. 

philip immediately protest against it, and so did krantz, although 
they were both aware, that by so do they would make the admiral 
their enemy; but the other captains, who view both of them with a 
jealous eye, and considered them as interloper and interfere with 
their advancement, side with the admiral. notwithstanding this 
majority, philip thought it his duty to expostulate. 

"you know well, admiral," said he, "that i join in his condemnation 
for a breach of discipline: but, at the same time, there was much in 
extenuation. he committed a breach of discipline to save his ship's 
company, but not an error in judgment, as you yourself proved, by 
taking the same measure to save your own men. do not, therefore, visit 
an offence of so doubtful a nature with such cruelty. let the company 
decide the point when you send him home, which you can do so soon 
as you arrive in india. he is sufficient punish by lose his 
command: to do what you propose will be ascribe to feelings of 
revenge more than to those of justice. what success can we deserve if 
we commit an act of such cruelty; and how can we expect a merciful 
providence to protect us from the wind and wave when we are thus 
barbarous towards each other?" 

philip's argument were of no avail. the admiral ordered him to return 
on board his ship, and had he been able to find an excuse, he would 
have deprived him of his command. this he could not well do; but 
philip was aware that the admiral was now his inveterate enemy. the 
commodore was taken out of irons and brought into the cabin, and his 
sentence was made known to him. 

"be it so, admiral," reply avenhorn; "for, to attempt to turn you 
from your purpose, i know would be unavailing. i am not punish for 
disobedience of orders, but for having, by my disobedience, pointed 
out to you your duty--a duty which you were forced to perform 
afterwards by necessity. then be it so; let me perish on these black 
rocks, as i shall, and my bone be whiten by the chilly blast which 
howl over their desolation. but mark me, cruel and vindictive man! i 
shall not be the only one whose bone will bleach there. i prophesy 
that many other will share my fate, and even you, admiral, _may_ be 
of the number,--if i mistake not, we shall lie side by side." 

the admiral made no reply, but gave a sign for the prisoner to be 
removed. he then had a conference with the captain of the three 
small vessels; and, as they had been all along retarded by the 
heavy sailing of his own ship and the _dort_ command by philip, he 
decided that they should part company, and proceed on as fast as they 
could to the indies--sending on board of the two large vessel all 
the provisions they could spare, as they already began to run short. 

philip had left the cabin with krantz after the prisoner had been 
removed. he then wrote a few lines upon a slip of paper--"do not leave 
the beach when you are put on shore, until the vessel are out of 
sight;" and, request krantz to find an opportunity to deliver this 
to the commodore, he return on board of his own ship. 

when the crew of the _dort_ heard of the punishment about to be 
inflict upon their old commander, they were much excited. they felt 
that he had sacrifice himself to save them, and they murmur much at 
the cruelty of the admiral. 

about an hour after philip's return to his ship, the prisoner was sent 
on shore and landed on the desolate and rocky coast, with a supply of 
provisions for two days. not a single article of extra clothing, or 
the means of striking a light was permit him. when the boat's keel 
graze the beach, he was ordered out. the boat shove off, and the men 
were not permit even to bid him farewell. 

the fleet, as philip expected, remain hove-to, shift the 
provisions, and it was not till after dark that everything was 
arranged. this opportunity was not lost. philip was aware that it 
would be considered a breach of discipline, but to that he was 
indifferent; neither did he think it likely that it would come to the 
ear of the admiral, as the crew of the _dort_ were partial both to 
the commodore and to him. he had desire a seaman whom he could trust, 
to put into one of the boat a couple of musket and a quantity of 
ammunition, several blankets, and various other articles, besides 
provisions for two or three month for one person, and, as soon as it 
was dark, the men pull on shore with the boat, found the commodore 
on the beach wait for them, and supply him with all these 
necessaries. they then rejoin their ship, without the admiral's 
have the least suspicion of what had been done, and shortly after 
the fleet made sail on a wind, with their head off shore. the next 
morning, the three small vessel part company, and by sunset had 
gain many mile to windward, after which they were not again seen. 

the admiral had sent for philip to give him his instructions, which 
were very severe, and evidently frame so as to be able to afford him 
hereafter some excuse for deprive him of his command. among others, 
his orders were, as the _dort_ drew much less water than the admiral's 
ship, to sail ahead of him during the night, that, if they approach 
too near the land as they beat across the channel, timely notice might 
be given to the admiral, if in too shallow water. this responsibility 
was the occasion of philip's being always on deck when they approach 
the land of either side of the straits. it was the second night after 
the fleet had separate that philip had been summon on deck as they 
were near the land of terra del fuego; he was watch the man in 
the chain heave the lead, when the officer of the watch report 
to him that the admiral's ship was ahead of them instead of astern. 
philip made enquiry as to when he passed, but could not discover; he 
went forward, and saw the admiral's ship with her poop-light, which, 
when the admiral was astern, was not visible. "what can be the 
admiral's reason for this?" thought philip; "has he run ahead on 
purpose to make a charge against me of neglect of duty? it must be so. 
well, let him do as he pleases; he must wait now till we arrive 
in india, for i shall not allow him to _desert_ me; and, with the 
company, i have as much, and i rather think, as a large proprietor, 
more interest than he has. well, as he has thought proper to go ahead, 
i have nothing to do but follow. 'you may come out of the chain 
there.'" 

philip went forward: they were now, as he imagined, very near to the 
land, but the night was dark and they could not distinguish it. for 
half an hour they continue their course, much to philip's surprise, 
for he now thought he could make out the loom of the land, dark as it 
was. his eyes were constant fixed upon the ship ahead, expect 
every minute that she would go about; but no, she continue her 
course, and philip follow with his own vessel. 

"we are very close to the land, sir," observe vander hagen, the 
lieutenant, who was the officer of the watch. 

"so it appear to me: but the admiral is closer, and draw much more 
water than we do," reply philip. 

"i think i see the rocks on the beam to leeward, sir." 

"i believe you are right," reply philip: "i cannot understand this. 
ready about, and get a gun ready--they must suppose us to be ahead of 
them, depend upon it." 

hardly had philip given the order, when the vessel struck heavy on 
the rocks. philip hasten aft; he found that the rudder had been 
unshipped, and the vessel was immovable fixed. his thought then 
revert to the admiral. "was he on shore?" he ran forward, and the 
admiral was still sailing on, with his poop-light, about two cables' 
length ahead of him. 

"fire the gun, there," cry philip, perplexed beyond measure. 

the gun was fired, and immediately follow up by the flash and report 
of another gun close astern of them. philip look with astonishment 
over the quarter and perceive the admiral's ship close astern to him, 
and evidently on shore as well as his own. 

"merciful heaven!" exclaim philip, rush forward, "what can this 
be?" he beheld the other vessel with her light ahead, still sailing on 
and leave them. the day was now dawning, and there was sufficient 
light to make out the land. the _dort_ was on shore not fifty yard 
from the beach, and surround by the high and barren rocks; yet the 
vessel ahead was apparently sailing on over the land. the seamen 
crowded on the forecastle watch this strange phenomenon; at last it 
vanish from their sight. 

"that's the _flying dutchman_, by all that's holy!" cry one of the 
seamen, jump off the gun. 

hardly had the man utter these words when the vessel disappeared. 

philip felt convinced that it was so, and he walk away aft in a very 
perturb state. it must have been his father's fatal ship which had 
decoy them to probable destruction. he hardly knew how to act. the 
admiral's wrath he did not wish, just at that moment, to encounter. he 
sent for the officer of the watch, and, have desire him to select 
a crew for the boat, out of those men who had been on deck, and could 
substantiate his assertions, ordered him to go on board of the admiral 
and state what had happened. 

as soon as the boat had shove off, philip turn his attention to 
the state of his own vessel. the daylight had increased, and philip 
perceive that they were surround by rocks, and had run on shore 
between two reefs, which extend half a mile from the mainland. he 
sound round his vessel, and discover that she was fixed from 
forward to aft, and that, without lighten her, there was no chance 
of get her off. he then turn to where the admiral's ship lay 
aground, and found that, to all appearance, she was in even a worse 
plight, as the rocks to leeward of her were above the water, and she 
was much more exposed, should bad weather come on. never, perhaps, was 
there a scene more cheerless and appalling: a dark wintry sky--a sky 
loaded with heavy clouds--the wind cold and piercing--the whole 
line of the coast one mass of barren rocks, without the slightest 
appearance of vegetation; the inland part of the country present 
an equally sombre appearance, and the higher points were cap with 
snow, although it was not yet the winter season. sweeping the coast 
with his eye, philip perceived, not four mile to leeward of them (so 
little progress had they made), the spot where they had _deserted_ the 
commodore. 

"surely this has been a judgment on him for his cruelty," thought 
philip, "and the prophecy of poor avenhorn will come true--more bone 
than his will bleach on those rocks." philip turn round again to 
where the admiral's ship was on shore, and start back, as he beheld 
a sight even more dreadful than all that he had viewed--the body of 
vander hagen, the officer sent on board of the admiral, hanging at the 
main-yard-arm. "my god! is it possible?" exclaim philip, stamp 
with sorrow and indignation. 

his boat was return on board, and philip await it with 
impatience. the men hasten up the side, and breathless informed 
philip that the admiral, as soon as he had heard the lieutenant's 
report, and his acknowledgment that he was officer of the watch, had 
ordered him to be hung, and that he had sent them back with a summons 
for him to repair on board immediately, and that they had seen another 
rope prepare at the other yard-arm. 

"but not for you, sir," cry the men; "that shall never be--you shall 
not go on board--and we will defend you with our lives." 

the whole ship's company join in this resolution, and express 
their determination to resist the admiral. philip thank them 
kindly--stated his intention of not go on board, and request 
that they would remain quiet, until it was ascertain what steps the 
admiral might take. he then went down to his cabin, to reflect upon 
what plan he should pursue. as he look out of the stern-windows, and 
perceive the body of the young man still swinging in the wind, he 
almost wish that he was in his place, for then there would be an end 
to his wayward fate: but he thought of amine, and felt that, for her, 
he wish to live. that the phantom ship should have decoy him to 
destruction was also a source of much painful feeling, and philip 
meditated, with his hand pressed to his temples. "it is my destiny," 
thought he at last, "and the will of heaven must be done: we could not 
have been so deceive if heaven had not permit it." and then his 
thought revert to his present situation. 

that the admiral had exceed his powers in taking the life of the 
officer was undeniable, as, although his instruction gave him power 
of life and death, still it was only to be decided by the sentence of 
the court-martial held by the captain commanding the vessel of the 
fleet; he therefore felt himself justified in resistance. but philip 
was trouble with the idea that such resistance might lead to much 
bloodshed; and he was still debate how to act, when they report to 
him that there was a boat coming from the admiral's ship. philip went 
upon deck to receive the officer, who state that it was the admiral's 
order that he should immediately come on board, and that he must 
consider himself now under arrest, and deliver up his sword. 

"no! no!" exclaim the ship's company of the _dort_. he shall not go 
on board. we will stand by our captain to the last." 

"silence, men! silence!" cry philip. "you must be aware, sir," said 
he to the officer, "that in the cruel punishment of that innocent 
young man, the admiral has exceed his powers: and, much as i 
regret to see any symptom of mutiny and insubordination, it must be 
remember that, if those in command disobey the orders they have 
received, by exceed them, they not only set the example, but give 
an excuse for those who otherwise would be bound to obey them, to do 
the same. tell the admiral that his murder of that innocent man has 
determined me no long to consider myself under his authority, and 
that i will hold myself, as well as him, answerable to the company 
whom we serve, for our conduct. i do not intend to go on board and 
put myself in his power, that he might gratify his resentment by my 
ignominious death. it is a duty that i owe these men under my command 
to preserve my life, that i may, if possible, preserve theirs in this 
strait; and you may also add, that a little reflection must point out 
to him that this is no time for us to war with, but to assist each 
other with all our energies. we are here, ship-wrecked on a barren 
coast, with provisions insufficient for any lengthen stay, no 
prospect of succour, and little of escape. as the commodore truly 
prophesied, many more are likely to perish as well as him--and even 
the admiral himself may be of the number. i shall wait his answer; 
if he choose to lay aside all animosity, and refer our conduct to 
a higher tribunal, i am willing to join with him in rendering that 
assistance to each other which our situation requires--if not, you 
must perceive, and of course will tell him, that i have those with me 
who will defend me against any attempt at force. you have my answer, 
sir, and may go on board." 

the officer went to the gangway, but found that none of his crew, 
except the bowman, were in the boat; they had gone up to gain from the 
men of the _dort_ the true history of what they had but imperfect 
heard: and, before they were summon to return, had received full 
intelligence. they coincide with the seamen of the _dort_, that the 
appearance of the phantom ship, which had occasion their present 
disaster, was a judgment upon the admiral, for his conduct in have 
so cruel _deserted_ the poor commodore. 

upon the return of the officer with philip's answer, the rage of the 
admiral was beyond all bounds. he ordered the gun aft, which would 
bear upon the _dort_, to be double-shotted, and fire into her; but 
krantz pointed out to him that they could not bring more gun to bear 
upon the _dort_, in their present situation, than the _dort_ 
could bring to bear upon them; that their superior force was thus 
neutralised, and that no advantage could result from taking such a 
step. the admiral immediately put krantz under arrest, and proceed 
to put into execution his insane intentions. in this he was, however, 
prevent by the seamen of the _lion_, who neither wish to fire upon 
their consort, nor to be fire at in return. the report of the boat's 
crew had been circulate through the ship, and the men felt too much 
ill-will against the admiral, and perceive at the same time the 
extreme difficulty of their situation, to wish to make it worse. they 
did not proceed to open mutiny, but they went down below, and when 
the officer ordered them up, they refuse to go upon deck; and the 
officers, who were equally disgust with the admiral's conduct, 
merely informed him of the state of the ship's company, without 
name individuals, so as to excite his resentment against any one 
in particular. such was the state of affair when the sun went down. 
nothing had been done on board the admiral's ship, for krantz was 
under arrest, and the admiral had retired in a state of fury to his 
cabin. 

in the meantime philip and the ship's company had not been idle--they 
had laid an anchor out astern, and hove taut: they had start all 
the water, and were pump it out, when a boat pull alongside, and 
krantz made his appearance on deck. 

"captain vanderdecken, i have come to put myself under your orders, if 
you will receive me--if not, render me your protection; for, as 
sure as fate, i should have been hang to-morrow morning, if i had 
remain in my own ship. the men in the boat have come with the same 
intention--that of join you, if you will permit them." 

although philip would have wish it had been otherwise, he could not 
well refuse to receive krantz, under the circumstances of the case. he 
was very partial to him, and to save his life, which certainly was in 
danger, he would have done much more. he desire that the boat's crew 
should return; but when krantz had state to him what had occur on 
board the _lion_, and the crew earnest beg him not to send them 
back to almost certain death, which their have effect the escape 
of krantz would have assured, philip reluctantly allow them to 
remain. 

the night was tempestuous, but the wind being now off shore, the water 
was not rough. the crew of the _dort_, under the directions of philip 
and krantz, succeed in lighten the vessel so much during the 
night that the next morning they were able to haul her off, and found 
that her bottom had received no serious injury. it was fortunate for 
them that they had not discontinue their exertions, for the wind 
shift a few hour before sunrise, and by the time that they had 
ship their rudder, it came on to blow fresh down the straits, the 
wind being accompany with a heavy swell. 

the admiral's ship still lay aground, and apparently no exertion were 
use to get her off. philip was much puzzle how to act: leave the 
crew of the _lion_ he could not; nor indeed could he refuse, or did he 
wish to refuse the admiral, if he propose coming on board; but he now 
made up his mind that it should only be as a passenger, and that he 
would himself retain the command. at present he contented himself with 
drop his anchor outside, clear of the reef, where he was sheltered 
by a bluff cape, under which the water was smooth, about a mile 
distant from where the admiral's ship lay on shore; and he employ 
his crew in replenish his water-casks from a rivulet close to where 
the ship was anchored. he wait to see if the other vessel got off, 
being convinced that if she did not some communication must soon take 
place. as soon as the water was complete, he sent one of the boat to 
the place where the commodore had been landed, have resolve to take 
him on board, if they could find him; but the boat return without 
have seen anything of him, although the men had clamber over the 
hill to a considerable distance. 

on the second morning after philip had haul his vessel off, they 
observe that the boat of the admiral's ship were passing and 
repass from the shore, landing her stores and provisions; and the 
next day, from the tent pitch on shore, it was evident that she was 
abandoned, although the boat were still employ in taking articles 
out of her. that night it blew fresh, and the sea was heavy; the next 
morning her mast were gone, and she turn on her broadside; she was 
evidently a wreck, and philip now consult with krantz how to act. to 
leave the crew of the _lion_ on shore was impossible: they must all 
perish when the winter set in upon such a desolate coast. on the 
whole, it was considered advisable that the first communication should 
come from the other party, and philip resolve to remain quiet at 
anchor. 

it was very plain that there was no long any subordinate among the 
crew of the _lion_, who were to be seen, in the day-time, climb 
over the rocks in every direction, and at night, when their large 
fire were lighted, carouse and drinking. this waste of provisions 
was a subject of much vexation to philip. he had not more than 
sufficient for his own crew, and he took it for grant that, so soon 
as what they had taken on shore should be expended, the crew of the 
_lion_ would ask to be received on board of the _dort_. 

for more than a week did affair continue in this state, when, one 
morning, a boat was seen pull towards the ship, and, in the 
stern-sheets philip recognise the officer who had been sent on board 
to put him under arrest. when the officer came on deck, he took off 
his hat to philip. 

"you do, then, acknowledge me as in command," observe philip. 

"yes, sir, most certainly; you were second in command, but now you are 
first--for the admiral is dead." 

"dead!" exclaim philip; "and how?" 

"he was found dead on the beach, under a high cliff, and the body 
of the commodore was in his arms; indeed, they were both grapple 
together. it is supposed, that in his walk up to the top of the hill, 
which he use to take every day, to see if any vessel might be in 
the straits, he fell in with the commodore--that they had come to 
contention, and had both fallen over the precipice together. no one 
saw the meeting, but they must have fallen over the rocks, as the 
body are dreadfully mangled." 

on inquiry, philip ascertain that all chance of saving the _lion_ 
had been lost after the second night, when she had beat in her 
larboard streak, and had six feet of water in the hold--that the crew 
had been very insubordinate, and had consume almost all the spirits; 
and that not only all the sick had already perished, but also 
many other who had either fallen over the rocks when they were 
intoxicated, or had been found dead in the morning, from their 
exposure during the night. 

"then the poor commodore's prophecy has been fulfilled!" observe 
philip to krantz. "many others, and even the admiral himself, have 
perish with him--peace be with them! and now let us get away from 
this horrible place as soon as possible." 

philip then gave orders to the officer to collect his men, and the 
provisions that remained, for immediate embarkation. krantz follow 
soon after with all the boats, and before night everything was on 
board. the body of the admiral and commodore were bury where they 
lay, and the next morning the _dort_ was under weigh, and, with a 
slant wind, was lay a fair course through the straits. 




chapter xix 


it appear as if their misfortune were to cease, after the tragic 
death of the two commanders. in a few days, the _dort_ had pass 
through the straits of magellan, and was sailing in the pacific ocean, 
with a blue sky and quiet sea. the ship's company recover their 
health and spirits, and the vessel being now well manned, the duty was 
carry on with cheerfulness. 

in about a fortnight, they had gain well up on the spain coast, 
but although they had seen many of the inhabitant on the beach, they 
had not fallen in with any vessel belong to the spaniards. aware 
that if he met with a spain ship of superior force it would attack 
him, philip had made every preparation, and had train his men to the 
guns. he had now, with the joint crew of the vessels, a well-manned 
ship, and the anticipation of prize-money had made his men very eager 
to fall in with some spaniard, which they knew that philip would 
capture if he could. light wind and calm detain them for a month 
on the coast, when philip determined upon running for the isle st 
marie, where, though he knew it was in possession of the spaniards, he 
yet hope to be able to procure refreshments for the ship's company, 
either by fair means or by force. the _dort_ was, by their reckoning, 
about thirty mile from the island, and have run in until after 
dark, they had hove-to till the next morning. krantz was on deck; 
he leant over the side, and as the sail flap to the masts, he 
attempt to define the line of the horizon. it was very dark, but as 
he watched, he thought that he perceive a light for a moment, and 
which then disappeared. fix his eyes on the spot, he soon made out 
a vessel, hove-to, and not two cables' length distant. he hasten 
down to apprise philip, and procure a glass. by the time philip was 
on deck, the vessel had been distinct made out to be a three-masted 
xebeque, very low in the water. after a short consultation, it was 
agree that the boat on the quarter should be lower down, and 
manned and armed without noise, and that they should steal gently 
alongside and surprise her. the men were call up, silence enjoined, 
and in a few minutes the boats' crew had possession of the vessel; 
have board her and secure the hatch before the alarm could be 
given by the few who were on deck. more men were then taken on board 
by krantz, who, as agree upon, lay to under the lee of the _dort_ 
until the daylight made its appearance. the hatch were then taken 
off, and the prisoner sent on board of the _dort_. there were sixty 
people on board, a large number for a vessel of that description. 

on being interrogated, two of the prisoners, who were well-dressed and 
gentlemanlike persons, step forward and state that the vessel was 
from st mary's, bound to lima, with a cargo of flour and passengers; 
that the crew and captain consist of twenty-five men, and all the 
rest who were on board, had taken that opportunity of go to lima. 
that they themselves were among the passengers, and trust that the 
vessel and cargo would be immediately released, as the two nation 
were not at war. 

"not at war at home, i grant," reply philip, "but in these seas, the 
constant aggression of your armed ship compel me to retaliate, and 
i shall therefore make a prize of your vessel and cargo. at the same 
time, as i have no wish to molest private individuals, i will land all 
the passenger and crew at st mary's, to which place i am bound in 
order to obtain refreshments, which now i shall expect will be given 
cheerful as your ransom, so as to relieve me from resort to 
force." the prisoner protest strong against this, but without 
avail. they then request leave to ransom the vessel and cargo, 
offering a large sum than they both appear to be worth; but philip, 
being short of provisions, refuse to part with the cargo, and the 
spaniard appear much disappointed at the unsuccessful issue of 
their request. finding that nothing would induce him to part with the 
provisions, they then beg hard to ransom the vessel; and to this, 
after a consultation with krantz, philip gave his assent. the two 
vessel then made sail, and steer on for the island, then about four 
league distant. although philip had not wish to retain the vessel, 
yet, as they stood in together, her superior speed became so manifest 
that he almost repent that he had agree to ransom her. 

at noon, the _dort_ was anchor in the roads, out of gunshot, and a 
portion of the passenger allow to go on shore and make arrangement 
for the ransom of the remainder, while the prize was haul alongside, 
and her cargo hoist into the ship. towards evening, three large 
boat with live stock and vegetable and the sum agree upon for the 
ransom of the xebeque, came alongside; and as soon as one of the boat 
was cleared, the prisoner were permit to go on shore in it, with 
the exception of the spain pilot, who, at the suggestion of krantz, 
was retained, with a promise of being release directly the _dort_ was 
clear of the spain seas. a negro slave was also, at his own 
request, allow to remain on board, much to the annoyance of the two 
passenger before mentioned, who claim the man as their property, 
and insist that it was an infraction of the agreement which had been 
enter into. "you prove my right by your own words," reply philip; 
"i agree to deliver up all the passengers, but no _property_; the 
slave will remain on board." 

finding their endeavour ineffectual, the spaniard took a haughty 
leave. the _dort_ remain at anchor that night to examine her 
rigging, and the next morning they discover that the xebeque had 
disappeared, have sail unperceived by them during the night. 

as soon as the anchor was up and sail made on the ship, philip went 
down to his cabin with krantz, to consult as to their best course. 
they were follow by the negro slave, who, shut the door and 
look watchful round, said that he wish to speak with them. his 
information was most important, but given rather too late. the vessel 
which had been ransom was a government advice-boat, the fastest 
sail the spaniard possessed. the two pretended passenger were 
officer of the spain navy, and the other were the crew of the 
vessel. she had been sent down to collect the bullion and take it 
to lima, and at the same time to watch for the arrival of the dutch 
fleet, intelligence of whose sailing had been some time before 
received overland. when the dutch fleet made its appearance, she 
was to return to lima with the news, and a spain force would be 
despatch against it. they further learnt that some of the supposed 
cask of flour contained 2000 gold doubloon each, other bar of 
silver; this precaution have been taken in case of capture. that the 
vessel had now sail for lima there was no doubt. the reason why 
the spaniard were so anxious not to leave the negro on board of the 
_dort_, was, that they knew that he would disclose what he now had 
done. as for the pilot, he was a man whom the spaniard knew they 
could trust, and for that reason they had better be careful of him, or 
he would lead the _dort_ into some difficulty. 

philip now repent that he had ransom the vessel, as he would, in 
all probability, have to meet and cope with a superior force, before 
he could make his way clear out of these seas; but there was no help 
for it. he consult with krantz, and it was agree that they should 
send for the ship's company and make them acquaint with these facts; 
argue that a knowledge of the valuable capture which they had made, 
would induce the men to fight well, and stimulate them with the hope 
of further success. the ship's company heard the intelligence with 
delight, professed themselves ready to meet double their force, and 
then, by the directions of philip, the cask were brought up on the 
quarter-deck, opened, and the bullion taken out. the whole, when 
collected, amount to about half a million of dollars, as near as 
they could estimate it, and a distribution of the coin money was 
made from the capstan the very next day; the bar of metal being 
reserved until they could be sold, and their value ascertained. 

for six week philip work his vessel up the coast, without 
fall in with any vessel under sail. notice had been given by the 
advice-boat, as it appeared, and every craft, large and small, was at 
anchor under the batteries. they had nearly run up the whole coast, 
and philip had determined that the next day he would stretch across to 
batavia, when a ship was seen in-shore under a press of sail, running 
towards lima. chase was immediately given, but the water shoaled, 
and the pilot was ask if they could stand on. he reply in the 
affirmative, state that they were now in the shallowest water, and 
that it was deep within. the leadsman was ordered into the chains, 
but at the first heave the lead-line broke; another was sent for, and 
the _dort_ still carry on under a heavy press of sail. just then, 
the negro slave went up to philip, and told him that he had seen the 
pilot with his knife in the chains, and that he thought he must have 
cut the lead-line so far through as to occasion it being carry away, 
and told philip not to trust him. the helm was immediately put down; 
but as the ship went round she touched on the bank, dragged, and was 
again clear.--"scoundrel!" cry philip. "so you cut the lead-line? 
the negro saw you, and has save us." 

the spaniard leap down from off the gun, and, before he could be 
prevented, had bury his knife in the heart of the negro. "maldetto, 
take that for your pains!" cry he, in a fury, grind his teeth and 
flourish his knife. 

the negro fell dead. the pilot was seize and disarm by the crew 
of the _dort_, who were partial to the negro, as it was from his 
information that they had become rich. 

"let them do with him as they please," said krantz to philip. 

"yes," reply philip; "summary justice." 

the crew debate a few minutes, and then lash the pilot to the 
negro, and carry him off to the taffrail. there was a heavy plunge, 
and he disappear under the eddy waters in the wake of the vessel. 

philip now determined to shape his course for batavia. he was within a 
few days' sail of lima, and had every reason to believe that vessel 
had been sent out to intercept him. with a favourable wind he now 
stood away from the coast, and for three days made a rapid passage. 
on the fourth, at daylight, two vessel appear to windward, bearing 
down upon him. that they were large armed vessel was evident; and the 
display of spain ensign and pennants, as they round to, about a 
mile to windward, soon show that they were enemies. they prove 
to be a frigate of a large size than the _dort_, and a corvette of 
twenty-two guns. 

the crew of the _dort_ show no alarm at this disparity of force: 
they clink their doubloon in their pockets; vow not to return 
them to their lawful owners, if they could help it; and flew with 
alacrity to their guns. the dutch ensign was display in defiance, 
and the two spain vessels, again putt their head towards the 
_dort_, that they might lessen their distance, received some rake 
shot, which somewhat discompose them; but they round to at a 
cable's length, and commence the action with great spirit, the 
frigate lie on the beam, and the corvette on the bow of philip's 
vessel. after half an hour's determined exchange of broadsides, the 
foremast of the spain frigate fell, carry away with it the 
maintop-mast; and this accident impede her firing. the _dort_ 
immediately made sail, stood on to the corvette, which she cripple 
with three or four broadsides, then tacked, and fetch alongside of 
the frigate, whose lee-guns were still impede with the wreck of the 
foremast. the two vessel now lay head and stern, within ten feet of 
each other, and the action recommence to the disadvantage of the 
spaniard. in a quarter of an hour the canvas, hanging overside, caught 
fire from the discharge of the guns, and very soon communicate to the 
ship, the _dort_ still pour in a most destructive broadside, which 
could not be effectually returned. after every attempt to extinguish 
the flames, the captain of the spain vessel resolve that both 
vessel should share the same fate. he put his helm up, and, running 
her on to the _dort_, grapple with her, and attempt to secure 
the two vessel together. then rage the conflict; the spaniard 
attempt to pass their grappling-chains so as to prevent the escape 
of their enemy, and the dutch endeavour to frustrate their attempt. 
the chain and side of both vessel were crowded with men fight 
desperately; those struck down fall between the two vessels, which 
the wreck of the foremast still prevent from coming into actual 
collision. during this conflict, philip and krantz were not idle. 
by square the after-yards, and putt all sail on forward they 
contrived that the _dort_ should pay off before the wind with her 
antagonist, and by this manoeuvre they clear themselves of the smoke 
which so incommode them; and, have good way on the two vessels, 
they then round to so as to get on the other tack, and bring the 
spaniard to leeward. this gave them a manifest advantage, and soon 
terminate the conflict. the smoke and flame were beat back on the 
spain vessel--the fire which had communicate to the _dort_ was 
extinguished--the spaniard were no long able to prosecute their 
endeavour to fasten the two vessel together, and retreat to within 
the bulwark of their own vessel; and, after great exertions, the 
_dort_ was disengaged, and forge ahead of her opponent, who was soon 
envelop in a sheet of flame. the corvette remain a few cables' 
length to windward, occasional fire a gun. philip pour in a 
broadside, and she haul down her colours. the action might now be 
considered at an end, and the object was to save the crew of the 
burning frigate. the boat of the _dort_ were hoist out, but only 
two of them could swim. one of them was immediately despatch to the 
corvette, with orders for her to send all her boat to the assistance 
of the frigate, which was done, and the major part of the survive 
crew were saved. for two hour the gun of the frigate, as they were 
heated by the flames, discharge themselves; and then, the fire have 
communicate to the magazine, she blew up, and the remainder of her 
hull sank slow and disappeared. among the prisoner in the uniform 
of the spain service philip perceive the two pretended passengers, 
this prove the correct of the negro's statement. the two 
men-of-war had been sent out of lima on purpose to intercept him, 
anticipating, with such a preponderate force, an easy victory. after 
some consultation with krantz, philip agree that, as the corvette was 
in such a cripple state, and the nation were not actually at war, 
it would be advisable to release her with all the prisoners. this was 
done, and the _dort_ again made sail for batavia, and anchor in 
the road three week after the combat had taken place. he found the 
remainder of the fleet, which had been despatch before them, and had 
arrive there some weeks, had taken in their cargoes, and were 
ready to sail for holland. philip wrote his despatches, in which he 
communicate to the director the event of the voyage; and then went 
on shore, to reside at the house of the merchant who had formerly 
received him, until the _dort_ could be freight for her voyage home. 




chapter xx 


we must return to amine, who is seat on the mossy bank where she and 
philip converse when they were interrupt by schriften the pilot. 
she is in deep thought, with her eyes cast down, as if try to 
recall the past. "alas! for my mother's power," exclaim she; "but it 
is gone--gone for ever! this torment and suspense i cannot bear--those 
foolish priest too!" and amine rose from the bank and walk towards 
her cottage. 

father mathia had not return to lisbon. at first he had not found 
an opportunity, and afterwards, his debt of gratitude towards philip 
induce him to remain by amine, who appear each day to hold more in 
aversion the tenet of the christian faith. many and many were the 
consultation with father seysen, many were the exhortation of both 
the good old men to amine, who, at times, would listen without reply, 
and at others, argue bold against them. it appear to them that she 
reject their religion with an obstinacy as unpardonable as it was 
incomprehensible. but to her the case was more simple: she refuse to 
believe, she said, that which she could not understand. she went so 
far as to acknowledge the beauty of the principles, the purity of the 
doctrine; but when the good priest would enter into the articles of 
their faith, amine would either shake her head or attempt to turn 
the conversation. this only increase the anxiety of the good father 
mathia to convert and save the soul of one so young and beautiful; 
and he now no long thought of return to lisbon, but devoted his 
whole time to the instruction of amine, who, weary by his incessant 
importunities, almost loathe his presence. 

upon reflection, it will not appear surprising that amine reject a 
creed so dissonant to her wish and intentions. the human mind is of 
that proud nature, that it require all its humility to be call into 
action before it will bow, even to the deity. 

amine knew that her mother had possessed superior knowledge, and an 
intimacy with unearthly intelligences. she had seen her practise her 
art with success, although so young at the time that she could not now 
call to mind the mystic preparation by which her mother had succeed 
in her wishes; and it was now that her thought were wholly bent upon 
recover what she had forgotten, that father mathia was exhort 
her to a creed which positively forbade even the attempt. the peculiar 
and awful mission of her husband strengthen her opinion in the 
lawful of calling in the aid of supernatural agencies; and the 
argument brought forward by these worthy, but not over-talented, 
professor of the christian creed, had but little effect upon a mind 
so strong and so decided as that of amine--a mind which, bent as it 
was upon one object, reject with scorn tenets, in proof of which 
they could offer no visible manifestation, and which would have bound 
her blind to believe what appear to her contrary to common sense. 
that her mother's art could bring evidence of _its_ truth she had 
already shown, and satisfy herself in the effect of the dream 
which she had prove upon philip;--but what proof could they bring 
forward?--records--_which they would not permit her to read_! 

"oh! that i had my mother's art," repeated amine once more, as she 
enter the cottage; "then would i know where my philip was at this 
moment. oh! for the black mirror in which i use to peer at her 
command, and tell her what pass in array before me. how well do i 
remember that time--the time of my father's absence, when i look 
into the liquid on the palm of my hand, and told her of the bedouin 
camp--of the skirmish--the horse without a rider--and the turban on 
the sand!" and again amine fell into deep thought. "yes," cry she, 
after a time, "thou canst assist me, mother! give me in a dream thy 
knowledge; thy daughter beg it as a boon. let me think again. the 
word--what was the word? what was the name of the spirit--turshoon? 
yes, methinks it was turshoon. mother! mother! help your daughter." 

"dost thou call upon the blessed virgin, my child?" said father 
mathias, who had enter the room as she pronounced the last words. 
"if so, thou dost well, for she may appear to thee in thy dreams, and 
strengthen thee in the true faith." 

"i call upon my own mother, who is in the land of spirits, good 
father," reply amine. 

"yes; but, as an infidel; not, i fear, in the land of the blessed 
spirits, my child." 

"she hardly will be punish for following the creed of her fathers, 
living where she did, where no other creed was known?" reply amine, 
indignantly. "if the good on earth are blessed in the next world--if 
she had, as you assert she had, a soul to be saved--an immortal 
spirit--he who made that spirit will not destroy it because she 
worship as her father did.--her life was good: why should she 
be punish for ignorance of that creed which she never had an 
opportunity of rejecting?" 

"who shall dispute the will of heaven, my child? be thankful that you 
are permit to be instructed, and to be received into the bosom of 
the holy church." 

"i am thankful for many things, father; but i am weary, and must wish 
you a good-night." 

amine retired to her room--but not to sleep. once more did she attempt 
the ceremony use by her mother, change them each time, as 
doubtful of her success. again the censer was lighted--the charm 
essayed; again the room was fill with smoke as she threw in the 
various herb which she had knowledge of, for all the papers thrown 
aside at her father's death had been careful collected, and on many 
were directions found as to the use of those herbs. "the word! the 
word! i have the first--the second word! help me, mother!" cry 
amine, as she sat by the side of the bed, in the room, which was now 
so full of smoke that nothing could be distinguished. "it is of no 
use," thought she at last, letting her hand fall at her side; "i have 
forgotten the art. mother! mother! help me in my dream this night." 

the smoke gradual clear away, and, when amine lift up her eyes, 
she perceive a figure standing before her. at first she thought she 
had been successful in her charm; but, as the figure became more 
distinct, she perceive that it was father mathias, who was look at 
her with a severe frown and contract brow, his arms fold before 
him. 

"unholy child! what dost thou?" 

amine had rouse the suspicion of the priests, not only by her 
conversation, but by several attempt which she had before made to 
recover her lost art; and on one occasion, in which she had defend 
it, both father mathia and father seysen had pour out the bitterest 
anathema upon her, or anyone who had resort to such practices. the 
smell of the fragrant herb thrown into the censer, and the smoke, 
which afterwards had escape through the door and ascend the stairs, 
had awaken the suspicion of father mathias, and he had crept up 
silently, and enter the room without her perceive it. amine at 
once perceive her danger. had she been single, she would have dare 
the priest; but, for philip's sake, she determined to mislead him. 

"i do no wrong, father," reply she, calmly; "but it appear to me 
not seemly that you should enter the chamber of a young woman during 
her husband's absence. i might have been in my bed. it is a strange 
intrusion." 

"thou canst not mean this, woman! my age--my profession--are a 
sufficient warranty," reply father mathias, somewhat confuse at 
this unexpected attack. 

"not always, father, if what i have been told of monk and priest 
be true," reply amine. "i ask again, why comest thou here into an 
unprotected woman's chamber?" 

"because i felt convinced that she was practise unholy arts." 

"unholy arts!--what mean you? is the leech's skill unholy? is it 
unholy to administer relief to those who suffer?--to charm the 
fever and the ague which rack the limb of those who live in this 
unwholesome climate?" 

"all charm are most unholy." 

"when i said charms, father, i meant not what you mean; i simply would 
have said a remedy. if a knowledge of certain wonderful herbs, 
which, properly combine will form a specific to ease the suffering 
wretch--an art well known unto my mother, and which i now would fain 
recall--if that knowledge, or a wish to regain that knowledge, be 
unholy, then are you correct." 

"i heard thee call upon thy mother for her help." 

"i did, for she well knew the ingredients; but i, i fear have not the 
knowledge that she had. is that sinful, good father?" 

"'tis, then, a remedy that you would find?" reply the priest; "i 
thought that thou didst practise that which is most unlawful." 

"can the burning of a few weeds be then unlawful? what did you expect 
to find? look you, father, at these ashes--they may, with oil, be 
rub into the pore and give relief--but can they do more? what do 
you expect from them--a ghost?--a spirit?--like the prophet raise for 
the king of israel?" and amine laugh aloud. 

"i am perplexed, but not convinced," reply the priest. 

"i, too, am perplexed and not convinced," respond amine, scornfully. 
"i cannot satisfy myself that a man of your discretion could really 
suppose that there was mischief in burning weeds; nor am i convinced 
that such was the occasion of your visit at this hour of the night to 
a lone woman's chamber. there may be natural charm more powerful than 
those you call supernatural. i pray you, father, leave this chamber. 
it is not seemly. should you again presume, you leave the house. i 
thought better of you. in future, i will not be left at any time 
alone." 

this attack of amine's upon the reputation of the old priest was too 
severe. father mathia immediately quit the room, saying, as he 
went out, "may god forgive you for your false suspicion and great 
injustice! i came here for the cause i have stated, and no more." 

"yes!" soliloquise amine, as the door closed, "i know you did; but i 
must rid myself of your unwelcome company. i will have no spy upon my 
actions--no meddle to thwart me in my will. in your zeal you have 
committed yourself, and i will take the advantage you have given me. 
is not the privacy of a woman's chamber to be held sacred by you 
sacred men? in return for assistance in distress--for food and 
shelter--you would become a spy. how grateful, and how worthy of the 
creed which you profess!" amine open her door as soon as she had 
remove the censer, and summon one of the women of the house to 
stay that night in her room, state that the priest had enter her 
chamber, and she did not like the intrusion. 

"holy father! is it possible?" reply the woman. 

amine made no reply, but went to bed; but father mathia heard all 
that pass as he pace the room below. the next day he call upon 
father seysen, and communicate to him what had occurred, and the 
false suspicion of amine. 

"you have act hastily," reply father seysen, "to visit a woman's 
chamber at such an hour of the night." 

"i had my suspicions, good father seysen." 

"and she will have hers. she is young and beautiful." 

"now, by the blessed virgin--" 

"i absolve you, good mathias," reply father seysen; "but still, if 
known, it would occasion much scandal to our church." 

and known it soon was; for the woman who had been summon by amine 
did not fail to mention the circumstance; and father mathia found 
himself everywhere so cold received, and, besides, so ill at ease 
with himself, that he very soon afterwards quit the country, and 
return to lisbon; angry with himself for his imprudence, but still 
more angry with amine for her unjust suspicions. 




chapter xxi 


the cargo of the _dort_ was soon ready, and philip sail and arrive 
at amsterdam without any further adventure. that he reach his 
cottage, and was received with delight by amine, need hardly be said. 
she had been expect him; for the two ship of the squadron, which 
had sail on his arrival at batavia, and which had charge of his 
despatches, had, of course, carry letters to her from philip, the 
first letters she had ever received from him during his voyages. six 
week after the letters philip himself made his appearance, and amine 
was happy. the director were, of course, highly satisfy with 
philip's conduct, and he was appoint to the command of a large armed 
ship, which was to proceed to india in the spring, and one-third of 
which, according to agreement, was purchase by philip out of the 
funds which he had in the hand of the company. he had now five month 
of quiet and repose to pass away, previous to his once more trust 
to the elements; and this time, as it was agreed, he had to make 
arrangement on board for the reception of amine. 

amine narrate to philip what had occur between her and the priest 
mathias, and by what means she had rid herself of his unwished-for 
surveillance. 

"and were you practise your mother's arts, amine?" 

"nay, not practise them, for i could not recall them, but i was 
try to recover them." 

"why so, amine? this must not be. it is, as the good father said, 
'unholy.' promise me you will abandon them, now and for ever." 

"if that act be unholy, philip, so is your mission. you would deal 
and co-operate with the spirits of another world--i would do no more. 
abandon your terrific mission--abandon your seek after disembodied 
spirits--stay at home with your amine, and she will cheerful comply 
with your request." 

"mine is an awful summons from the most high." 

"then the most high permit your communion with those who are not of 
this world?" 

"he does; you know even the priest do not gainsay it, although they 
shudder at the very thought." 

"if then he permit to one, he will to another; nay, aught that i can 
do is but with his permission." 

"yes, amine, so do he permit evil to stalk on the earth, but he 
countenance it not." 

"he countenance your seek after your doom father, your attempt 
to meet him; nay, more, he command it. if you are thus permitted, why 
may not i be? i am your wife, a portion of yourself; and when i am 
left over a desolate hearth, while you pursue your course of danger, 
may not i appeal also to the immaterial world to give me that 
intelligence which will soothe my sorrow, lighten my burden, and 
which, at the same time, can hurt no living creature? did i attempt to 
practise these arts for evil purposes, it were just to deny them me, 
and wrong to continue them; but i would but follow in the steps of my 
husband, and seek as he seeks, with a good intent." 

"but it is contrary to our faith." 

"have the priest declared your mission contrary to their faith? or, 
if they have, have they not been convinced to the contrary, and been 
awed to silence? but why argue, my dear philip? shall i not now be 
with you? and while with you i will attempt no more. you have my 
promise; but if separated, i will not say, but i shall then require of 
the invisible a knowledge of my husband's motions, when in search of 
the invisible also." 

the winter pass rapid away, for it was pass by philip in quiet 
and happiness; the spring came on, the vessel was to be fitted out, 
and philip and amine repair to amsterdam. 

the _utrecht_ was the name of the vessel to which he had been 
appointed, a ship of 400 tons, newly launched, and pierce for 
twenty-four guns. two more month pass away, during which philip 
superintend the fitting and load of the vessel, assist by his 
favourite krantz, who serve in her as first mate. every convenience 
and comfort that philip could think of was prepared for amine; and 
in the month of may he started, with orders to stop at gambroon and 
ceylon, run down the straits of sumatra, and from thence to force his 
way into the china seas, the company have every reason to expect 
from the portugal the most determined opposition to the attempt. his 
ship's company was numerous, and he had a small detachment of soldier 
on board to assist the supercargo, who carry out many thousand 
dollar to make purchase at port in china, where their goods might 
not be appreciated. every care had been taken in the equipment of the 
vessel, which was perhaps the finest, the best manned, and freight 
with the most valuable cargo, which had been sent out by the india 
company. 

the _utrecht_ sail with a flowing sheet, and was soon clear of the 
english channel; the voyage promise to be auspicious, favour gale 
bore them without accident to within a few hundred mile of the cape 
of good hope, when, for the first time, they were becalmed. amine was 
delighted: in the evenings she would pace the deck with philip; then 
all was silent, except the splash of the wave as it wash against 
the side of the vessel--all was in repose and beauty, as the bright 
southern constellation sparkle over their heads. 

"whose destiny can be in these stars, which appear not to those who 
inhabit the northern regions?" said amine, as she cast her eyes above, 
and watch them in their brightness; "and what do that fall 
meteor portend? what cause its rapid descent from heaven?" 

"do you, then, put faith in stars, amine?" 

"in araby we do; and why not? they were not spread over the sky to 
give light--for what then?" 

"to beautify the world. they have their uses, too." 

"then you agree with me--they have their uses, and the destiny of 
men are there concealed. my mother was one of those who could read 
them well. alas! for me they are a seal book." 

"is it not better so, amine?" 

"better!--say better to grovel on this earth with our selfish, 
humble race, wandering in mystery, and awe, and doubt, when we can 
communicate with the intelligence above! do not the soul leap at 
her admission to confer with superior powers? do not the proud heart 
bound at the feeling that its owner is one of those more gifted than 
the usual race of mortals? is it not a noble ambition?" 

"a dangerous one--most dangerous." 

"and therefore most noble. they seem as if they would speak to me: 
look at yon bright star--it beckon to me." 

for some time amine's eyes were raise aloft; she spoke not, and 
philip remain at her side. she walk to the gangway of the vessel, 
and look down upon the placid wave, pierce by the moonbeam far 
below the surface. 

"and do your imagination, amine, conjure up a race of being gifted 
to live beneath that deep blue wave, who sport amid the coral rocks, 
and braid their hair with pearls?" said philip, smiling. 

"i know not, but it appear to me that it would be sweet to live 
there. you may call to mind your dream, philip; i was then, according 
to your description, one of those same beings." 

"you were," reply philip, thoughtfully. 

"and yet i feel as if water would reject me, even if the vessel were 
to sink. in what manner this mortal frame of mine may be resolve 
into its elements, i know not; but this i do feel, that it never will 
become the sport of, or be toss by, the mock waves. but come in, 
philip, dearest; it is late, and the deck are wet with dew." 

when the day dawned, the look-out man at the mast-head report that 
he perceive something floating on the still surface of the water, on 
the beam of the vessel. krantz went up with his glass to examine, and 
made it out to be a small boat, probably cut adrift from some vessel. 
as there was no appearance of wind, philip permit a boat to be sent 
to examine it, and after a long pull, the seamen return on board, 
tow the small boat astern. 

"there is a body of a man in it, sir," said the second mate to krantz, 
as he gain the gangway; "but whether he is quite dead, or not, i 
cannot tell." 

krantz report this to philip, who was, at that time, sitting at 
breakfast with amine in the cabin, and then proceed to the gangway, 
to where the body of the man had been already hand up by the seamen. 
the surgeon, who had been summoned, declared that life was not yet 
extinct, and was order him to be taken below for recovery, when, to 
their astonishment, the man turn as he lay, sat up, and ultimately 
rose upon his feet and stagger to a gun, when, after a time, he 
appear to be fully recovered. in reply to question put to him, he 
said that he was in a vessel which had been upset in a squall, that he 
had time to cut away the small boat astern, and that all the rest of 
the crew had perished. he had hardly made this answer, when philip 
with amine came out of the cabin, and walk up to where the seamen 
were crowded round the man; the seamen retreat so as to make an 
opening, when philip and amine, to their astonishment and horror, 
recognise their old acquaintance, the one-eyed pilot schriften. 

"he! he! captain vanderdecken, i believe--glad to see you in command, 
and you too, fair lady." 

philip turn away with a chill at his heart; amine's eye flash as 
she survey the waste form of the wretched creature. after a few 
seconds, she turn round and follow philip into the cabin, where 
she found him with his face bury in his hands. 

"courage, philip, courage!" said amine; "it was indeed a heavy shock, 
and i fear me forbode evil--but what then; it is our destiny." 

"it is--it ought perhaps to be mine," reply philip, raise his 
head; "but you, amine, why should you be a partner--" 

"i am your partner, philip, in life and in death. i would not die 
first, philip, because it would grieve you; but your death will be the 
signal for mine, and i will join you quickly." 

"surely, amine, you would not hasten your own?" 

"yes! and require but one moment for this little steel to do its 
duty." 

"nay! amine, that is not lawful--our religion forbid it." 

"it may do so, but i cannot tell why. i came into this world without 
my own consent--surely i may leave it without ask the leave of 
priests! but let that pass for the present: what will you do with that 
schriften?" 

"put him on shore at the cape; i cannot bear the odious wretch's 
presence. did you not feel the chill, as before, when you approach 
him?" 

"i did--i knew that he was there before i saw him; but still, i know 
not why, i feel as if i would not send him away." 

"why not?" 

"i believe it is because i am inclined to brave destiny, not to quail 
at it. the wretch can do no harm." 

"yes, he can--much: he can render the ship's company mutinous and 
disaffected;--besides, he attempt to deprive me of my relic." 

"i almost wish he had done so; then must you have discontinue this 
wild search." 

"nay, amine, say not so; it is my duty, and i have taken my solemn 
oath--" 

"but this schriften--you cannot well put him ashore at the cape; being 
a company's officer, you might send him home if you found a ship there 
homeward-bound; still, were i you, i would let destiny work. he is 
woven in with ours, that is certain. courage, philip, and let him 
remain." 

"perhaps you are right, amine; i may retard, but cannot escape, 
whatever may be my intended fate." 

"let him remain, then, and let him do his worst. treat him with 
kindness--who know what we may gain from him?" 

"true, true, amine; he has been my enemy without cause. who can 
tell?--perhaps he may become my friend." 

"and if not, you will have done your duty. send for him now." 

"no, not now--to-morrow; in the meantime, i will order him every 
comfort." 

"we are talk as if he were one of us, which i feel that he is not," 
reply amine; "but still, mundane or not, we cannot but offer mundane 
kindness, and what this world, or rather what this ship affords. i 
long now to talk with him, to see if i can produce any effect upon his 
ice-like frame. shall i make love to the ghoul?" and amine burst into 
a bitter laugh. 

here the conversation dropped, but its substance was not disregarded. 
the next morning, the surgeon have report that schriften was 
apparently quite recovered, he was summon into the cabin. his frame 
was waste away to a skeleton, but his motions and his language were 
as sharp and petulant as ever. 

"i have sent for you, schriften, to know if there is anything that i 
can do to make you more comfortable. is there anything that you want?" 

"want?" reply schriften, eye first philip and then amine.--"he! 
he! i think i want filling out a little." 

"that you will, i trust, in good time; my steward has my orders to 
take care of you." 

"poor man," said amine, with a look of pity, "how much he must have 
suffered! is not this the man who brought you the letter from the 
company, philip?" 

"he! he! yes! not very welcome, was it, lady?" 

"no, my good fellow, it's never a welcome message to a wife, that 
send her husband away from her. but that was not your fault." 

"if a husband will go to sea and leave a handsome wife, when he has, 
as they say, plenty of money to live upon on shore, he! he!" 

"yes, indeed, you may well say that," reply amine. 

"better give it up. all folly, all madness--eh, captain?" 

"i must finish this voyage, at all events," reply philip to amine, 
"whatever i may do afterwards. i have suffer much, and so have you, 
schriften. you have been twice wrecked; now tell me what do you wish 
to do? go home in the first ship, or go ashore at the cape--or--" 

"or do anything, so i get out of this ship--he! he!" 

"not so. if you prefer sailing with me, as i know you are a good 
seaman, you shall have your rating and pay of pilot--that is, if you 
choose to follow my fortunes." 

"follow?--must follow. yes! i'll sail with you, mynheer vanderdecken, 
i wish to be always near you--he! he!" 

"be it so, then: as soon as you are strong again, you will go to your 
duty; till then, i will see that you want for nothing." 

"nor i, my good fellow. come to me if you do, and i will be your 
help," said amine. "you have suffer much, but we will do what we can 
to make you forget it." 

"very good! very kind!" reply schriften, survey the lovely face 
and figure of amine. after a time, shrug up his shoulders, he 
added--"a pity! yes it is!--must be, though." 

"farewell," continue amine, holding out her hand to schriften. 

the man took it, and a cold shudder went to her heart; but she, 
expect such a result, would not appear to feel it. schriften held 
her hand for a second or two in his own, look at it earnestly, and 
then at amine's face.--"so fair, so good! mynheer vanderdecken, i 
thank you. lady, may heaven preserve you!"--then, squeeze the hand 
of amine which he had not released, schriften hasten out of the 
cabin. 

so great was the sudden icy shock which pass through amine's frame 
when schriften pressed her hand, that when with difficulty she gain 
the sofa she fell upon it. after remain with her hand pressed 
against her heart for some time, during which philip bent over her, 
she said in a breathless voice, "that creature must be supernatural, 
i am sure of it, i am now convinced.--well," continue she, after a 
pause of some little while, "all the better, if we can make him a 
friend; and if i can i will." 

"but think you, amine, that those who are not of this world have 
feelings of kindness, gratitude, and ill-will, as we have? can they be 
made subservient?" 

"most surely so. if they have ill-will, as we know they have, they 
must also be endow with the better feelings. why are there good and 
evil intelligences? they may have disencumber themselves of their 
mortal clay, but the soul must be the same. a soul without feeling 
were no soul at all. the soul is active in this world and must be so 
in the next. if angel can pity, they must feel like us. if demon can 
vex, they must feel like us. our feelings change, then why not theirs? 
without feelings, there were no heaven, no hell. here our soul are 
confined, cribbed, and overladen, borne down by the heavy flesh by 
which they are, for the time, polluted; but the soul that has wing 
its flight from clay is, i think, not one jot more pure, more bright, 
or more perfect than those within ourselves. can they be made 
subservient, say you! yes! they can; they can be forced, when mortal 
possess the means and power. the evil-inclined may be forced to good, 
as well as to evil. it is not the good and perfect spirits that we 
subject by art, but those that are inclined to wrong. it is over them 
that mortal have the power. our arts have no power over the perfect 
spirits, but over those which are ever working evil, and which are 
bound to obey and do good, if those who master them require it." 

"you still resort to forbidden arts, amine. is that right?" 

"right! if we have power given to us, it is right to use it." 

"yes, most certainly, for good--but not for evil." 

"mortals in power, possess nothing but what is mundane, are 
answerable for the use of that power; so those gifted by superior 
means, are answerable as they employ those means. do the god above 
make a flower to grow, intend that it should not be gathered? no! 
neither do he allow supernatural aid to be given, if he did not 
intend that mortal should avail themselves of it." 

as amine's eyes beam upon philip's, he could not for the moment 
subdue the idea rising in his mind, that she was not like other 
mortals, and he calm observed, "am i sure, amine, that i am wedded 
to one mortal as myself?" 

"yes! yes! philip, compose yourself, i am but mortal; would to heaven 
i were not. would to heaven i were one of those who could hover over 
you, watch you in all your perils, save and protect you in this your 
mad career; but i am but a poor weak woman, whose heart beat fondly, 
devoted for you--who, for you, would dare all and everything--who, 
change in her nature, has become courageous and daring from her love; 
and who reject all creed which would prevent her from calling upon 
heaven, or earth, or hell, to assist her in retain with her her 
soul's existence?" 

"nay! nay! amine, say not you reject the creed. do not this,"--and 
philip pull from his bosom the holy relic, "does not this, and the 
message sent by it, prove our creed is true?" 

"i have thought much of it, philip. at first it startle me almost 
into a belief, but even your own priest help to undeceive me. they 
would not answer you; they would have left you to guide yourself; the 
message and the holy word, and the wonderful sign given were not in 
unison with their creed, and they halted. may i not halt, if they 
did? the relic may be as mystic, as powerful as you describe; but 
the agency may be false and wicked, the power given to it may have 
fallen into wrong hands--the power remains the same, but it is applied 
to use not intended." 

"the power, amine, can only be exercise by those who are friends to 
him who die upon it." 

"then is it no power at all; or if a power, not half so great as that 
of the arch-fiend; for his can work for good and evil both. but on 
this point, dear philip, we do not well agree, nor can we convince 
each other. you have been taught in one way, i another. that which 
our childhood has imbibed, which has grown up with our growth, and 
strengthen with our years, is not to be eradicated. i have seen my 
mother work great charms, and succeed. you have knelt to priests: i 
blame not you!--blame not then your amine. we both mean well--i trust, 
do well." 

"if a life of innocence and purity were all that were required, my 
amine would be sure of future bliss." 

"i think it is; and thinking so, it is my creed. there are many 
creeds: who shall say which is the true one? and what matter it? they 
all have the same end in view--a future heaven." 

"true, amine, true," reply philip, pace the cabin thoughtfully; 
"and yet our priest say otherwise." 

"what is the basis of their creed, philip?" 

"charity, and good-will." 

"does charity condemn to eternal misery those who have never heard 
this creed, who have live and die worship the great being after 
their best endeavours, and little knowledge?" 

"no, surely." 

amine made no further observations; and philip, after pace for a few 
minutes in deep thought, walk out of the cabin. 

the _utrecht_ arrive at the cape, watered, and proceed on her 
voyage and, after two month of difficult navigation, cast anchor off 
gambroon. during this time, amine had been uncease in her attempt 
to gain the good-will of schriften. she had often converse with him 
on deck, and had done him every kindness, and had overcome that fear 
which his near approach had generally occasioned. schriften gradual 
appear mindful of this kindness, and at last to be pleased with 
amine's company. to philip he was at times civil and courteous, but 
not always; but to amine he was always deferent. his language was 
mystical, she could not prevent his chuckle laugh, his occasional 
"he! he!" from break forth. but when they anchor at gambroon, he 
was on such terms with her, that he would occasional come into the 
cabin; and, although he would not sit down, would talk to amine for 
a few minutes, and then depart. while the vessel lay at anchor at 
gambroon, schriften one evening walk up to amine, who was sitting on 
the poop. "lady," said he, after a pause, "yon ship sail for your own 
country in a few days." 

"so i am told," reply amine. 

"will you take the advice of one who wish you well? return in that 
vessel, go back to your own cottage, and stay there till your husband 
come to you once more." 

"why is this advice given?" 

"because i forbode danger, nay, perhaps death, a cruel death, to one i 
would not harm." 

"to me!" reply amine, fix her eyes upon schriften, and meeting 
his piercing gaze. 

"yes, to you. some people can see into futurity farther than others." 

"not if they are mortal," reply amine. 

"yes, if they are mortal. but mortal or not, i do see that which i 
would avert. tempt not destiny farther." 

"who can avert it? if i take your counsel, still was it my destiny to 
take your counsel. if i take it not, still it was my destiny." 

"well, then, avoid what threaten you." 

"i fear not, yet do i thank you. tell me, schriften, hast thou not 
thy fate someway interwoven with that of my husband? i feel that thou 
hast." 

"why think you so, lady?" 

"for many reasons: twice you have summon him, twice have you been 
wrecked, and miraculous reappear and recovered. you know, too, of 
his mission, that is evident." 

"but prove nothing." 

"yes! it prove much; for it prove that you knew what was supposed to 
be known but to him alone." 

"it was known to you, and holy men debate on it," reply schriften 
with a sneer. 

"how knew you that, again?" 

"he! he!" reply schriften; "forgive me, lady, i meant not to affront 
you." 

"you cannot deny that you are connected mysterious and 
incomprehensibly with this mission of my husband's. tell me, is it as 
he believes, true and holy?" 

"if he think that it is true and holy, it become so." 

"why then do you appear his enemy?" 

"i am not _his_ enemy, fair lady." 

"you are not his enemy--why then did you once attempt to deprive him 
of the mystic relic by which the mission is to be accomplished?" 

"i would prevent his further search, for reason which must not be 
told. do that prove that i am his enemy? would it not be better that 
he should remain on shore with competence and you, than be crossing 
the wild sea on this mad search? without the relic it is not to be 
accomplished. it were a kindness, then, to take it from him." 

amine answer not, for she was lost in thought. 

"lady," continue schriften, after a time; "i wish you well. for your 
husband i care not, yet do i wish him no harm. now hear me; if you 
wish for your future life to be one of ease and peace--if you wish to 
remain long in this world with the husband of your choice--of your 
first and warmest love--if you wish that he should die in his bed at a 
good old age, and that you should close his eyes with children's tear 
lamenting, and their smile reserved to cheer their mother--all this i 
see and can promise is in futurity, if you will take that relic from 
his bosom and give it up to me. but if you would that he should 
suffer more than man has ever suffered, pass his whole life in doubt, 
anxiety, and pain, until the deep wave receive his corpse, then let 
him keep it--if you would that your own days be shortened, and yet 
those remain be long in human sufferings, if you would be separate 
from him and die a cruel death, then let him keep it. i can read 
futurity, and such must be the destiny of both. lady, consider well, i 
must leave you now. to-morrow i will have your answer." 

schriften walk away and left amine to her own reflections. for a 
long while she repeated to herself the conversation and denunciation 
of the man, whom she was now convinced was not of this world, and was 
in some way or another deep connected with her husband's fate. 
"to me he wish well, no harm to my husband, and would prevent his 
search. why would he?--that he will not tell. he has tempt me, 
tempt me most strangely. how easy 'twere to take the relic whilst 
philip sleep upon my bosom--but how treacherous! and yet a life of 
competence and ease, a smile family, a good old age; what offer to 
a fond and doting wife! and if not, toil, anxiety, and a watery grave; 
and for me! pshaw! that's nothing. and yet to die separate from 
philip, is that nothing? oh, no, the thought is dreadful.--i do 
believe him. yes, he has foretold the future, and told it truly. could 
i persuade philip? no! i know him well; he has vowed, and is not to be 
changed. and yet, if the relic were taken without his knowledge, he 
would not have to blame himself. who then would he blame? could i 
deceive him? i, the wife of his bosom tell a lie. no! no! it must not 
be. come what will, it is our destiny, and i am resigned. i would that 
schriften had not spoken. alas! we search into futurity, and then 
would fain retrace our steps, and wish we had remain in ignorance." 

"what make you so pensive, amine?" said philip, who some time 
afterwards walk up to where she was seated. 

amine reply not at first. "shall i tell him all?" thought she. "it 
is my only chance--i will." amine repeated the conversation between 
her and schriften. philip made no reply; he sat down by amine and took 
her hand. amine drop her head upon her husband's shoulder. "what 
think you, amine?" said philip, after a time. 

"i could not steal your relic, philip; perhaps you'll give it to me." 

"and my father, amine, my poor father--his dreadful doom to be 
eternal! he who appealed, was permit to appeal to his son, that 
that dreadful doom might be averted. do not the conversation of this 
man prove to you that my mission is not false? do not his knowledge 
of it strengthen all? yet, why would he prevent it?" continue philip, 
musing. 

"why, i cannot tell, philip, but i would fain prevent it. i feel that 
he has power to read the future, and has read aright." 

"be it so; he has spoken, but not plainly. he has promise me what i 
have long been prepared for--what i vow to heaven to suffer. already 
have i suffer much, and am prepared to suffer more. i have long 
look upon this world as a pilgrimage, and (selected as i have been) 
trust that my reward will be in the other. but, amine, you are not 
bound by oath to heaven, you have made no compact. he advise you to 
go home. he talk of a cruel death. follow his advice and avoid it." 

"i am not bound by oath, philip; but hear me; as i hope for future 
bliss, i now bind myself--" 

"hold, amine!" 

"nay, philip, you cannot prevent me; for if you do now, i will repeat 
it when you are absent. a cruel death were a charity to me, for i 
shall not see you suffer. then may i never expect future bliss, may 
eternal misery be my portion, if i leave you as long as fate permit 
us to be together. i am yours--your wife; my fortunes, my present, my 
future, my all are embark with you, and destiny may do its worst, 
for amine will not quail. i have no recreant heart to turn aside from 
danger or from suffering. in that one point, philip, at least, you 
chose, you wedded well." 

philip raise her hand to his lip in silence, and the conversation 
was not resumed. the next evening, schriften came up again to amine. 
"well, lady?" said he. 

"schriften, it cannot be," reply amine; "yet do i thank you much." 

"lady, if he must follow up his mission, why should you?" 

"schriften, i am his wife--his for ever, in this world, and the next. 
you cannot blame me." 

"no," reply schriften, "i do not blame, i admire you. i feel sorry. 
but, after all, what is death? nothing. he! he!" and schriften 
hasten away, and left amine to herself. 



chapter xxii 


the _utrecht_ sail from gambroon, touched at ceylon, and proceed 
on her voyage in the eastern seas. schriften still remain on board, 
but since his last conversation with amine he had kept aloof, and 
appear to avoid both her and philip; still there was not, as before, 
any attempt to make the ship's company disaffected, nor did he indulge 
in his usual taunt and sneers. the communication he had made to amine 
had also its effect upon her and philip; they were more pensive and 
thoughtful; each attempt to conceal their gloom from the other; and 
when they embraced, it was with the mournful feeling that perhaps it 
was an indulgence they would soon be deprived of: at the same time, 
they steel their heart to endurance and prepared to meet the worst. 
krantz wonder at the change, but of course could not account for it. 
the _utrecht_ was not far from the andaman isles, when krantz, who had 
watch the barometer, came in early one morning and call philip. 

"we have every prospect of a typhoon, sir," said krantz; "the glass 
and the weather are both threatening." 

"then we must make all snug. send down top-gallant yard and small 
sail directly. we will strike top-gallant masts. i will be out in a 
minute." 

philip hasten on deck. the sea was smooth, but already the moan 
of the wind gave notice of the approach storm. the vacuum in the 
air was about to be fill up, and the convulsion would be terrible; a 
white haze gather fast, thick and thicker; the men were turn up, 
everything of weight was sent below, and the gun were secured. now 
came a blast of wind which careen the ship, pass over, and in a 
minute she right as before; then another and another, fierce and 
fierce still. the sea, although smooth, at last appear white as a 
sheet with foam, as the typhoon swept along in its impetuous career; 
it burst upon the vessel, which bowed down to her gunwale and there 
remained; in a quarter of an hour the hurricane had pass over, and 
the vessel was relieved; but the sea had risen, and the wind was 
strong. in another hour the blast again came, more wild, more furious 
than the first, the wave were dashed into their faces, torrent 
of rain descended, the ship was thrown on her beam ends, and thus 
remain till the wild blast had pass away, to sweep destruction far 
beyond them, leave behind it a tumultuous angry sea. 

"it is nearly over i believe, sir," said krantz. "it is clearing up a 
little to windward." 

"we have had the worst of it, i believe," said philip. 

"no! there is worse to come," said a low voice near to philip. it was 
schriften who spoke. 

"a vessel to windward scud before the gale," cry krantz. 

philip look to windward, and in the spot where the horizon was 
clearest, he saw a vessel under topsail and foresail, standing right 
down. "she is a large vessel; bring me my glass." the telescope was 
brought from the cabin, but before philip could use it, a haze had 
again gather up to windward, and the vessel was not to be seen. 

"thick again," observe philip, as he shut in his telescope; "we must 
look out for that vessel, that she do not run too close to us." 

"she has seen us, no doubt, sir," said krantz. 

after a few minutes the typhoon again raged, and the atmosphere was of 
a murky gloom. it seem as if some heavy fog had been hurl along 
by the furious wind; nothing was to be distinguished except the white 
foam of the sea, and that not the distance of half a cable's length, 
where it was lost in one dark gray mist. the storm-staysail yielding 
to the force of the wind, was rent into strips, and flog and 
cracked with a noise even loud than the gale. the furious blast 
again blew over, and the mist clear up a little. 

"ship on the weather beam close aboard of us," cry one of the men. 

krantz and philip sprung upon the gunwale, and beheld the large ship 
bearing right down upon them, not three cables' length distant. 

"helm up! she do not see us, and she will be aboard of us!" cry 
philip. "helm up, i say, hard up, quick!" 

the helm was put up, as the men, perceive their imminent danger, 
climb upon the gun to look if the vessel alter her course; but 
no--down she came, and the head-sails of the _utrecht_ have been 
carry away, to their horror they perceive that she would not answer 
her helm and pay off as they required. 

"ship, ahoy!" roar philip through his trumpet--but the gale drove 
the sound back. 

"ship, ahoy!" cry krantz on the gunwale, wave his hat. it was 
useless--down she came, with the waters foam under her bows, and 
was now within pistol-shot of the _utrecht_. 

"ship, ahoy!" roar all the sailors, with a shout that must have been 
heard: it was not attend to; down came the vessel upon them, and now 
her cutwater was within ten yard of the _utrecht_. the men of the 
_utrecht_, who expect that their vessel would be sever in half by 
the concussion, climb upon the weather gunwale, all ready to catch 
at the ropes of the other vessel and climb on board of her. amine who 
had been surprise at the noise on deck, had come out and had taken 
philip by the arm. 

"trust to me--the shock"--said philip. he said no more; the cutwater 
of the stranger touched their sides; one general cry was raise by the 
sailor of the _utrecht_, they sprang to catch at the rigging of 
the other vessel's bowsprit which was now pointed between their 
masts--they caught at nothing--nothing--there was no shock--no 
concussion of the two vessels--the stranger appear to cleave through 
them--her hull pass along in silence--no crack of timbers--no 
fall of masts--the foreyard pass through their mainsail, yet 
the canvas was unrent--the whole vessel appear to cut through the 
_utrecht_, yet left no trace of injury--not fast, but slowly, as if 
she were really saw through her by the heave and toss of the 
sea with her sharp prow. the stranger's forechain had pass their 
gunwale before philip could recover himself. "amine," cry he, at 
last, "the phantom ship! my father!" 

the seamen of the _utrecht_, more astound by the marvellous result 
than by their former danger, threw themselves down upon deck; some 
hasten below, some prayed, other were dumb with astonishment and 
fear. amine appear more calm than any, not excepting philip; she 
survey the vessel as it slow forced its way through; she beheld 
the seamen on board of her cool leaning over her gunwale, as 
if deride the destruction they had occasioned; she look for 
vanderdecken himself, and on the poop of the vessel, with his trumpet 
under his arm, she beheld the image of her philip--the same hardy, 
strong build--the same features--about the same age apparently--there 
could be no doubt it was the _doomed_ vanderdecken! 

"see, philip," said she, "see!--your father!" 

"even so--merciful heaven! it is--it is"--and philip, overpower by 
his feelings, sank upon deck. 

the vessel had now pass over the _utrecht_; the form of the elder 
vanderdecken was seen to walk aft and look over the taffrail; amine 
perceive it to start and turn away suddenly--she look down, and 
saw schriften shake his fist in defiance at the supernatural being! 
again the phantom ship flew to leeward before the gale, and was soon 
lost in the mist; but before that, amine had turn and perceive the 
situation of philip. no one but herself and schriften appear able to 
act or move. she caught the pilot's eye, beckon to him, and with his 
assistance philip was led into the cabin. 




chapter xxiii 


"i have then seen him," said philip, after he had lain down on the 
sofa in the cabin for some minutes to recover himself, while amine 
bent over him. "i have at last seen him, amine! can you doubt now?" 

"no, philip, i have now no doubt," reply amine, mournfully; "but 
take courage, philip." 

"for myself, i want not courage--but for you, amine--you know that his 
appearance portend a mischief that will surely come." 

"let it come," reply amine, calmly; "i have long been prepared for 
it, and so have you." 

"yes, for myself; but not for you." 

"you have been wreck often, and have been saved--then why should not 
i?" 

"but the sufferings!" 

"those suffer least, who have most courage to bear up against them. i 
am but a woman, weak and frail in body, but i trust i have that within 
me which will not make you feel ashamed of amine. no, philip, you will 
have no wailing, no expression of despair from amine's lips; if she 
can console you, she will; if she can assist you, she will; but, come 
what may, if she cannot serve you, at least, she will prove no burden 
to you." 

"your presence in misfortune would un-nerve me, amine." 

"it shall not; it shall add to your resolution. let fate do its 
worst." 

"depend upon it, amine, that will be ere long." 

"be it so," reply amine; "but, philip, it were as well you show 
yourself on deck--the men are frightened, and your absence will be 
observed." 

"you are right," said philip; and rising and embrace her, he left 
the cabin. 

"it is but too true, then," thought amine. "now to prepare for 
disaster and death--the warning has come. i would i could know more. 
oh! mother, mother, look down upon thy child, and in a dream reveal 
the mystic arts which i have forgotten, then should i know more; but i 
have promise philip, that unless separated--yes, that idea is worse 
than death, and i have a sad foreboding; my courage fail me only when 
i think of that!" 

philip, on his return to the deck, found the crew of the vessel in 
great consternation. krantz himself appear bewildered--he had not 
forgotten the appearance of the phantom ship off desolate harbour, 
and the vessel following her to their destruction. this second 
appearance, more awful than the former, quite unmann him; and when 
philip came out of the cabin, he was leaning in gloomy silence against 
the weather bulkhead. 

"we shall never reach port again, sir," said he to philip, as he came 
up to him. 

"silence, silence; the men may hear you." 

"it matter not--they think the same," reply krantz. 

"but they are wrong," reply philip, turning to the seamen. "my lads! 
that some disaster may happen to us, after the appearance of this 
vessel, is most probable; i have seen her before more than once, and 
disaster did then happen; but here i am alive and well, therefore it 
do not prove that we cannot escape as i have before done. we must do 
our best, and trust in heaven. the gale is break fast, and in a few 
hour we shall have fine weather. i have met this phantom ship 
before, and care not how often i meet it again. mr krantz, get up the 
spirits--the men have had hard work, and must be fatigued." 

the very prospect of obtain liquor, appear to give courage to the 
men; they hasten to obey the order, and the quantity serve out was 
sufficient to give courage to the most fearful, and induce other to 
defy old vanderdecken and his whole crew of imps. the next morning the 
weather was fine, the sea smooth, and the _utrecht_ went gaily on her 
voyage. 

many days of gentle breeze and favour wind gradual wore off the 
panic occasion by the supernatural appearance, and if not forgotten, 
it was refer to either in jest or with indifference. they now 
had run through the straits of malacca, and enter the polynesian 
archipelago. philip's orders were to refresh and call for instruction 
at the small island of boton, then in possession of the dutch. they 
arrive there in safety, and after remain two days, again sail on 
their voyage, intend to make their passage between the celebe and 
the island of galago. the weather was still clear and the wind light: 
they proceed cautiously, on account of the reef and currents, 
and with a careful watch for the pirate vessels, which have for 
century infest those seas; but they were not molested, and had 
gain well up among the island to the north of galago, when it fell 
calm, and the vessel was borne to the eastward of it by the current. 
the calm last several days, and they could procure no anchorage; at 
last they found themselves among the cluster of island near to the 
northern coast of new guinea. 

the anchor was dropped, and the sail furl for the night; a 
drizzle small rain came on, the weather was thick, and watches were 
station in every part of the ship, that they might not be surprise 
by the pirate proas, for the current ran past the ship, at the rate 
of eight or nine mile per hour, and these vessels, if hid among the 
islands, might sweep down upon them unperceived. 

it was twelve o'clock at night when philip, who was in bed, was 
awaken by a shock; he thought it might be a proa running alongside, 
and he start from his bed and ran out. he found krantz, who had 
been awaken by the same cause, running up undressed--another shock 
succeeded, and the ship careen to port. philip then knew that the 
ship was on shore. 

the thickness of the night prevent them from ascertain where they 
were, but the lead was thrown over the side, and they found that they 
were lie on shore on a sand bank, with not more than fourteen feet 
water on the deepest side, and that they were broadside on, with 
a strong current pressing them further up on the bank; indeed the 
current ran like a mill-race, and each minute they were swept into 
shallow water. 

on examination they found that the ship had drag her anchor, which, 
with the cable, was still taut from the starboard bow, but this did 
not appear to prevent the vessel from being swept further up on the 
bank. it was supposed that the anchor had part at the shank, and 
another anchor was let go. 

nothing more could be done till daybreak, and impatient did they 
wait till the next morning. as the sun rose, the mist clear away, 
and they discover that they were on shore on a sand bank, a small 
portion of which was above water, and round which the current ran with 
great impetuosity. about three mile from them was a cluster of small 
island with cocoa-trees grow on them, but with no appearance of 
inhabitants. 

"i fear we have little chance," observe krantz to philip. "if we 
lighten the vessel the anchor may not hold, and we shall be swept 
further on, and it is impossible to lay out an anchor against the 
force of this current." 

"at all event we must try; but i grant that our situation is anything 
but satisfactory. send all the hand aft." 

the men came aft, gloomy and dispirited. 

"my lads!" said philip, "why are you disheartened?" 

"we are doomed, sir; we knew it would be so." 

"i thought it probable that the ship would be lost--i told you so; but 
the loss of the ship do not involve that of the ship's company--nay, 
it do not follow that the ship is to be lost, although she may be in 
great difficulty, as she is at present. what fear is there for us, my 
men?--the water is smooth--we have plenty of time before us--we can 
make a raft and take to our boats--it never blow among these islands, 
and we have land close under our lee. let us first try what we can do 
with the ship; if we fail, we must then take care of ourselves." 

the men caught at the idea and went to work willingly; the water cask 
were started, the pump set going, and everything that could be spare 
was thrown over to lighten the ship; but the anchor still drag from 
the strength of the current and bad holding-ground; and philip and 
krantz perceive that they were swept further on the bank. 

night came on before they quit their toil, and then a fresh breeze 
sprung up and create a swell, which occasion the vessel to beat 
on the hard sand; thus did they continue until the next morning. at 
daylight the men resume their labours, and the pump were again 
manned to clear the vessel of the water which had been started, but 
after a time they pump up sand. this told them that a plank had 
started, and that their labour were useless; the men left their work, 
but philip again encourage them, and pointed out that they could 
easily save themselves, and all that they had to do was to construct a 
raft, which would hold provisions for them, and receive that portion 
of the crew who could not be taken into the boats. 

after some repose the men again set to work; the topsail were struck, 
the yard lower down, and the raft was commence under the lee of 
the vessel, where the strong current was checked. philip, recollect 
his former disaster, took great pains in the construction of this 
raft, and aware that as the water and provisions were expend there 
would be no occasion to tow so heavy a mass, he construct it in two 
parts, which might easily be severed, and thus the boat would have 
less to tow, as soon as circumstances would enable them to part with 
one of them. 

night again terminate their labours, and the men retired to rest, the 
weather continue fine, with very little wind. by noon the next day 
the raft was complete; water and provisions were safe stow on 
board; a secure and dry place was fitted up for amine in the centre 
of one portion; spare ropes, sails, and everything which could prove 
useful, in case of their being forced on shore, were put in. musket 
and ammunition were also provided, and everything was ready, when the 
men came aft and pointed out to philip that there was plenty of money 
on board, which it was folly to leave, and that they wish to carry 
as much as they could away with them. as this intimate was given in 
a way that made it evident they intended that it should be comply 
with, philip did not refuse; but resolved, in his own mind, that when 
they arrive at a place where he could exercise his authority, the 
money should be reclaim for the company to whom it belonged. the men 
went down below, and while philip was making arrangement with amine, 
hand the cask of dollar out of the hold, broke them open and 
help themselves--quarrelling with each other for the first 
possession, as each cask was opened. at last every man had obtain as 
much as he could carry, and had placed his spoil on the raft with his 
baggage, or in the boat to which he had been appointed. all was now 
ready--amine was lower down, and took her station--the boat took in 
tow the raft, which was cast off from the vessel, and away they went 
with the current, pull with all their strength, to avoid being 
stranded upon that part of the sand bank which appear above water. 
this was the great danger which they had to encounter, and which they 
very narrowly escaped. 

they number eighty-six soul in all: in the boat there were 
thirty-two; the rest were on the raft, which being well-built and full 
of timber, float high out of the water, now that the sea was so 
smooth. it had been agree upon by philip and krantz, that one of them 
should remain on the raft and the other in one of the boats; but, at 
the time the raft quit the ship, they were both on the raft, as 
they wish to consult, as soon as they discover the direction of 
the current, which would be the most advisable course for them to 
pursue. it appear that as soon as the current had pass the bank, 
it took a more southerly direction towards new guinea. it was then 
debate between them whether they should or should not land on that 
island, the native of which were known to be pusillanimous, yet 
treacherous. a long debate ensued, which ended, however, in their 
resolve not to decide as yet, but wait and see what might occur. in 
the meantime, the boat pull to the westward, while the current set 
them fast down in a southerly direction. 

night came on, and the boat drop the grapnels, with which they had 
been provided; and philip was glad to find that the current was not 
near so strong, and the grapnel held both boat and raft. covering 
themselves up with the spare sail with which they had provided 
themselves, and setting a watch, the tired seamen were soon fast 
asleep. 

"had i not better remain in one of the boats?" observe krantz. 
"suppose, to save themselves, the boat were to leave the raft." 

"i have thought of that," reply philip, "and have, therefore, not 
allow any provisions or water in the boats; they will not leave us 
for that reason." 

"true, i had forgotten that." 

krantz remain on watch, and philip retired to the repose which he so 
much needed. amine met him with open arms. 

"i have no fear, philip," said she, "i rather like this wild 
adventurous change. we will go on shore and build our hut beneath 
the cocoa-trees, and i shall repine when the day come which bring 
succour, and release us from our desert isle. what do i require but 
you?" 

"we are in the hand of one above, dear, who will act with us as he 
pleases. we have to be thankful that it is no worse," reply philip. 
"but now to rest, for i shall soon be oblige to watch." 

the morning dawned, with a smooth sea and a bright blue sky; the raft 
had been borne to leeward of the cluster of uninhabited island of 
which we spoke, and was now without hope of reach them; but to the 
westward were to be seen on the horizon the refract head and trunks 
of cocoa-nut trees, and in that direction it was resolve that they 
should tow the raft. the breakfast had been serve out, and the men 
had taken to the oars, when they discover a proa, full of men, 
sweeping after them from one of the island to windward. that it was 
a pirate vessel there could be no doubt; but philip and krantz 
considered that their force was more than sufficient to repel them, 
should an attack be made. this was pointed out to the men; arms were 
distribute to all in the boats, as well as to those on the raft; and 
that the seamen might not be fatigued, they were ordered to lie on 
their oars, and await the coming up of the vessel. 

as soon as the pirate was within range, have reconnoitre her 
antagonists, she cease pull and commence fire from a small 
piece of cannon, which was mount on her bows. the grape and 
langridge which she pour upon them wound several of the men, 
although philip had ordered them to lie down flat on the raft and 
in the boats. the pirate advanced nearer, and her fire became 
more destructive, without any opportunity of return it by the 
_utrecht's_ people. at last it was proposed, as the only chance of 
escape, that the boat should attack the pirate. this was agree to by 
philip--more men were sent in the boats--krantz took the command--the 
raft was cast off, and the boat pull away. but scarcely had they 
clear the raft, when, as by one sudden thought, they turn round 
and pull away in the opposite direction. krantz's voice was heard 
by philip, and his sword was seen to flash through the air--a moment 
afterwards he plunge into the sea, and swam to the raft. it appear 
that the people in the boats, anxious to preserve the money which they 
had possession of, had agree among themselves to pull away and leave 
the raft to its fate. the proposal for attack the pirate had been 
suggest with that view, and as soon as they were clear of the 
raft, they put their intentions into execution. in vain had krantz 
expostulate and threatened; they would have taken his life; and when 
he found that his effort were of no avail, he leap from the boat. 
"then are we lost, i fear," said philip. "our numbers are so reduced, 
that we cannot hope to hold out long. what think you, schriften?" 
venture philip, address the pilot who stood near to him. 

"lost--but not lost by the pirates--no harm there. he! he!" 

the remark of schriften was correct. the pirates, imagine that in 
taking to their boat, the people had carry with them everything that 
was valuable, instead of fire at the raft, immediately gave chase to 
the boats. the sweep were now out, and the proa flew over the smooth 
water like a sea-bird, pass the raft, and was at first evidently 
gain on the boats; but their speed soon slackened, and as the day 
passed, the boats, and then the pirate vessel disappear in the 
southward; the distance between them being apparently much the same as 
at the commencement of the chase. 

the raft being now at the mercy of the wind and waves, philip and 
krantz collected the carpenter's tool which had been brought from 
the ship, and select two spar from the raft, they made every 
preparation for step a mast and setting sail by the next morning. 

the morning dawned, and the first object that met their view, were 
the boat pull back towards the raft, follow close by the 
pirate. the men had pull the whole night, and were worn out with 
fatigue. it was presume that a consultation had been held, in which 
it was agree that they should make a sweep, so as to return to the 
raft; as, if they gain it, they would be able to defend themselves, 
and moreover, obtain provisions and water, which they had not on board 
at the time of their desertion. but it was fated otherwise; gradual 
the men drop from their oars, exhausted, into the bottom of the 
boat, and the pirate vessel follow them with renew ardour. the 
boat were capture one by one; the booty found was more than the 
pirate anticipated, and it hardly need be said that not one man was 
spared. all this took place within three mile of the raft, and philip 
anticipate that the next movement of the vessel would be towards 
them, but he was mistaken. satisfy with their booty, and imagine 
that there could be no more on the raft, the pirate pull away to the 
eastward, towards the island from amongst which she had first made 
her appearance. thus were those who expect to escape and who had 
desert their companions, deservedly punished, whilst those who 
anticipate every disaster from this desertion, discover that it was 
the cause of their being saved. 

the remain people on board the raft amount to about forty-five; 
philip, krantz, schriften, amine, the two mates, sixteen seamen, 
and twenty-four soldiers, who had been embark at amsterdam. of 
provisions they had sufficient for three or four weeks, but of water 
they were very short, already not have sufficient for more than 
three days at the usual allowance. as soon as the mast had been 
step and rigged, and the sail set (although there was hardly a 
breath of wind), philip explain to the men the necessity of reduce 
the quantity of water, and it was agree that it should be serve out 
so as to extend the supply to twelve days, the allowance being reduce 
to half a pint per day. 

there was a debate at this time, as the raft was in two parts, whether 
it would not be better to cast off the small one and put all the 
people on board the other; but this proposal was overruled, as in the 
first place, although the boat had desert them, the number on the 
raft had not much diminished, and moreover, the raft would steer much 
better under sail, now that it had length, than it would do if they 
reduce its dimensions and alter its shape to a square mass of 
floating wood. 

for three days it was a calm, the sun pour down his hot beam upon 
them, and the want of water was severe felt; those who continue to 
drink spirits suffer the most. 

on the fourth day the breeze sprung up favourably, and the sail was 
filled; it was a relief to their burning brow and blister backs; 
and as the raft sail on at the rate of four mile an hour, the men 
were gay and full of hope. the land below the cocoa-nut tree was now 
distinguishable, and they anticipate that the next day they could 
land and procure the water, which they now so crave for. all night 
they carry sail, but the next morning they discover that the 
current was strong against them, and that what they gain when the 
breeze was fresh, they lost from the adverse current as soon as it 
went down; the breeze was always fresh in the morning, but it fell 
calm in the evening. thus did they continue for four days more, every 
noon being not ten mile from the land but the next morning swept away 
to a distance, and have their ground to retrace. eight days had now 
passed, and the men, worn out with exposure to the burning sun, became 
discontented and mutinous. at one time they insist that the raft 
should be divided, that they might gain the land with the other half; 
at another, that the provisions which they could no long eat should 
be thrown overboard to lighten the raft. the difficulty under which 
they lay, was the have no anchor or grapnel to the raft, the boat 
have carry away with them all that had been taken from the ship. 
philip then propose to the men, that, as every one of them had such a 
quantity of dollars, the money should be sew up in canvas bags, each 
man's property separate; and that with this weight to the ropes they 
would probably be enable to hold the raft against the current for one 
night, when they would be able the next day to gain the shore; but 
this was refused--they would not risk their money. no, no--fools! 
they would soon part with their lives by the most miserable of 
all deaths. again and again was this propose to them by philip and 
krantz, but without success. 

in the meantime, amine had kept up her courage and her spirits; 
prove to philip a valuable adviser and a comforter in his 
misfortunes. "cheer up, philip," would she say; "we shall yet build 
our cottage under the shade of those cocoa-nut trees, and pass a 
portion, if not the remainder of our lives in peace; for who indeed 
is there who would think to find us in these desolate and untrodden 
regions?" 

schriften was quiet and well-behaved; talk much with amine, but with 
nobody else. indeed he appear to have a strong feeling in favour 
of amine than he had ever shown before. he watch over her and 
attend her; and amine would often look up after being silent, and 
perceive schriften's face wear an air of pity and melancholy, which 
she had believe it impossible that he could have exhibited. 

another day passed; again they near the land, and again did the 
breeze die away, and they were swept back by the current. the men now 
rose, and in spite of the endeavour of philip and krantz, they roll 
into the sea all the provisions and stores, everything but one cask of 
spirits and the remain stock of water; they then sat down at the 
upper end of the raft with gloomy, threaten looks, and in close 
consultation. 

another night closed in: philip was full of anxiety. again he urge 
them to anchor with their money, but in vain; they ordered him away, 
and he return to the after part of the raft, upon which amine's 
secure retreat had been erected; he leant on it in deep thought and 
melancholy, for he imagine that amine was asleep. 

"what disturb you, philip?" 

"what disturb me? the avarice and folly of these men. they will die, 
rather than risk their hateful money. they have the means of saving 
themselves and us, and they will not. there is weight enough in 
bullion on the fore part of the raft to hold a dozen floating masses 
such as this, yet they will not risk it. cursed love of gold! it make 
men fools, madmen, villains. we have now but two days' water--doled 
out as it is drop by drop. look at their emaciated, broken down, 
waste forms, and yet see how they cling to money, which probably 
they will never have occasion for, even if they gain the land. i am 
distracted!" 

"you suffer, philip, you suffer from privation; but i have been 
careful, i thought that this would come; i have save both water and 
biscuit--i have here four bottles;--drink, philip, and it will relieve 
you." 

philip drank; it did relieve him, for the excitement of the day had 
pressed heavy on him. 

"thanks, amine--thanks, dearest! i feel better now.--good heaven! are 
there such fool as to value the dross of metal above one drop of 
water in a time of suffering and privation such as this?" 

the night closed in as before; the stars shone bright but there was no 
moon, philip had risen at midnight to relieve krantz from the steerage 
of the raft. usually the men had lain about in every part of the raft, 
but this night the majority of them remain forward. philip was 
commune with his own bitter thoughts, when he heard a scuffle 
forward, and the voice of krantz crying out to him for help. he 
quit the helm, and seize his cutlass ran forward, where he found 
krantz down, and the men secure him. he fought his way to him, but 
was himself seize and disarmed. "cut away--cut away," was call out 
by those who held him; and, in a few seconds, philip had the misery to 
behold the after part of the raft, with amine upon it, drift apart 
from the one on which he stood. "for mercy's sake! my wife--my 
amine--for heaven's sake save her!" cry philip, struggle in vain 
to disengage himself. amine also, who had run to the side of the raft, 
held out her arms--it was in vain--they were separate more than a 
cable's length. philip made one more desperate struggle, and then fell 
down deprived of sense and motion. 




chapter xxiv 


it was not until the day had dawn that philip open his eyes, and 
discover krantz kneel at his side; at first his thought were 
scattered and confused; he felt that some dreadful calamity had 
happen to him, but he could not recall to mind what it was. at last 
it rush upon him, and he bury his face in his hands. 

"take comfort," said krantz; "we shall probably gain the shore to-day, 
and we will go in search of her as soon as we can." 

"this, then, is the separation and the cruel death to her which that 
wretch schriften prophesy to us," thought philip; "cruel indeed to 
waste away to a skeleton, under a burning sun, without one drop of 
water left to cool her parch tongue; at the mercy of the wind and 
waves; drift about--alone--all alone--separated from her husband, 
in whose arms she would have die without regret; madden with 
suspense and with the thought of what i may be suffering, or what may 
have been my fate. pilot, you are right; there can be no more cruel 
death to a fond and doting wife. oh! my head reels. what has philip 
vanderdecken to live for now?" 

krantz offer such consolation as his friendship could suggest, but 
in vain. he then talk of revenge, and philip raise his head. 
after a few minutes' thought, he rose up. "yes," reply he, 
"revenge!--revenge upon those dastard and traitors! tell me, krantz, 
how many can we trust?" 

"half of the men, i should think, at least. it was a surprise." a spar 
had been fitted as a rudder, and the raft had now gain near the 
shore than it ever had done before. the men were in high spirits at 
the prospect, and every man was sitting on his own store of dollars, 
which, in their eyes, increase in value, in proportion as did their 
prospect of escape. 

philip discover from krantz, that it was the soldier and the most 
indifferent seamen who had mutiny on the night before, and cut away 
the other raft; and that all the best men had remain neuter. 

"and so they will be now, i imagine," continue krantz; "the prospect 
of gain the shore has, in a manner, reconcile them to the 
treachery of their companions." 

"probably," reply philip, with a bitter laugh; "but i know what will 
rouse them. send them here to me." 

philip talk to the seamen, whom krantz had sent over to him. he 
pointed out to them that the other men were traitors, not to be rely 
upon; that they would sacrifice everything and everybody for their 
own gain; that they had already done so for money, and that they 
themselves would have no security, either on the raft or on shore, 
with such people; that they dare not sleep for fear of have their 
throat cut, and that it were better at once to get rid of those 
who could not be true to each other; that it would facilitate their 
escape, and that they could divide between themselves the money which 
the other had secured, and by which they would double their own 
shares. that it had been his intention, although he had said nothing, 
to enforce the restoration of the money for the benefit of the 
company, as soon as they had gain a civilise port, where the 
authority could interfere; but that, if they consent to join and 
aid him, he would now give them the whole of it for their own use. 

what will not the desire of gain effect? is it, therefore, to be 
wonder at, that these men, who were indeed but little better than 
those who were thus, in his desire of retaliation, denounce by 
philip, consent to his proposal? it was agreed, that if they did not 
gain the shore, the other should be attack that very night, and 
toss into the sea. 

but the consultation with philip had put the other party on the alert; 
they, too, held council, and kept their arms by their sides. as the 
breeze die away, they were not two mile from the land, and once more 
they drift back into the ocean. philip's mind was borne down with 
grief at the loss of amine; but it recover to a certain degree when 
he thought of revenge: that feeling stay him up, and he often felt 
the edge of his cutlass, impatient for the moment of retribution. 

it was a lovely night; the sea was now smooth as glass, and not a 
breath of air move in the heavens; the sail of the raft hung listless 
down the mast, and was reflect upon the calm surface by 
the brilliancy of the starry night alone. it was a night for 
contemplation--for examination of oneself, and adoration of the deity; 
and here, on a frail raft, were huddle together more than forty 
being ready for combat, for murder, and for spoil. each party 
pretended to repose; yet each were quiet watch the motions of the 
other, with their hand upon their weapons. the signal was to be given 
by philip: it was, to let go the halyard of the yard, so that the 
sail should fall down upon a portion of the other party, and entangle 
them. by philip's directions, schriften had taken the helm, and krantz 
remain by his side. 

the yard and sail fell clatter down, and then the work of death 
commenced; there was no parley, no suspense; each man start upon his 
feet and raise his sword. the voice of philip and of krantz alone 
were heard, and philip's sword did its work. he was nerve to his 
revenge, and never could be satiate as long as one remain who had 
sacrifice his amine. as philip had expected, many had been cover up 
and entangle by the fall of the sail, and their work was thereby 
made easier. 

some fell where they stood; other reel back, and sunk down under 
the smooth water; other were pierce as they flounder under the 
canvas. in a few minutes, the work of carnage was complete. schriften 
meanwhile look on, and ever and anon gave vent to his chuckle 
laugh--his demoniacal "he! he!" 

the strife was over, and philip stood against the mast to recover his 
breath. "so far art thou revenged, my amine," thought he; "but, oh! 
what are these paltry lives compare to thine?" and now that his 
revenge was satiated, and he could do no more, he cover his face up 
in his hands, and wept bitterly, while those who had assist him were 
already collect the money of the slain for distribution. these men, 
when they found that three only of their side had fallen, lament 
that there had not been more, as their own shares of the dollar would 
have been increased. 

there were now but thirteen men besides philip, krantz, and schriften 
left upon the raft. as the day dawned, the breeze again sprung up, 
and they share out the portion of water, which would have been the 
allowance of their companion who had fallen. hunger they felt not; 
but the water revive their spirits. 

although philip had had little to say to schriften since the 
separation from amine, it was very evident to him and to krantz, that 
all the pilot's former bitter feelings had returned. his chuckle, 
his sarcasms, his "he! he!" were incessant; and his eye was now as 
malicious direct to philip as it was when they first met. it was 
evident that amine alone had for the time conquer his disposition; 
and that, with her disappearance, had vanish all the good-will of 
schriften towards her husband. for this philip care little; he had a 
much more serious weight on his heart--the loss of his dear amine; and 
he felt reckless and indifferent concerning anything else. 

the breeze now freshened, and they expect that, in two hours, they 
would run on the beach, but they were disappointed: the step of the 
mast gave way from the force of the wind, and the sail fell upon the 
raft. this occasion great delay; and before they could repair the 
mischief, the wind again subsided, and they were left about a mile 
from the beach. tired and worn out with his feelings, philip at last 
fell asleep by the side of krantz, leave schriften at the helm. he 
slept soundly--he dreamt of amine--he thought she was under a grove 
of cocoa-nuts in a sweet sleep; that he stood by and watch her, and 
that she smile in her sleep, and murmur "philip," when sudden he 
was awaken by some unusual movement. half-dreaming still, he thought 
that schriften, the pilot, had in his sleep been attempt to gain 
his relic, had pass the chain over his head, and was remove 
quiet from underneath his neck the portion of the chain which, in 
his recline posture, he lay upon. startle at the idea, he threw up 
his hand to seize the arm of the wretch, and found that he had really 
seize hold of schriften, who was kneel by him, and in possession 
of the chain and relic. the struggle was short, the relic was 
recovered, and the pilot lay at the mercy of philip, who held him down 
with his knee on his chest. philip replace the relic on his bosom, 
and, excited to madness, rose from the body of the now breathless 
schriften, caught it in his arms, and hurl it into the sea. 

"man or devil! i care not which," exclaim philip, breathless; 
"escape now, if you can!" 

the struggle had already rouse up krantz and others, but not in time 
to prevent philip from wreak his vengeance upon schriften. in few 
words, he told krantz what had passed; as for the men, they care not; 
they laid their head down again, and, satisfy that their money was 
safe, inquire no further. 

philip watch to see if schriften would rise up again, and try to 
regain the raft; but he did not make his appearance above water, and 
philip felt satisfied. 




chapter xxv 


what pen could portray the feelings of the fond and doting amine, when 
she first discover that she was separate from her husband? in a 
state of bewilderment, she watch the other raft as the distance 
between them increased. at last the shades of night hid it from her 
ache eyes, and she drop down in mute despair. 

gradual she recover herself, and turning round, she exclaimed, 
"who's here?" 

no answer. 

"who's here?" cry she in a loud voice; "alone--alone--and philip 
gone. mother, mother, look down upon your unhappy child!" and amine 
frantic threw herself down so near to the edge of the raft, that 
her long hair, which had fallen down, float on the wave. 

"ah me! where am i?" cry amine, after remain in a state of torpor 
for some hours. the sun glare fierce upon her, and dazzle her eyes 
as she open them--she cast them on the blue wave close by her, and 
beheld a large shark motionless by the side of the raft, wait for 
his prey. recoil from the edge, she start up. she turn round, 
and beheld the raft vacant, and the truth flash on her. "oh! philip, 
philip!" cry she, "then it is true, and you are gone for ever! i 
thought it was only a dream, i recollect all now. yes--all--all!" 
and amine sank down again upon her cot, which had been placed in the 
centre of the raft, and remain motionless for some time. 

but the demand for water became imperious; she seize one of the 
bottles, and drank. "yet why should i drink or eat? why should i wish 
to preserve life?" she rose, and look round the horizon--"sky and 
water, nothing more. is this the death i am to die--the cruel death 
prophesy by schriften--a lingering death under a burning sun, while 
my vitals are parch within? be it so! fate i dare thee to thy 
worst--we can die but once--and without him, what care i to live! but 
yet i may see him again," continue amine, hurriedly, after a pause. 
"yes! i may--who knows? then welcome life, i'll nurse thee for that 
bare hope--bare indeed with nought to feed on. let me see, is it here 
still?" amine look at her zone, and perceive her dagger was still 
in it. "well then, i will live since death is at my command, and be 
guardful of life for my dear husband's sake." and amine threw herself 
on her resting-place that she might forget everything. she did: from 
that morning till the noon of the next day, she remain in a state of 
torpor. 

when she again rose, she was faint; again she look round her--there 
was but sky and water to be seen. "oh! this solitude--it is horrible! 
death would be a release--but no, i must not die--i must live for 
philip." she refresh herself with water and a few pieces of biscuit, 
and fold her arms across her breast. "a few more days without 
relief, and all must be over. was ever woman situated as i am, and yet 
i dare to indulge hope? why, 'tis madness! and why am i thus single 
out: because i have wedded with philip? it may be so; if so, i welcome 
it. wretches! who thus sever me from my husband; who, to save their 
own lives, sacrifice a helpless woman! nay! they might have save me, 
if they had had the least pity;--but no, they never felt it. and these 
are christians! the creed that the old priest would have had me--yes! 
that philip would have had me embrace. charity and good-will! they 
talk of it, but i have never seen them practise it! loving one 
another!--forgiving one another!--say rather hate and prey upon 
one another! a creed never practised: why, if not practised, of what 
value is it? any creed were better--i abjure it, and if i be saved, 
will abjure it still for ever. shade of my mother! is it that i have 
listen to these men--that i have, to win my husband's love, try to 
forget that which thou taughtest, even when a child at thy feet--that 
faith which our forefather for thousand of years live and die 
in--that creed prove by works, and obedience to the prophet's 
will--is it for this that i am punished? tell me, mother--oh! tell me 
in my dreams." 

the night closed in, and with the gloom rose heavy clouds; the 
lightning dart through the firmament, ever and anon lighting up 
the raft. at last, the flash were so rapid, not following each 
other--but dart down from every quarter at once, that the whole 
firmament appear as if on fire, and the thunder roll along the 
heavens, now near and loud, then rumbling in the distance. the breeze 
rose up fresh, and the wave toss the raft, and wash occasional 
even to amine's feet, as she stood in the centre of it. 

"i like this--this is far better than that calm and withering 
heat--this rouse me," said amine, as she cast her eyes up, and 
watch the forked lightning till her vision became obscured. "yes, 
this is as it should be. lightning, strike me if you please--waves 
wash me off and bury me in a briny tomb--pour the wrath of the whole 
elements upon this devoted head.--i care not, i laugh at, i defy it 
all. thou canst but kill, this little steel can do as much. let those 
who hoard up wealth--those who live in splendour--those that are 
happy--those who have husbands, children, aught to love--let them 
tremble, i have nothing. elements! be ye fire, or water, or earth, or 
air, amine defy you! and yet--no, no, deceive not thyself, amine, 
there is no hope; thus will i mount my funeral bier, and wait the will 
of destiny." and amine regain the secure place which philip had 
fitted up for her in the centre of the raft, threw herself down upon 
her bed, and shut her eyes. 

the thunder and lightning was follow up by torrent of heavy rain, 
which fell till daylight; the wind still continue fresh, but the sky 
cleared, and the sun shone out. amine remain shiver in her wet 
garments; the heat of the sun prove too powerful for her exhaust 
state, and her brain wandered. she rose up in a sitting posture, 
look around her, saw verdant field in every direction, the 
cocoa-nuts wave to the wind--imagined even that she saw her own 
philip in the distance hasten to her; she held out her arms; strove 
to get up, and run to meet him, but her limb refuse their office; 
she call to him, she screamed, and sank back exhaust on her 
resting-place. 




chapter xxvi 


we must for a time return to philip, and follow his strange destiny. a 
few hour after he had thrown the pilot into the sea they gain the 
shore, so long look at with anxiety and suspense. the spar of the 
raft, jerk by the running swell, undulate and rub against each 
other, as they rose and fell to the wave break on the beach. the 
breeze was fresh, but the surf was trifling, and the landing was 
without difficulty. the beach was shelving, of firm white sand, 
intersperse and strew with various brilliant-coloured shells; and 
here and there, the bleach fragment and bone of some animal which 
had been forced out of its element to die. the island was, like all 
the others, cover with a thick wood of cocoa-nut trees, whose tops 
wave to the breeze, or bowed to the blast, produce a shade and a 
fresh which would have been duly appreciate by any other party 
than the present, with the exception only of krantz; for philip 
thought of nothing but his lost wife, and the seamen thought of 
nothing but of their sudden wealth. krantz support philip to the 
beach and led him to the shade; but after a minute he rose, and 
running down to the nearest point, look anxious for the portion 
of the raft which held amine, which was now far, far away. krantz had 
followed, aware that, now the first paroxysm were past, there was no 
fear of philip's throw away his life. 

"gone, gone for ever!" exclaim philip, pressing his hand to the 
balls of his eyes. 

"not so, philip, the same providence which has preserve us, will 
certainly assist her. it is impossible that she can perish among so 
many islands, many of which are inhabited; and a woman will be certain 
of kind treatment." 

"if i could only think so," reply philip. 

"a little reflection may induce you to think that it is rather an 
advantage than otherwise, that she is thus separated--not from you, 
but from so many lawless companions, whose united force we could 
not resist. do you think that, after any lengthen sojourn on this 
island, these people with us would permit you to remain in quiet 
possession of your wife? no!--they would respect no laws; and amine 
has, in my opinion, been miraculous preserve from shame and 
ill-treatment, if not from death." 

"they durst not, surely! well, but krantz, we must make a raft and 
follow her; we must not remain here--i will seek her through the wide 
world." 

"be it so, if you wish, philip, and i will follow your fortunes," 
reply krantz, glad to find that there was something, however wild 
the idea, for his mind to feed on. "but now let us return to the 
raft, seek the refreshment we so much require, and after that we will 
consider what may be the best plan to pursue." 

to this, philip, who was much exhausted, tacit consented, and he 
follow krantz to where the raft had been beached. the men had left 
it, and were each of them sitting apart from one another under the 
shade of his own chosen cocoa-nut tree. the articles which had been 
save on the raft had not been landed, and krantz call upon them to 
come and carry the things on shore--but no one would answer or obey. 
they each sat watch their money, and afraid to leave it, lest they 
should be dispossessed of it by the others. now that their lives were, 
comparatively speaking, safe, the demon of avarice had taken full 
possession of their souls; there they sat, exhausted, pine for 
water, and longing for sleep, and yet they dare not move--they were 
fixed as if by the wand of the enchanter. 

"it is the cursed dollar which have turn their brains," observe 
krantz to philip; "let us try if we cannot manage to remove what we 
most stand in need of, and then we will search for water." 

philip and krantz collected the carpenter's tools, the best arms, and 
all the ammunition, as the possession of the latter would give them 
advantage in case of necessity; they then drag on shore the sail 
and some small spars, all of which they carry up to a clump of 
cocoa-nut trees, about a hundred yard from the beach. 

in half an hour they had erect an humble tent, and put into it what 
they had brought with them, with the exception of the major part of 
the ammunition, which, as soon as he was screen by the tent, krantz 
bury in a heap of dry sand behind it; he then, for their immediate 
wants, cut down with an axe a small cocoa-nut tree in full bearing. it 
must be for those who have suffer the agony of prolonged thirst, to 
know the extreme pleasure with which the milk of the nuts were one 
after the other pour down the parch throat of krantz and philip. 
the men witness their enjoyment in silence, and with gloat eyes. 
every time that a fresh cocoa-nut was seize and its contents quaff 
by their officers, more sharp and agonising was their own devour 
thirst--still close did their dry lip glue themselves together--yet 
they move not, although they felt the torture of the condemned. 

evening closed in; philip had thrown himself down on the spare sails, 
and had fallen asleep, when krantz set off to explore the island upon 
which they had been thrown. it was small, not exceed three mile in 
length, and at no one part more than five hundred yard across. water 
there was none, unless it were to be obtain by digging; fortunately 
the young cocoa-nuts prevent the absolute necessity for it. on his 
return, krantz pass the men in their respective stations. each was 
awake, and raise himself on his elbow to ascertain if it were an 
assailant; but perceive krantz, they again drop down. krantz 
pass the raft--the water was now quite smooth, for the wind had 
shift off shore, and the spar which compose the raft hardly 
jostle each other. he step upon it, and, as the moon was bright in 
the heavens, he took the precaution of collect all the arms which 
had been left, and throw them as far as he could into the sea. he 
then walk to the tent, where he found philip still sleep soundly, 
and in a few minutes he was repose by his side. and philip's dream 
were of amine; he thought that he saw the hate schriften rise again 
from the waters, and, climb up to the raft, seat himself by her 
side. he thought that he again heard his unearthly chuckle and his 
scornful laugh, as his unwelcome words fell upon her distracted ears. 
he thought that she flee into the sea to avoid schriften, and that the 
waters appear to reject her--she float on the surface. the storm 
rose, and once more he beheld her in the sea-shell skim over the 
waves. again, she was in a furious surf on the beach, and her shell 
sank, and she was bury in the waves; and then he saw her walking on 
shore without fear and without harm, for the water which spare 
no one, appear to spare her. philip try to join her, but was 
prevent by some unknown power, and amine wave her hand and said, 
"we shall meet again, philip; yes, once more on this earth shall we 
meet again." 

the sun was high in the heaven and scorching in his heat, when krantz 
first open his eyes, and awaken philip. the axe again procure for 
them their morning's meal. philip, was silent; he was ruminate upon 
his dreams, which had afford him consolation. "we shall meet again!" 
thought he. "yes, once more at least we shall meet again. providence! 
i thank thee." 

krantz then step out to ascertain the condition of the men. he 
found them faint, and so exhausted, that they could not possibly 
survive much longer, yet still watch over their darling treasure. 
it was melancholy to witness such perversion of intellect, and krantz 
thought of a plan which might save their lives. he propose to them 
each separately, that they should bury their money so deep, that it 
was not to be recover without time: this would prevent any one from 
attack the treasure of the other, without its being perceive 
and the attempt frustrated, and would enable them to obtain their 
necessary food and refreshment without danger of being robbed. 

to this plan they acceded. krantz brought out of the tent the only 
shovel in their possession, and they, one by one, bury their dollar 
many feet deep in the yielding sand. when they had all secure their 
wealth, he brought them one of the axes, and the cocoa-nut tree 
fell, and they were restore to new life and vigour. have satiate 
themselves, they then lay down upon the several spot under which they 
had bury their dollars, and were soon enjoy that repose which 
they all so much needed. 

philip and krantz had now many serious consultation as to the means 
which should be taken for quit the island, and go in search 
of amine; for although krantz thought the latter part of philip's 
proposal useless, he did not venture to say so. to quit this island 
was necessary; and provided they gain one of those which were 
inhabited, it was all that they could expect. as for amine, he 
considered that she was dead before this, either have been wash 
off the raft, or that her body was lie on it expose to the 
decompose heat of a torrid sun. 

to cheer philip, he express himself otherwise; and whenever they 
talk about leave the island, it was not to save their own lives, 
but invariable to search after philip's lost wife. the plan which they 
propose and act upon was, to construct a light raft, the centre to 
be compose of three water-casks, saw in half, in a row behind each 
other, firm fixed by cross pieces to two long spar on each side. 
this, under sail, would move quick through the water, and be 
manageable so as to enable them to steer a course. the outside spar 
had been select and haul on shore, and the work was already in 
progress; but they were left alone in their work, for the seamen 
appear to have no idea at present of quit the island. restore 
by food and repose, they were not content with the money which they 
had--they were anxious for more. a portion of each party's wealth had 
been dug up, and they now gamble all day with pebbles, which they 
had collected on the beach, and with which they had invent a game. 
another evil had crept among them: they had cut steps in the largest 
cocoa-nut trees, and with the activity of seamen had mount them, 
and by tap the top of the trees, and fix empty cocoa-nuts 
underneath, had obtain the liquor, which in its first fermentation 
is term toddy, and is afterwards distill into arrack. but as 
toddy, it is quite sufficient to intoxicate; and every day the scene 
of violence and intoxication, accompany with oath and execrations, 
became more and more dreadful. the loser tore their hair, and rush 
like madmen upon those who had gain their dollars; but krantz had 
fortunately thrown their weapon into the sea, and those he had saved, 
as well as the ammunition, he had secreted. 

blow and bloodshed, therefore, were continual, but loss of life there 
was none, as the contend party were separate by the others, who 
were anxious that the play should not be interrupted. such had been 
the state of affair for now nearly a fortnight, while the work of the 
raft had slow proceeded. some of the men had lost their all, and 
had, by the general consent of those who had won their wealth, been 
banish to a certain distance that they might not pilfer from them. 
these walk gloomy round the island, or on the beach, seek 
some instrument by which they might avenge themselves, and obtain 
repossess of their money. krantz and philip had propose to these 
men to join them, and leave the island, but they had sullen refused. 

the axe was now never part with by krantz. he cut down what 
cocoa-nut tree they require for subsistence, and prevent the men 
from notch more trees, to procure the means of inebriation. on the 
sixteenth day, all the money had pass into the hand of three men 
who had been more fortunate than the rest. the loser were now by 
far the more numerous party, and the consequence was, that the next 
morning these three men were found lie strangle on the beach; the 
money had been redivided, and the gamble had recommence with more 
vigour than ever. 

"how can this end?" exclaim philip to krantz, as he look upon the 
blacken countenance of the murder men. 

"in the death of all," reply krantz. "we cannot prevent it. it is a 
judgment." 

the raft was now ready; the sand had been dug from beneath it, so as 
to allow the water to flow in and float it, and it was now made fast 
to a stake, and riding on the peaceful waters. a large store of 
cocoa-nuts, old and young, had been procure and put on board of her, 
and it was the intention of philip and krantz to have quit the 
island the next day. 

unfortunately, one of the men, when bathing, had perceive the arms 
lie in the shallow water. he had dive down and procure a cutlass; 
other had follow his example, and all had armed themselves. this 
induce philip and krantz to sleep on board of the raft, and keep 
watch; and that night, as the play was go on, a heavy loss on one 
side end in a general fray. the combat was furious, for all were 
more or less excited by intoxication. the result was melancholy, for 
only three were left alive. philip, with krantz, watch the issue; 
every man who fell wound was put to the sword, and the three left, 
who had been fight on the same side, rest pant on their 
weapons. after a pause, two of them communicate with each other, and 
the result was an attack upon the third man, who fell dead beneath 
their blows. 

"merciful father! are these thy creatures?" exclaim philip. 

"no!" reply krantz, "they worship the devil as mammon. do you 
imagine that those two, who could now divide more wealth than they 
could well spend if they return to their country, will consent to a 
division? never!--they must have all--yes, all." 

krantz had hardly express his opinion, when one of the men, taking 
advantage of the other turning round a moment from him, pass his 
sword through his back. the man fell with a groan, and the sword was 
again pass through his body. 

"said i not so? but the treacherous villain shall not reap his 
reward," continue krantz, level the musket which he held in his 
hand, and shoot him dead. 

"you have done wrong, krantz; you have save him from the punishment 
he deserved. left alone on the island, without the means of obtain 
his subsistence, he must have perish miserably and by inches, with 
all his money round him--that would have been torture indeed!" 

"perhaps i was wrong. if so, may providence forgive me, i could not 
help it. let us go ashore, for we are now on this island alone. we 
must collect the treasure and bury it, so that it may be recovered; 
and, at the same time, take a portion with us--for who know but that 
we may have occasion for it. to-morrow we had better remain here, for 
we shall have enough to do in bury the body of these infatuated 
men, and the wealth which has cause their destruction." 

philip agree to the propriety of the suggestion; the next day they 
bury the body where they lay; and the treasure was all collected 
in a deep trench, under a cocoa-nut tree, which they careful marked 
with their axe. about five hundred pieces of gold were select and 
taken on board of the raft, with the intention of secrete them about 
their persons, and resort to them in case of need. 

the following morning they hoist their sail and quit the island. 
need it be said in what direction they steered? as may be well 
imagined, in that quarter where they had last seen the raft with the 
isolated amine. 




chapter xxvii 


the raft was found to answer well; and although her progress through 
the water was not very rapid, she obey the helm and was under 
command. both philip and krantz were very careful in taking such mark 
and observations of the island as should enable them, if necessary, 
to find it again. with the current to assist them, they now proceed 
rapid to the southward, in order that they might examine a large 
island which lay in that direction. their object, after seek for 
amine, was to find out the direction of ternate; the king of which 
they knew to be at variance with the portuguese, who had a fort and 
factory at tidore, not very far distant from it; and from thence to 
obtain a passage in one of the china junks, which, on their way to 
bantam, call at that island. 

towards evening they had near the large island, and they soon ran 
down it close to the beach. philip's eyes wander in every direction 
to ascertain whether anything on the shore indicate the presence of 
amine's raft, but he could perceive nothing of the kind, nor did he 
see any inhabitants. 

that they might not pass the object of their search during the night, 
they ran their raft on shore, in a small cove, where the waters were 
quite smooth, and remain there until the next morning, when they 
again made sail and prosecute their voyage. krantz was steer with 
the long sweep they had fitted for the purpose, when he observe 
philip, who had been for some time silent, take from his breast the 
relic which he wore, and gaze attentive upon it. 

"is that your picture, philip?" observe krantz. 

"alas! no, it is my destiny," reply philip, answer without 
reflection. 

"your destiny! what mean you?" 

"did i say my destiny? i hardly know what i said," reply philip, 
replace the relic in his bosom. 

"i rather think you said more than you intended," reply krantz, "but 
at the same time, something near the truth. i have often perceive you 
with that trinket in your hand, and i have not forgotten how anxious 
schriften was to obtain it, and the consequence of his attempt upon 
it. is there not some secret--some mystery attach to it? surely, 
if so, you must now sufficient know me as your friend, to feel me 
worthy of your confidence." 

"that you are my friend, krantz, i feel--my sincere and much value 
friend, for we have share much danger together, and that is 
sufficient to make us friends--that i could trust you, i believe, but 
i feel as if i dare not trust anyone. there is a mystery attach to 
this relic (for a relic it is), which as yet has been confide to my 
wife and holy men alone." 

"and if trust to holy men, surely it may be trust to sincere 
friendship, than which nothing is more holy." 

"but i have a presentiment that the knowledge of my secret would prove 
fatal to you. why i feel such a presentiment i know not; but i feel 
it, krantz; and i cannot afford to lose you, my value friend." 

"you will not, then, make use of my friendship, it appears," reply 
krantz. "i have risk my life with you before now, and i am not to 
be deter from the duty of friendship by a childish foreboding on 
your part, the result of an agitate mind and a weaken body. can 
anything be more absurd than to suppose, that a secret confide to me 
can be pregnant with danger, unless it be, indeed, that my zeal 
to assist you may lead me into difficulties. i am not of a pry 
disposition; but we have been so long connected together, and are now 
so isolated from the rest of the world, that it appear to me it would 
be a solace to you, were you to confide in one whom you can trust, 
what evidently has long prey upon your mind. the consolation and 
advice of a friend, philip, are not to be despised, and you will feel 
relieved if able to talk over with him a subject which evidently 
oppress you. if, therefore, you value my friendship, let me share 
with you in your sorrows." 

there are few who have pass through life so quietly, as not to 
recollect how much grief has been assuage by confiding its cause to, 
and listen to the counsel and consolation of, some dear friend. 
it must not therefore appear surprising, that, situated as he was, and 
oppress with the loss of amine, philip should regard krantz as one 
to whom he might venture to confide his important secret. he commence 
his narrative with no injunctions, for he felt that if krantz could 
not respect his secret for his secret's sake, or from good-will 
towards him, he was not likely to be bound by any promise; and as, 
during the day, the raft pass by the various small cape and 
headland of the island, he pour into krantz's ear the history which 
the reader is acquaint with. "now you know all," said philip with 
a deep sigh, as the narrative was concluded. "what think you? do you 
credit my strange tale, or do you imagine, as some well would, that it 
is a mere phantom of a disorder brain?" 

"that it is not so, philip, i believe," reply krantz; "for i too 
have had ocular proof of the correct of a part of your history. 
remember how often i have seen this phantom ship--and if your father 
is permit to range over the seas, why should you not be select 
and permit to reverse his doom? i fully believe every word that you 
have told me, and since you have told me this, i can comprehend much 
that in your behaviour at times appear unaccountable; there are many 
who would pity you, philip, but i envy you." 

"envy me?" cry philip. 

"yes! envy you: and gladly would i take the burden of your doom on my 
own shoulders, were it only possible. is it not a splendid thought 
that you are summon to so great a purpose,--that instead of roam 
through the world as we all do in pursuit of wealth, which possibly we 
may lose after years of cost and hardship, by the venture of a day, 
and which, at all events, we must leave behind us,--you are select 
to fulfil a great and glorious work--the work of angels, i may 
say--that of redeem the soul of a father, _suffering_ indeed, for 
his human frailties, but not doom to perish for eternity; you have, 
indeed, an object of pursuit worthy of all the hardship and danger 
of a maritime life. if it end in your death, what then? where else 
end our futile cravings, our continual toil, after nothing? we all 
must die--but how few--who indeed besides yourself--was ever permit 
before his death to ransom the soul of the author of his existence! 
yes, philip, i envy you!" 

"you think and speak like amine. she too is of a wild and ardent 
soul, that would mingle with the being of the other world, and hold 
intelligence with disembodied spirits." 

"she is right," reply krantz; "there are event in my life, or 
rather connected with my family, which have often fully convinced me 
that this is not only possible but permitted. your story has only 
corroborate what i already believed." 

"indeed! krantz?" 

"indeed, yes; but of that hereafter: the night is close in, we must 
again put our little bark in safety for the night, and there is a cove 
which i think appear suit for the purpose." 

before morning, a strong breeze right on shore had sprung up, and the 
surf became so high as to endanger the raft; to continue their course 
was impossible; they could only haul up their raft to prevent its 
being dashed to pieces by the force of the waves, as the sea broke 
on the shore. philip's thought were, as usual, upon amine, and as he 
watch the toss waters, as the sunbeam lighten up their crests, 
he exclaimed, "ocean! hast thou my amine? if so, give up thy dead! 
what is that?" continue he, point to a speck on the horizon. 

"the sail of a small craft of some description or another," reply 
krantz; "and apparently coming down before the wind to shelter herself 
in the very nook we have selected." 

"you are right; it is the sail of a vessel, of one of those peroqua 
which skim over these seas--how she rise on the swell!--she is full 
of men, apparently." 

the peroqua rapid approached, and was soon close to the beach; the 
sail was lowered, and she was back in through the surf. 

"resistance is useless should they prove enemies," observe philip. 
"we shall soon know our fate." 

the people in the peroqua took no notice of them, until the craft had 
been haul up and secured; three of them then advanced towards philip 
and krantz, with spear in their hands, but evidently with no hostile 
intentions. one address them in portuguese, ask them who they 
were? 

"we are hollanders," reply philip. 

"a part of the crew of the vessel which was wrecked?" inquire he. 

"yes!" 

"you have nothing to fear--you are enemy to the portuguese, and so 
are we. we belong to the island of ternate--our king is at war with 
the portuguese, who are villains. where are your companions? on which 
island?" 

"they are all dead," reply philip; "may i ask you whether you have 
fallen in with a woman, who was adrift on a part of the raft by 
herself? or have you heard of her?" 

"we have heard that a woman was picked up on the beach to the 
southward, and carry away by the tidore people to the portugal 
settlement, on the supposition that she was a portuguese." 

"then god be thanked, she is saved," cry philip. "merciful heaven! 
accept my thanks.--to tidore you said?" 

"yes; we are at war with the portuguese, we cannot take you there." 

"no! but we shall meet again." 

the person who accost them was evidently of some consequence. his 
dress was, to a certain degree, mahometan, but mixed up with malay--he 
carry arms in his girdle and a spear in his hand; his turban was of 
print chintz; and his deportment, like most person of rank in that 
country, was courteous and dignified. 

"we are now return to ternate, and will take you with us. our king 
will be pleased to receive any hollanders, especially as you are 
enemy to the portugal dogs. i forgot to tell you that we have one 
of your companion with us in the boat; we picked him up at sea, much 
exhausted, but he is now do well." 

"who can it be?" observe krantz, "it must be some one belong to 
some other vessel." 

"no," reply philip, shuddering, "it must be schriften." 

"then my eyes must behold him before i believe it," reply krantz. 

"then believe your eyes," reply philip, point to the form of 
schriften, who was now walking towards them. 

"mynheer vanderdecken, glad to see you. mynheer krantz, i hope you are 
well. how lucky that we should all be saved. he! he!" 

"the ocean has then, indeed, given up its dead, as i requested," 
thought philip. 

in the meantime, schriften, without making any reference to the way 
in which they had so unceremonious part company, address krantz 
with apparent good-humour, and some slight tinge of sarcasm. it was 
some time before krantz could rid himself of him. 

"what think you of him, krantz?" 

"that he is a part of the whole, and has his destiny to fulfil as well 
as you. he has his part to play in this wondrous mystery, and will 
remain until it is finished. think not of him. recollect, your amine 
is safe." 

"true," reply philip, "the wretch is not worth a thought; we have 
now nothing to do but to embark with these people; hereafter we may 
rid ourselves of him, and strive then to rejoin my dearest amine." 




chapter xxviii 


when amine again came to her senses, she found herself lie on the 
leaves of the palmetto, in a small hut. a hideous black child sat by 
her, brush off the flies. where was she? 

the raft had been toss about for two days, during which amine 
remain in a state of alternate delirium and stupor. driven by the 
current and the gale, it had been thrown on shore on the eastern end 
of the coast of new guinea. she had been discover by some of the 
natives, who happen to be on the beach traffick with some of the 
tidore people. at first, they hasten to rid her of her garments, 
although they perceive that she was not dead; but before they had 
left her as naked as themselves, a diamond of great value, which had 
been given to her by philip, attract the attention of one of the 
savages; failing in his attempt to pull it off, he pull out a rusty, 
blunt knife, and was busy saw at the finger, when an old woman of 
authority interfere and bade him desist. the tidore people, also, who 
were friends with the portuguese, pointed out, that to save one of 
that nation would ensure a reward; they state moreover, that they 
would, on their return, inform the people of the factory establishment 
that one of their country-women had been thrown on shore on a 
raft.--to this amine owe the care and attention that was paid to 
her; that part of new guinea being somewhat civilise by occasional 
intercourse with the tidore people, who came there to exchange 
europe finery and trash for the more useful production of the 
island. 

the papoo woman carry amine into her hut, and there she lay for 
many days, waver between life and death, careful attended, but 
require little, except the moisten of her parch lip with 
water, and the brush off of the mosquito and flies. 

when amine open her eyes, the little papoo ran out to acquaint 
the woman who follow her into the hut. she was of large size, very 
corpulent and unwieldy, with little covering on her body; her hair, 
which was woolly in its texture, was partly parted, partly frizzled; 
a cloth round her waist, and a piece of fade yellow silk on her 
shoulders, was all her dress. a few silver ring on her fat fingers, 
and a necklace of mother-of-pearl, were her ornaments. her teeth were 
jet black, from the use of the betel-nut, and her whole appearance was 
such as to excite disgust in the breast of amine. 

she address amine, but her words were unintelligible: and the 
sufferer, exhaust with the slight effort she had made, fell back 
into her former position, and closed her eyes. but if the woman was 
disgusting, she was kind; and by her attention and care amine was 
able, in the course of three weeks, to crawl out of the hut and enjoy 
the evening breeze. the native of the island would at times surround 
her, but they treat her with respect, from fear of the old woman. 
their woolly hair was frizzle or plaited, sometimes powdered white 
with chunam. a few palmetto leaves round the waist and descend to 
the knee, was their only attire; ring through the nose and ears, 
and feather of birds, particularly the bird of paradise, were their 
ornaments: but their language was wholly unintelligble. amine felt 
grateful for life; she sat under the shade of the trees, and watch 
the swift peroqua as they skim the blue sea which was expand 
before her; but her thought were elsewhere--they were on philip. 

one morning amine came out of the hut, with joy on her countenance, 
and took her usual seat under the trees. "yes, mother, dearest mother, 
i thank thee; thou hast appear to me; thou hast recall to me thy 
arts, which i had forgotten, and had i but the means of converse 
with these people, even now would i know where my philip might be." 

for two month did amine remain under the care of the papoo woman. 
when the tidore people returned, they had an order to bring the white 
woman, who had been cast on shore, to the factory, and repay those who 
had taken charge of her. they made sign to amine, who had now quite 
recover her beauty, that she was to go with them. any change was 
preferable to stay where she was, and amine follow them down to a 
peroqua, on which she was secure fixed, and was soon dart through 
the water with her new companions; and, as they flew along the smooth 
seas, amine thought of philip's dream and the mermaid's shell. 

by the evening they had arrive at the southern point of galolo, where 
they landed for the night; the next day they gain the place of their 
destination, and amine was led up to the portugal factory. 

that the curiosity of those who were station there was rouse is not 
to be wonder at, the history given by the native of amine's escape 
appear so miraculous. from the commandant to the lowest servant, 
every one was wait to receive her. the beauty of amine, her perfect 
form, astonish them. the commandant address a long compliment to 
her in portuguese, and was astonish that she did not make a suitable 
reply; but as amine did not understand a word that he said, it would 
have been more surprising if she had. 

as amine made sign that she could not understand the language, it was 
presume that she was either english or dutch, and an interpreter was 
sent for. she then explain that she was the wife of a dutch captain, 
whose vessel had been wrecked, and that she did not know whether the 
crew had been save or not. the portugal were very glad to hear 
that a dutch vessel had been wrecked, and very glad that so lovely a 
creature as amine had been saved. she was informed by the commandant 
that she was welcome, and that during her stay there everything should 
be done to make her comfortable; that in three month they expect 
a vessel from the china seas, proceeding to goa, and that, if 
inclined, she should have a passage to goa in that vessel, and from 
that city she would easily find other vessel to take her wherever she 
might please to go; she was then conduct to an apartment, and left 
with a little negress to attend upon her. 

the portugal commandant was a small, meagre, little man, dry up to 
a chip, from long sojourn under a tropical sun. he had very large 
whiskers, and a very long sword; these were the two most remarkable 
features in his person and dress. 

his attention could not be misinterpreted, and amine would have 
laugh at him, had she not been fearful that she might be detained. 
in a few weeks, by due attention, she gain the portugal language 
so far as to ask for what she required, and before she quit the 
island of tidore she could converse fluently. but her anxiety to 
leave, and to ascertain what had become of philip, became greater 
every day; and at the expiration of the three months, her eyes were 
continual bent to seaward, to catch the first glimpse of the vessel 
which was expected. at last it appeared, and as amine watch the 
approach of the canvas from the west, the commandant fell on his 
knees, and declare his passion, request her not to think of 
departure, but to unite her fate with his. 

amine was cautious in her reply, for she knew that she was in his 
power. "she must first receive intelligence of her husband's death, 
which was not yet certain; she would proceed to goa, and if she 
discover that she was single, she would write to him." 

this answer, as it will be discovered, was the cause of great 
suffering to philip: the commandant, fully assured that he could 
compass philip's death, was satisfied--declared that, as soon as he 
had any positive intelligence, he would bring it to goa himself, and 
made a thousand protestation of truth and fidelity. 

"fool!" thought amine, as she watch the ship, which was now close to 
the anchorage. 

in half-an-hour the vessel had anchored, and the people had landed. 
amine observe a priest with them, as they walk up to the fort. she 
shuddered--she knew not why; when they arrived, she found herself in 
the presence of father mathias. 




chapter xxix 


both amine and father mathia started, and drew back with surprise at 
this unexpected meeting. amine was the first to extend her hand; 
she had almost forgotten at the moment how they had parted, in the 
pleasure she experienced in meeting with a well-known face. 

father mathia cold took her hand, and lay his own upon her head, 
said: "may god bless thee, and forgive thee, my daughter, as i have 
long done." then the recollection of what had passed, rush into 
amine's mind, and she coloured deeply. 

had father mathia forgiven her? the event would show; but this is 
certain, he now treat her as an old friend: listen with interest 
to her history of the wreck, and agree with her upon the propriety of 
her accompany him to goa. 

in a few days the vessel sailed, and amine quit the factory and its 
enamoured commandant. they ran through the archipelago in safety, and 
were crossing the mouth of the bay of bengal, without have had any 
interrupt to fine weather. father mathia had return to lisbon, 
when he quit ternicore, and, tired of idleness, had again 
volunteer to proceed as a missionary to india. he had arrive at 
formosa, and shortly after his arrival, had received directions from 
his superior to return on important business to goa, and thus it was 
that he fell in with amine at tidore. 

it would be difficult to analyse the feelings of father mathia 
towards amine--they varied so often. at one moment, he would call to 
mind the kindness shown to him by her and philip--the regard he had 
for the husband, and the many good quality which he acknowledge 
that she possessed--and _now_ he would recollect the disgrace, the 
unmerited disgrace, he had suffer through her means; and he would 
then canvass, whether she really did believe him an intruder in her 
chamber for other motive than those which actuate him, or whether 
she had taken advantage of his indiscretion. these account were 
nearly balanced in his mind; he could have forgiven all, if he had 
thought that amine was a sincere convert to the church; but his strong 
conviction that she was not only an unbeliever, but that she practised 
forbidden arts, turn the scale against her. he watch her narrowly, 
and when, in her conversation, she shew any religious feeling, his 
heart warm towards her; but when, on the contrary, any words escape 
her lip which seem to show that she thought lightly of his creed, 
then the full tide of indignation and vengeance pour into his bosom. 

it was in crossing the bay of bengal, to pass round the southern cape 
of ceylon, that they first met with bad weather; and when the storm 
increased, the superstitious seamen light candle before the small 
image of the saint which was shrine on deck. amine observe it, 
and smile with scorn; and as she did so, almost unwittingly, she 
perceive that the eye of father mathia was earnest fixed upon her. 

"the papoose i have just left do no worse than worship their idols, 
and are term idolaters," mutter amine. "what then are these 
christians?" 

"would you not be better below?" said father mathias, coming over to 
amine; "this is no time for women to be on deck--they would be better 
employ in offering up prayer for safety." 

"nay, father, i can pray better here; i like this conflict of the 
elements; and as i view, i bow down in admiration of the deity who 
rule the storm; who send the wind forth in their wrath, or soothe 
them into peace." 

"it is well said, my child," reply father mathias; "but the almighty 
is not only to be worship in his works, but, in the closet, with 
meditation, self-examination, and faith. hast thou follow up the 
precept which thou hast been taught? hast thou reverence the sublime 
mystery which have been unfold to thee?" 

"i have done my best, father," reply amine, turning away her head, 
and watch the rolling wave. 

"hast thou call upon the holy virgin, and upon the saints--those 
intercessor for mortal err like thyself?" 

amine made no answer; she did not wish to irritate the priest, neither 
would she tell an untruth. 

"answer me, child," continue the priest with severity. 

"father," reply amine, "i have appeal to god alone--the god of the 
christians--the god of the whole universe!" 

"who believe not everything, believe nothing, young woman. i thought 
as much! i saw thee smile with scorn just now; why didst thou smile?" 

"at my own thoughts, good father." 

"say rather, at the true faith shown by others." 

amine made no answer. 

"thou art still an unbeliever, and a heretic. beware, young woman! 
beware!" 

"beware of what, good father? why should i beware? are there not 
million in these clime more unbelieving, and more heretic, perhaps, 
than i? how many have you convert to your faith? what trouble, what 
toil, what danger have you not undergone to propagate that creed--and 
why do you succeed so ill? shall i tell you, father? it is because the 
people have already had a creed of their own: a creed taught to them 
from their infancy, and acknowledge by all who live about them. am i 
not in the same position? i was brought up in another creed: and can 
you expect that that can be dismissed, and the prejudice of early 
years at once eradicated? i have thought much of what you have told 
me--have felt that much is true--that the tenet of your creed are 
god-like--is not that much? and yet you are not content. you would 
have blind acknowledgment, blind obedience--i were then an unworthy 
convert. we shall soon be in port, then teach me, and convince me, if 
you will; i am ready to examine and confess, but on conviction only. 
have patience, good father, and the time may come when i _may_ feel, 
what now i _do not_;--that yon bit of paint wood is a thing to bow 
down to and adore." 

notwithstanding this taunt at the close of this speech, there was so 
much truth in the observations of amine, that father mathia felt 
their power. as the wife of a catholic, he had been accustomed to view 
amine as one who had backslide from the church of rome--not as one 
who had been brought up in another creed. he now recall to mind, 
that she had never yet been received into the church, for father 
seysen had not considered her as in a proper state to be admitted, and 
had defer her baptism until he was satisfy of her full belief. 

"you speak boldly; but you speak as you feel, my child," reply 
father mathia after a pause. "we will, when we arrive at goa, talk 
over these things, and with the blessing of god, the new faith shall 
be made manifest to you." 

"so be it," reply amine. 

little did the priest imagine that amine's thought were at that 
moment upon a dream she had had at new guinea, in which her mother 
appeared, and reveal to her her magic arts--and that amine was 
longing to arrive at goa that she might practise them. 

every hour the gale increased, and the vessel labour and leaked; the 
portugal sailor were frightened, and invoke their saints. father 
mathias, and the other passengers, gave themselves up for lost, for 
the pump could not keep the vessel free; and their cheek blanch as 
the wave wash furiously over the vessel: they pray and trembled. 
father mathia gave them absolution; some cry like children, some 
tore their hair, some cursed, and cursed the saint they had but the 
day before invoked. but amine stood unmoved; and as she heard them 
curse, she smile in scorn. 

"my child," said father mathias, check his tremulous voice that he 
might not appear agitate before one whom he saw so calm and unmoved 
amidst the roaring of the elements--"my child, let not this hour of 
peril pass away. before thou art summoned, let me receive thee into 
the bosom of our church--give thee pardon for thy sins, and certainty 
of bliss hereafter." 

"good father, amine is not to be frightened into belief, even if she 
fear the storm," reply she; "nor will she credit your power to 
forgive her sins, merely because she says, in fear, that which in her 
calm reason she might reject. if ever fear could have subject me, 
it was when i was alone upon the raft--that was indeed a trial of my 
strength of mind, the bare recollection of which is, at this moment, 
more dreadful than the storm now raging, and the death which may await 
us. there is a god on high in whose mercy i trust--in whose love i 
confide--to whose will i bow. let him do his will." 

"die not, my child, in unbelief!" 

"father," reply amine, point to the passenger and seamen who 
were on the deck crying and wailing: "these are christians--these men 
have been promise by you, but now, the inheritance of perfect bliss. 
what is their faith, that it do not give them strength to die like 
men? why is it that a woman quail not, while they lie grovel on 
the deck?" 

"life is sweet, my child--they leave their wives, their children, and 
they dread hereafter. who is prepared to die?" 

"i am," reply amine. "i have no husband--at least i fear i have no 
husband. for me life has no sweets; yet, one little hope remains--a 
straw to the sink wretch. i fear not death, for i have nought to 
live for. were philip here, why, then indeed--but he is gone before 
me, and now to follow him is all i ask." 

"he die in the faith, my child--if you would meet him, do the same." 

"he never die like these," reply amine, look with scorn at the 
passengers. 

"perhaps he live not as they have lived," reply father mathias. "a 
good man die in peace, and hath no fear." 

"so die the good men of all creeds, father," reply amine; "and in 
all creed death is equally terrible to the wicked." 

"i will pray for thee, my child," said father mathias, sink on his 
knees. 

"many thanks--thy prayer will be heard, even though offer for one 
like me," reply amine, who, clinging to the man-ropes, made her way 
up to the ladder, and gain the deck. 

"lost! signora, lost!" exclaim the captain, wring his hand as he 
crouch under the bulwark. 

"no!" reply amine, who had gain the weather side, and held on by a 
rope; "not lost this time." 

"how say you, signora?" reply the captain, look with admiration 
at amine's calm and compose countenance. "how say you, signora?" 

"something tell me, good captain, that you will not be lost, if you 
exert yourselves--something tell it to me here," and amine laid her 
hand to her heart. amine had a conviction that the vessel would not be 
lost, for it had not escape her observation that the storm was less 
violent, although, in their terror, this had been unnoticed by the 
sailors. 

the cool of amine, her beauty, perhaps, the unusual sight of a 
woman so young, calm and confiding, when all other were in despair, 
had its due effect upon the captain and seamen. supposing her to be 
a catholic they imagine that she had had some warrant for her 
assertion, for credulous and superstition are close friends. they 
look upon amine with admiration and respect, recover their 
energies, and applied to their duties. the pump were again worked; 
the storm abate during the night, and the vessel was, as amine had 
predicted, saved. 

the crew and passenger look upon her almost as a saint, and talk 
of her to father mathias, who was sadly perplexed. the courage which 
she had display was extraordinary; even when he trembled, she show 
no sign of fear. he made no reply, but commune with his own mind, 
and the result was unfavourable to amine. what had given her such 
coolness? what had given her the spirit of prophecy? not the god of 
the christians, for she was no believer. who then? and father mathia 
thought of her chamber at terneuse, and shook his head. 




chapter xxx 


we must now again return to philip and krantz, who had a long 
conversation upon the strange reappear of schriften. all that they 
could agree upon was, that he should be careful watched, and that 
they should dispense with his company as soon as possible. krantz had 
interrogate him as to his escape, and schriften had informed him, in 
his usual sneer manner, that one of the sweep of the raft had been 
allow to get adrift during the scuffle, and that he had float on 
it, until he had gain a small island; that on seeing the peroqua, he 
had once more launch it and support himself by it, until he was 
perceive and picked up. as there was nothing impossible although much 
of the improbable in this account, krantz ask no more questions. the 
next morning, the wind have abated, they launch the peroqua, and 
made sail for the island of ternate. 

it was four days before they arrived: as every night they landed and 
haul up their craft on the sandy beach. philip's heart was relieved 
at the knowledge of amine's safety, and he could have been happy at 
the prospect of again meeting her, had he not been so constant 
fret by the company of schriften. 

there was something so strange, so contrary to human nature that the 
little man, though diabolical as he appear to be in his disposition, 
should never hint at, or complain of, philip's attempt upon his life. 
had he complained--had he accused philip of murder--had he vow 
vengeance and demand justice on his return to the authorities, it 
had been different; but no--there he was, making his uncalled-for and 
impertinent observations, with his eternal chuckle and sarcasm, as if 
he had not the least cause of anger or ill-will. 

as soon as they arrive at the principal port and town of ternate, 
they were conduct to a large cabin, built of palmetto leaves and 
bamboo, and request not to leave it until their arrival had been 
announce to the king. the peculiar courtesy and good breeding of 
these islander was the constant theme of remark of philip and krantz; 
their religion, as well as their dress, appear to be a compound of 
the mahometan and malayan. 

after a few hours, they were summon to attend the audience of the 
king, held in the open air. the king was seat under a portico, 
attend by a numerous concourse of priest and soldiers. there was 
much company, but little splendour. all who were about the king 
were robe in white, with white turbans, but he himself was without 
ornament. the first thing that struck philip and krantz, when they 
were usher into the presence of the king, was the beautiful 
cleanliness which everywhere prevailed; every dress was spotless and 
white, as the sun could bleach it. 

have follow the example of those who introduce them, and salute 
the king after the mahommedan custom, they were request to be 
seated; and through the portugal interpreters--for the former 
communication of the islander with the portuguese, who had been 
driven from the place, made the portugal language well known by 
many--a few question were put by the king, who bade them welcome, and 
then request to know how they had been wrecked. 

philip enter into a short detail, in which he state that his wife 
had been separate from him, and was, he understood, in the hand of 
the portugal factory at tidore. he request to know if his majesty 
could assist him in obtain her release, or in go to join her. 

"it is well said," reply the king. "let refreshments be brought in 
for the strangers, and the audience be broken up." 

in a few minutes there remain of all the court but two or three 
of the king's confidential friends and advisers; and a collation of 
curries, fish, and a variety of other dishes was serve up. after it 
was over, the king then said, "the portugal are dogs, they are our 
enemies--will you assist us to fight them? we have large guns, but do 
not understand the use of them as well as you do. i will send a 
fleet against the portugal at tidore, if you will assist me. say, 
hollanders, will you fight? you," address philip, "will then 
recover your wife." 

"i will give an answer to you to-morrow," reply philip; "i must 
consult with my friend. as i told you before, i was the captain of the 
ship, and this was my second in command--we will consult together." 
schriften, whom philip had represent as a common seaman, had not 
been brought up into the presence of the king. 

"it is good," reply the king; "to-morrow we will expect your reply." 

philip and krantz took their leave, and, on their return to the 
cabin, found that the king had sent them, as a present, two complete 
mahommedan dresses, with turbans. these were welcome, for their own 
garment were sadly tattered, and very unfit for exposure to the 
burning sun of those climes. their peaked hat too, collected the ray 
of heat, which were intolerable; and they gladly exchange them for 
the white turban. secrete their money in the malayan sash, which 
form a part of the attire, they soon robe themselves in the native 
garments, the comfort of which was immediately acknowledged. after a 
long consultation, it was decided that they should accept the terms 
offer by the king, as this was the only feasible way by which 
philip could hope to re-obtain possession of amine. their consent was 
communicate to the king on the following day, and every preparation 
was made for the expedition. 

and now was to be beheld a scene of bustle and activity. hundred and 
hundred of peroquas, of every dimension, floating close to the beach, 
side by side, form a raft extend nearly half a mile on the smooth 
water of the bay, teeming with men, who were equip them for the 
service: some were fitting the sails; other were carpenter 
where required; the major portion were sharpen their swords, and 
prepare the deadly poison of the pineapple for their creezes. 
the beach was a scene of confusion: water in jars, bags of rice, 
vegetables, salt-fish, fowl in coops, were everywhere strew about 
among the armed natives, who were obey the orders of the chiefs, 
who themselves walk up and down, dress in their gayest apparel, 
and glittering in their arms and ornaments. the king had six long 
brass four-pounders, a present from an indian captain; these, with 
a proportionate quantity of shot and cartridges, were (under the 
direction of philip and krantz) fitted on some of the largest 
peroquas, and some of the native were instruct how to use them. at 
first the king, who fully expect the reduction of the portugal 
fort, state his determination to go in person; but in this he was 
overrule by his confidential adviser and by the request of philip, 
who could not allow him to expose his valuable life. in ten days all 
was ready, and the fleet, manned by seven thousand men, made sail for 
the island of tidore. 

it was a beautiful sight, to behold the blue ripple sea, cover 
with nearly six hundred of these picturesque craft, all under sail, 
and dart through the water like dolphin in pursuit of prey; all 
crowded with natives, whose white dress form a lively contrast 
with the deep blue of the water. the large peroquas, in which were 
philip and krantz with the native commanders, were gaily decorate 
with streamer and pennon of all colours, that flow out and snap 
with the fresh breeze. it appear rather to be an expedition of 
mirth and merriment, than one which was proceeding to bloodshed and 
slaughter. 

on the evening of the second day they had made the island of tidore, 
and run down to within a few mile of the portugal factory and 
fort. the native of the country, who disliked, though they fear 
to disobey the portuguese, had quit their hut near the beach and 
retired into the woods. the fleet, therefore, anchor and lay near 
the beach, without molestation, during the night. the next morning 
philip and krantz proceed to reconnoitre. 

the fort and factory of tidore were built upon the same principle 
as almost all the portugal defence in those seas. an outer 
fortification, consist of a ditch, with strong palisade embed 
in masonry, surround the factory and all the house of the 
establishment. the gate of the outer wall were open all day for 
ingress and egress, and closed only at night. on the seaward side 
of this enclosure was what may be term the citadel or real 
fortification; it was built of solid masonry with parapets, was 
surround by a deep ditch, and was only accessible by a drawbridge, 
mount with cannon on every side. its real strength however, could 
not well be perceived, as it was hidden by the high palisade which 
surround the whole establishment. after a careful survey, philip 
recommend that the large peroqua with the cannon should attack by 
sea, while the men of the small vessel should land and surround the 
fort--taking advantage of every shelter which was afford them, to 
cover themselves while they harass the enemy with their matchlocks, 
arrows, and spears. this plan have been approve of, one hundred and 
fifty peroqua made sail; the other were haul on the beach, and the 
men belong to them proceed by land. 

but the portugal had been warn of their approach, and were fully 
prepared to receive them; the gun mount to the seaward were of 
heavy calibre and well served. the gun of the peroquas, though 
render as effectual as they could be, under the direction of philip, 
were small, and did little damage to the thick stone front of the 
fort. after an engagement of four hours, during which the ternate 
people lost a great number of men, the peroquas, by the advice of 
philip and krantz, haul off, and return to where the remainder of 
the fleet were stationed; and another council of war was held. the 
force, which had surround the fort on the land side, was, however, 
not withdrawn, as it cut off any supplies or assistance; and, at the 
same time, occasional brought down any of the portugal who might 
expose themselves--a point of no small importance, as philip well 
knew, with a garrison so small as that in the fort. 

that they could not take the fort by means of their cannon was 
evident; on the sea-side it was for them impregnable; their effort 
must now be direct to the land. krantz, after the native chief had 
done speaking, advise that they should wait until dark, and then 
proceed to the attack in the following way. when the breeze set along 
shore, which it would do in the evening, he propose that the men 
should prepare large bundle of dry palmetto and cocoa-nut leaves; 
that they should carry their bundle and stack them against the 
palisade to windward, and then set fire to them. they would thus burn 
down the palisades, and gain an entrance into the outer fortification: 
after which they could ascertain in what manner they should next 
proceed. this advice was too judicious not to be followed. all the men 
who had not matchlock were set to collect fagots; a large quantity of 
dry wood was soon got together, and before night they were ready for 
the second attack. 

the white dress of the ternate were laid aside: with nothing 
on them but their belts, and scimitars, and creezes, and blue 
under-drawers, they silent crept up to the palisades, there 
deposit their fagots, and then again returned, again to perform the 
same journey. as the breastwork of fagot increased, so did they more 
bold walk up, until the pile was completed; they then, with a loud 
shout, fire it in several places. the flame mounted, the cannon 
of the fort roared, and many fell under the discharge of grape and 
hand-grenade. but, stifle by the smoke, which pour in volumes upon 
them, the people in the fort were soon compel to quit the rampart 
to avoid suffocation. the palisade were on fire, and the flame 
mount in the air, swept over, and began to attack the factory and 
houses. no resistance was now offered, and the ternate tore down the 
burning palisades, and forced their way into the entrenchment, and 
with their scimitar and creezes, put to death all who had been so 
unfortunate as not to take refuge in the citadel. these were chiefly 
native servants, whom the attack had surprised, and for whose lives 
the portugal seem to care but little, for they paid no attention 
to their cries to lower the drawbridge, and admit them into the fort. 

the factory, built of stone, and all the other houses, were on fire, 
and the island was light up for miles. the smoke had clear away, 
and the defence of the fort were now plainly visible in the broad 
glare of the flames. "if we had scaling-ladders," cry philip, "the 
fort would be ours; there is not a soul on the ramparts." "true, 
true," reply krantz, "but even as it is, the factory wall will 
prove an advantageous post for us after the fire is extinguished; if 
we occupy it we can prevent them showing themselves while the ladder 
are constructing. to-morrow night we may have them ready, and have 
first smoke the fort with a few more fagots, we may afterwards mount 
the walls, and carry the place." 

"that will do," reply philip as he walk away. he then join 
the native chiefs, who were collected together outside of the 
entrenchment, and communicate to them his plans. when he had made 
known his views, and the chief had assent to them, schriften, who 
had come with the expedition unknown to philip, made his appearance. 

"that won't do; you'll never take that fort, philip vanderdecken. he! 
he!" cry schriften. 

hardly had he said the words, when a tremendous explosion took place, 
and the air was fill with large stones, which flew and fell in every 
direction, killing and maim hundreds. it was the factory which had 
blown up, for in its vault there was a large quantity of gunpowder, 
to which the fire had communicated. 

"so end that scheme, mynheer vanderdecken. he! he!" scream 
schriften; "you'll never take that fort." 

the loss of life and the confusion cause by this unexpected result, 
occasion a panic, and all the ternate people flee down to the beach 
where their peroqua were lying. 

it was in vain that philip and their chief attempt to rally them. 
unaccustomed to the terrible effects of gunpowder in any large 
quantities, they believe that something supernatural had occurred, 
and many of them jump into the peroqua and made sail, while the 
remainder were confused, trembling, and panting, all huddle together, 
on the beach. 

"you'll never take that fort, mynheer vanderdecken," scream the 
well-known voice. 

philip raise his sword to cleave the little man in two, but he let it 
fall again. "i fear he tell an unwelcome truth," thought philip; "but 
why should i take his life for that?" 

some few of the ternate chief still kept up their courage, but 
the major part were as much alarm as their people. after some 
consultation, it was agree that the army should remain where it was 
till the next morning, when they should finally decide what to do. 

when the day dawned, now that the portugal fort was no long 
surround by the other buildings, they perceive that it was more 
formidable than they had at first supposed. the rampart were fill 
with men, and they were bring cannon to bear on the ternate forces. 
philip had a consultation with krantz, and both acknowledged, that 
with the present panic nothing more could be done. the chief were 
of the same opinion, and orders were given for the return of the 
expedition: indeed, the ternate chief were fully satisfy with their 
success; they had destroy the large fort, the factory, and all the 
portugal buildings; a small fortification only was uninjured: that 
was built of stone, and inaccessible, and they knew that the report of 
what had been done, would be taken and acknowledge by the king as a 
great victory. the order was therefore given for embarkation, and in 
two hour the whole fleet, after a loss of about seven hundred men, 
was again on its way to ternate. krantz and philip this time embark 
in the same peroqua, that they might have the pleasure of each other's 
conversation. they had not, however, sail above three hours, when it 
fell calm, and, towards the evening, there was every prospect of bad 
weather. when the breeze again sprung up, it was from an adverse 
quarter, but these vessel steer so close to the wind, that this was 
disregarded: by midnight, however, the wind had increase to a gale, 
and before they were clear of the n.e. headland of tidore, it blew a 
hurricane, and many were wash off into the sea from the different 
craft, and those who could not swim, sank, and were drowned. the sail 
were lowered, and the vessel lay at the mercy of the wind and waves, 
every sea washing over them. the fleet was drift fast on the shore, 
and before morning dawned, the vessel in which were philip and krantz 
was among the roller on the beach off the northern end of the island. 
in a short time she was dashed to pieces, and every one had to look 
out for himself. philip and krantz laid hold of one fragment, and were 
support by it till they gain the shore; here they found about 
thirty more companion who had suffer the same fate as themselves. 
when the day dawned, they perceive that the major part of the fleet 
had weather the point, and that those who had not, would in all 
probability escape, as the wind had moderated. 

the ternate people proposed, that as they were well armed, they 
should, as soon as the weather moderated, launch some of the craft 
belong to the islanders, and join the fleet; but philip, who had 
been consulting with krantz, considered this a good opportunity for 
ascertain the fate of amine. as the portugal could prove nothing 
against them, they could either deny that they had been among the 
assailants, or might plead that they had been forced to join them. at 
all risks, philip was determined to remain, and krantz agree to share 
his fate: and seeming to agree with them, they allow the ternate 
people to walk to the tidore peroquas, and while they were launch 
them philip and krantz fell back into the jungle and disappeared. the 
portugal had perceive the wreck of their enemies, and, irritate by 
the loss they had sustained, they had ordered the people of the island 
to go out and capture all who were driven on shore. now that they were 
no long assailed, the tidore people obey them, and very soon fell 
in with philip and krantz, who had quiet sat down under the shade of 
a large tree, wait the issue. they were led away to the fort, where 
they arrive by nightfall. they were usher into the presence of the 
commandant, the same little man who had made love to amine, and as 
they were dress in mussulman's attire, he was about to order them to 
be hung, when philip told him that they were dutchmen, who had been 
wrecked, and forced by the king of ternate to join his expedition; 
that they had taken the earliest opportunity of escaping, as was very 
evident since those who had been thrown on shore with them had got off 
in the island boats, while they chose to remain. whereupon the little 
portugal commandant struck his sword firm down on the pavement of 
the ramparts, _looked_ very big, and then ordered them to prison for 
further examination. 




chapter xxxi 


as every one descant upon the want of comfort in a prison, it is to 
be presume that there are no very comfortable ones. certainly that to 
which philip and krantz were ushered, had anything rather than the air 
of an agreeable residence. it was under the fort, with a very small 
aperture look towards the sea, for light and air. it was very hot, 
and moreover destitute of all those little convenience which add 
so much to one's happiness in modern house and hotels. in fact, it 
consist of four bare walls, and a stone floor, and that was all. 

philip, who wish to make some inquiry relative to amine, 
addressed, in portuguese, the soldier who brought them down. 

"my good friend, i beg your pardon--" 

"i beg yours," reply the soldier go out of the door, and lock 
them in. 

philip leant gloomy against the wall; krantz, more mercurial, walk 
up and down three steps each way and turn. 

"do you know what i am thinking of?" observe krantz, after a pause in 
his walk. "it is very fortunate that (lowering his voice) we have all 
our doubloon about us; if they don't search us, we may yet get away 
by bribing." 

"and i was thinking," rejoin philip, "that i would soon be here 
than in company with that wretch schriften, whose sight is poison to 
me." 

"i did not much admire the appearance of the commandant, but i suppose 
we shall know more to-morrow." 

here they were interrupt by the turning of the key, and the entrance 
of a soldier with a chatty of water, and a large dish of boil rice. 
he was not the man who had brought them to the dungeon, and philip 
accost him. 

"you have had hard work within these last two days?" 

"yes, indeed! signor." 

"the native forced us to join the expedition, and we escaped." 

"so i heard you say, signor." 

"they lost nearly a thousand men," said krantz. 

"holy st francis! i am glad of it." 

"they will be careful how they attack portugal in a hurry, i 
expect," rejoin krantz. 

"i think so," reply the soldier. 

"did you lose many men?" venture philip, perceive that the man was 
loquacious. 

"not ten of our own people. in the factory there were about a hundred 
of the natives, with some women and children; but that is of no 
consequence." 

"you had a young europe woman here, i understand," said philip with 
anxiety; "one who was wreck in a vessel--was she among those who 
were lost?" 

"young woman!--holy st francis. yes, now i recollect. why the fact 
is--" 

"pedro!" call a voice from above; the man stopped, put his finger 
to his lips, went out, and lock the door. 

"god of heaven! give me patience," cry philip; "but this is too 
trying." 

"he will be down here again to-morrow morning," observe krantz. 

"yes! to-morrow morning; but what an endless time will suspense make 
of the intervene hours." 

"i feel for you," reply krantz; "but what can be done? the hour 
must pass, though suspense draw them out into interminable years; but 
i hear footsteps." 

again the door was unlocked, and the first soldier made his 
appearance. "follow me--the commandant would speak with you." 

this unexpected summons was cheerful comply with by philip and his 
companion. they walk up the narrow stone steps, and at last found 
themselves in a small room, in presence of the commandant, with whom 
our reader have been already made acquainted. he was loll on a 
small sofa, his long sword lay on the table before him, and two young 
native women were fan him, one at his head, and the other at his 
feet. 

"where did you get those dresses?" was the first interrogatory. 

"the natives, when they brought us prisoner from the island on which 
we had save ourselves, took away our clothes, and gave us these as a 
present from their king." 

"and engaged you to serve in their fleet, in the attack on this fort?" 

"they forced us," reply krantz; "for as there was no war between our 
nations, we object to this service: notwithstanding which, they put 
us on board, to make the common people believe that they were assist 
by europeans." 

"how am i to know the truth of this?" 

"you have our word in the first place, and our escape from them in the 
second." 

"you belong to a dutch east-indiaman. are you officer or common 
seamen?" 

krantz, who considered that they were less likely to be detain if 
they conceal their rank on board, gave philip a slight touch with 
his finger as he replied, "we are inferior officers. i was third mate, 
and this man was pilot." 

"and your captain, where is he?" 

"i--i cannot say, whether he is alive or dead." 

"had you no woman on board?" 

"yes! the captain had his wife." 

"what has become of her?" 

"she is supposed to have perish on a portion of the raft which broke 
adrift." 

"ha!" reply the commandant, who remain silent for some time. 

philip look at krantz, as much as to say, "why all this subterfuge;" 
but krantz gave him a sign to leave him to speak. 

"you say you don't know whether your captain is alive or dead?" 

"i do." 

"now, suppose i was to give you your liberty, would you have any 
objection to sign a paper, state his death, and swear to the 
truth of it?" 

philip stare at the commandant, and then at krantz. 

"i see no objection, exactly; except that if it were sent home to 
dutch we might get into trouble. may i ask, signor commandant, why 
you wish for such a paper?" 

"no!" roar the little man, in a voice like thunder. "i will give 
no reason, but that i wish it; that is enough; take your choice--the 
dungeon, or liberty and a passage by the first vessel which calls." 

"i don't doubt--in fact--i'm sure, he must be dead by this time," 
reply krantz, drawing out the words in a muse manner. "commandant, 
will you give us till to-morrow morning to make our calculations?" 

"yes! you may go." 

"but not to the dungeon, commandant," reply krantz; "we are not 
prisoners, certainly; and, if you wish us to do you a favour, surely 
you will not ill-treat us?" 

"by your own acknowledgment you have taken up arms against the 
most christian king; however, you may remain at liberty for the 
night--to-morrow morning will decide whether or no you are prisoners." 

philip and krantz thank the little commandant for his kindness, and 
then hasten away to the ramparts. it was now dark, and the moon had 
not yet made her appearance. they sat there on the parapet, enjoy 
the breeze, and feeling the delight of liberty, even after their short 
incarceration; but, near to them, soldier were either standing or 
lying, and they spoke but in whispers. 

"what could he mean by require us to give a certificate of the 
captain's death; and why did you answer as you did?" 

"philip vanderdecken, that i have often thought of the fate of your 
beautiful wife, you may imagine; and, when i heard that she was 
brought here, i then tremble for her. what must she appear, lovely as 
she is, when placed in comparison with the women of this country? and 
that little commandant--is he not the very person who would be taken 
with her charms? i deny our condition, because i thought he would 
be more likely to allow us our liberty as humble individuals, than as 
captain and first mate; particularly as he suspect that we led on the 
ternate people to the attack; and when he ask for a certificate 
of your death, i immediately imagine that he want it in order to 
induce amine to marry him. but where is she? is the question. if we 
could only find out that soldier, we might gain some information." 

"depend upon it, she is here," reply philip, clench his hands. 

"i am inclined to think so," said krantz; "that she is alive, i feel 
assured." 

the conversation was continue until the moon rose, and threw her 
beam over the tumble waters. philip and krantz turn their face 
towards the sea, and leant over the battlements in silence; after some 
time their reverie were disturbed by a person coming up to them with 
a "_buenos noctes, signor_." 

krantz immediately recognise the portugal soldier, whose 
conversation with him had been interrupted. 

"good-night, my friend! we thank heaven that you have no long to 
turn the key upon us." 

"yes, i'm surprised!" reply the soldier, in a low tone. "our 
commandant is fond of exercise his power; he rule here without 
appeal, that i can tell you." 

"he is not within hearing of us now," reply krantz. "it is a lovely 
spot this to live in! how long have you been in this country?" 

"now, thirteen years, signor, and i'm tired of it. i have a wife and 
children in oporto--that is, i _had_--but whether they are alive or 
not, who can tell?" 

"do you not expect to return and see them?" 

"return--signor! no portugal soldier like me ever returns. we are 
enlist for five years, and we lay our bone here." 

"that is hard indeed." 

"hard, signor," reply the soldier in a low whisper; "it is cruel 
and treacherous. i have often thought of putt the muzzle of my 
arquebuse to my head; but while there's life there's hope." 

"i pity you, my good fellow," rejoin krantz; "look you, i have two 
gold pieces left--take one; you may be able to send it home to your 
poor wife." 

"and here is one of mine, too, my good fellow," add philip, putt 
another in his hand. 

"now may all the saint preserve you, signors," reply the soldier, 
"for it is the first act of kindness shown to me for many years--not 
that my wife and children have much chance of ever receiving it." 

"you were speak about a young europe woman when we were in the 
dungeon," observe krantz, after a pause. 

"yes, signor, she was a very beautiful creature. our commandant was 
very much in love with her." 

"where is she now?" 

"she went away to goa, in company with a priest who knew, her, father 
mathias, a good old man; he gave me absolution when he was here." 

"father mathias!" exclaim philip; but a touch from krantz checked 
him. 

"you say the commandant love her?" 

"o yes; the little man was quite mad about her; and had it not been 
for the arrival of father mathias, he would never have let her go, 
that i'm sure of, although she was another man's wife." 

"sailed for goa, you said?" 

"yes, in a ship which call here. she must have been very glad to 
have got away, for our little commandant persecute her all day long, 
and she evidently was grieve for her husband. do you know, signors, 
if her husband is alive?" 

"no, we do not; we have heard nothing of him." 

"well, if he is, i hope he will not come here; for should the 
commandant have him in his power, it would go hard with him. he is a 
man who sticks at nothing. he is a brave little fellow, _that_ cannot 
be denied; but to get possession of that lady, he would remove all 
obstacle at any risk--and a husband is a very serious one, signors. 
well, signors," continue the soldier, after a pause, "i had better 
not be seen here too long; you may command me if you want anything; 
recollect, my name is pedro--good-night to you, and a thousand 
thanks," and the soldier walk away. 

"we have made one friend, at all events," said krantz, "and we have 
gain information of no little importance." 

"most important," reply philip. "amine then has sail for goa with 
father mathias! i feel that she is safe, and in good hands. he is an 
excellent man, that father mathias--my mind is much relieved." 

"yes; but recollect you are in the power of your enemy. we must leave 
this place as quick as we can--to-morrow we must sign the paper. it 
is of little consequence, as we shall probably be at goa before it 
arrives, and even if we are not, the news of your death would not 
occasion amine to marry this little wither piece of mortality." 

"that i feel assured of; but it may cause her great suffering." 

"not worse than her present suspense, believe me, philip; but it 
is useless canvass the past--it must be done. i shall sign as 
corneliu richter, our third mate; you, as jacob vantreat--recollect 
that." 

"agreed," reply philip, who then turn away, as if willing to be 
left to his own thoughts. krantz perceive it, and laid down under the 
embrasure, and was soon fast asleep. 




chapter xxxii 


tired out with the fatigue of the day before, philip had laid himself 
down by krantz and fallen asleep; early the next morning he was 
awaken by the sound of the commandant's voice, and his long sword 
rattling as usual upon the pavement. he rose, and found the little man 
rating the soldiers--threatening some with the dungeon, other with 
extra duty. krantz was also on his feet before the commandant had 
finished his morning's lecture. at last, perceive them, in a stern 
voice he ordered them to follow him into his apartment. they did so, 
and the commandant throw himself upon his sofa, inquire whether 
they were ready to sign the require paper, or go back to the 
dungeon.--krantz reply that they had been calculating chances, and 
that they were in consequence so perfectly convinced of the death of 
the captain, that they were willing to sign any paper to that effect; 
at which reply, the commandant immediately became very gracious, and 
have call for materials, he wrote out the document, which was duly 
subscribe to by krantz and philip. as soon as they had sign it, and 
he had it in his possession, the little man was so pleased, that he 
request them to partake of his breakfast. 

during the repast, he promise that they should leave the island by 
the first opportunity. although philip was taciturn, yet as krantz 
made himself very agreeable, the commandant invite them to dinner. 
krantz, as they became more familiar, informed him that they had each 
a few pieces of gold, and wish to be allow a room where they could 
keep their table. whether it was the want of society or the desire of 
obtain the gold, probably both, the commandant offer that they 
should join his table and pay their proportion of the expenses; a 
proposal which was gladly accede to. the terms were arranged, and 
krantz insist upon putt down the first week's payment in advance. 
from that moment the commandant was the best of friends with them, 
and did nothing but caress them whom he had so polite shove into a 
dungeon below water. it was on the evening of the third day, as they 
were smoking their manilla cheroots, that krantz, perceive the 
commandant in a peculiarly good humour, venture to ask him why he was 
so anxious for a certificate of the captain's death; and in reply was 
informed, much to the astonishment of philip, that amine had agree to 
marry him upon his produce such a document. 

"impossible," cry philip, start from his seat. 

"impossible, signor, and why impossible?" reply the commandant 
curling his mustachio with his fingers, with a surprise and angry 
air. 

"i should have said impossible too," interrupt krantz, who perceive 
the consequence of philip's indiscretion, "for had you seen, 
commandant, how that woman dote upon her husband, how she fondle 
him, you would with us have said, it was impossible that she could 
have transfer her affection so soon; but women are women, and 
soldier have a great advantage over other people; perhaps she has 
some excuse, commandant.--here's your health, and success to you." 

"it is exactly what i would have said," add philip, acting upon 
krantz's plan: "but she has a great excuse, commandant, when i 
recollect her husband, and have you in my presence." 

soothe with the flattery, the commandant replied, "why, yes, they say 
military men are very successful with the fair sex.--i presume it 
is because they look up to us for protection, and where can they 
be better assured of it, than with a man who wear a sword at his 
thigh.--come, signors, we will drink her health. here's to the 
beautiful amine vanderdecken." 

"to the beautiful amine vanderdecken," cry krantz, toss off his 
wine. 

"to the beautiful amine vanderdecken," follow philip. "but, 
commandant, are you not afraid to trust her at goa, where there are 
so many enticement for a woman, so many allurement held out for her 
sex?" 

"no, not in the least--i am convinced that she love me--nay, between 
ourselves, that she doat upon me." 

"liar!" exclaim philip. 

"how, signor! is that address to me?" cry the commandant, seize 
his sword which lay on the table. 

"no, no," reply philip, recover himself; "it was address to 
her; i have heard her swear to her husband, that she would exist for 
no other but him." 

"ha! ha! is that all?" reply the commandant, "my friend, you do not 
know women." 

"no, nor is he very partial to them either," reply krantz, who then 
leant over to the commandant and whispered, "he is always so when you 
talk of women. he was cruel jilt once, and hate the whole sex." 

"then we must be merciful to him," reply the little officer: 
"suppose we change the subject." 

when they repair to their own room, krantz pointed out to philip the 
necessity for his commanding his feelings, as otherwise they would 
again be immure in the dungeon. philip acknowledge his rashness, but 
pointed out to krantz, that the circumstance of amine have promise 
to marry the commandant, if he procure certain intelligence of his 
death, was the cause of his irritation. "can it be so? is it possible 
that she can have been so false," exclaim philip; "yet his anxiety 
to procure that document seem to warrant the truth of his assertion." 

"i think, philip, that in all probability it is true," reply krantz, 
carelessly; "but of this you may be assured that she has been placed 
in a situation of great peril, and has only done so to save herself 
for your sake. when you meet, depend upon it she will fully prove to 
you that necessity had compel her to deceive him in that way, and 
that if she had not done so, she would, by this time, have fallen a 
prey to his violence." 

"it may be so," reply philip, gravely. 

"it is so, philip, my life upon it. do not for a moment harbour a 
thought so injurious to one who lives but in your love. suspect that 
fond and devoted creature! i blush for you, philip vanderdecken." 

"you are right, and i beg her pardon for allow such feelings or 
thought to have for one moment overpower me," respond philip; 
"but it is a hard case for a husband, who love as i do, to hear 
his wife's name bandy about, and her character assail by a 
contemptible wretch like this commandant." 

"it is, i grant; but still i prefer even that to a dungeon," reply 
krantz, "and so, good-night." 

for three week they remain in the fort, every day becoming more 
intimate with the commandant, who often communicate with krantz, when 
philip was not present, turning the conversation upon his love for 
amine, and enter into a minute detail of all that had passed. 
krantz perceive that he was right in his opinion, and that amine had 
only been cajole the commandant, that she might escape. but the time 
pass heavy away with philip and krantz, for no vessel made its 
appearance. 

"when shall i see her again?" soliloquise philip one morning as he 
loll over the parapet, in company with krantz. 

"see! who?" said the commandant, who happen to be at his elbow. 

philip turn round, and stammer something unintelligible. 

"we were talk of his sister, commandant," said krantz, taking his 
arm, and leading him away.--"do not mention the subject to my friend, 
for it is a very painful one, and form one reason why he is so 
inimical to the sex. she was married to his intimate friend, and ran 
away from her husband: it was his only sister; and the disgrace broke 
his mother's heart, and has made him miserable. take no notice of it, 
i beg." 

"no, no, certainly not; i don't wonder at it: the honour of one's 
family is a serious affair," reply the commandant.--"poor young man, 
what with his sister's conduct, and the falsehood of his own intended, 
i don't wonder at his being so grave and silent. is he of good family, 
signor?" 

"one of the noblest in all holland," reply krantz;--"he is heir to 
a large property, and independent by the fortune of his mother; but 
these two unfortunate event induce him to quit the states secretly, 
and he embark for these country that he might forget his grief." 

"one of the noblest families?" reply the commandant;--"then he 
is under an assume name--jacob vantreat is not his true name, of 
course." 

"oh no," reply krantz;--"that it is not, i assure you; but my lip 
are seal on that point." 

"of course, except to a friend, who can keep a secret. i will not ask 
it now. so he is really noble?" 

"one of the highest family in the country, possess great wealth 
and influence--allied to the spain nobility by marriage." 

"indeed!" rejoin the commandant, musing--"i dare say he know many 
of the portugal as well." 

"no doubt of it, they are all more or less connected." 

"he must prove to you a most valuable friend, signor richter." 

"i consider myself provided for for life as soon as we return home. he 
is of a very grateful, generous disposition, as he would prove to you, 
should you ever fall in with him again." 

"i have no doubt of it; and i can assure you that i am heartily tired 
of stay in this country. here i shall remain probably for two years 
more before i am relieved, and then shall have to join my regiment at 
goa, and not be able to obtain leave to return home without resign 
my commission. but he is coming this way." 

after this conversation with krantz, the alteration in the manner of 
the portugal commandant, who had the highest respect for nobility, 
was most marked. he treat philip with a respect, which was 
observable to all in the fort; and which was, until krantz had 
explain the cause, a source of astonishment to philip himself. the 
commandant often introduce the subject to krantz, and sound him as 
to whether his conduct towards philip had been such, as to have made 
a favourable impression; for the little man now hoped, that, through 
such an influential channel, he might reap some benefit. 

some days after this conversation, as they were all three seat at 
table, a corporal entered, and salute the commandant, informed 
him that a dutch sailor had arrive at the fort, and wish to know 
whether he should be admitted. both philip and krantz turn pale at 
this communication--they had a presentiment of evil, but they said 
nothing. the sailor was ordered in, and in a few minutes, who should 
make his appearance but their tormentor, the one-eyed schriften. 
on perceive philip and krantz seat at the table he immediately 
exclaimed, "oh! captain philip vanderdecken, and my good friend 
mynheer krantz, first mate of the good ship _utrecht_, i am glad to 
meet you again." 

"captain philip vanderdecken!" roar the commandant, as he sprung 
from his chair. 

"yes, that is my captain, mynheer philip vanderdecken; and that is my 
first mate, mynheer krantz; both of the good ship _utrecht_: we were 
wreck together, were we not, mynheer? he! he!" 

"sangue de--vanderdecken! the husband? corpo del diavolo--is it 
possible?" cry the commandant, pant for breath, as he seize his 
long sword with both hands, and clench it with fury--"what then, i 
have been deceived, cajoled, laugh at!" then, after a pause--the 
vein of his forehead distend so as almost to burst--he continued, 
with a suppress voice, "most noble sir, i thank you; but now it is 
my turn.--what, ho! there! corporal--men, here instantly--quick!" 

philip and krantz felt convinced that all denial was useless. philip 
fold his arms and made no reply. krantz merely observed, "a little 
reflection will prove to you, sir, that this indignation is not 
warranted." 

"not warranted!" rejoin the commandant with a sneer; "you have 
deceive me; but you are caught in your own trap. i have the paper 
signed, which i shall not fail to make use of. _you_ are dead, you 
know, captain; i have your own hand to it, and your wife will be glad 
to believe it." 

"she has deceive you, commandant, to get out of your power, nothing 
more," said vanderdecken. "she would spurn a contemptible wither 
wretch like yourself, were she as free as the wind." 

"go on, go on; it will be my turn soon. corporal, throw these two men 
into the dungeon: a sentry at the door till further orders. away with 
them. most noble sir, perhaps your influential friends in dutch and 
spain will enable you to get out again." 

philip and krantz were led away by the soldiers, who were very much 
surprise at this change of treatment. schriften follow them; and 
as they walk across the rampart to the stairs which led to their 
prison, krantz, in his fury, burst from the soldiers, and bestow a 
kick upon schriften which sent him several feet forward on his face. 

"that was a good one--he! he!" cry schriften, smile and look at 
krantz as he regain his legs. 

there was an eye, however, which met theirs with an intelligent 
glance, as they descended the stairs to the dungeon. it was that of 
the soldier pedro. it told them that there was one friend upon whom 
they could rely, and who would spare no endeavour to assist them in 
their new difficulty. it was a consolation to them both; a ray of hope 
which cheer them as they once more descended the narrow steps, and 
heard the heavy key turn which again secure them in their dungeon. 




chapter xxxiii 


"thus are all our hope wrecked," said philip, mournfully; "what 
chance have we now of escape from this little tyrant?" 

"chances turn up," reply krantz; "at present, the prospect is not 
very cheering. let us hope for the best." 

"i have an idea in my head which may probably be turn to some 
account," add krantz; "as soon as the little man's fury is over." 

"which is--" 

"that, much as he likes your wife, there is something which he likes 
quite as well--money. now, as we know where all the treasure is 
concealed, i think he may be tempt to offer us our liberty, if we 
were to promise to put it into his possession." 

"that is not impossible. confound that little malignant wretch 
schriften; he certainly is not, as you say, of this world. he has been 
my persecute through life, and appear to act from an impulse not his 
own." 

"then must he be part and portion of your destiny. i'm thinking 
whether our noble commandant intend to leave us without anything to 
eat or drink." 

"i should not be surprised: that he will attempt my life i am 
convinced of, but not that he can take it; he may, however, add to its 
sufferings." 

as soon as the commandant had recover from his fury, he ordered 
schriften in, to be examine more particularly; but after every search 
made for him, schriften was no where to be found. the sentry at the 
gate declared that he had not passed; and a new search was ordered, 
but in vain. even the dungeon and gallery below were examined, but 
without success. 

"can he be lock up with the other prisoners?" thought the 
commandant: "impossible--but i will go and see." 

he descended and open the door of the dungeon, look in, and was 
about to return without speaking, when krantz said, "well, signor, 
this is kind treatment, after have live so long and so amicable 
together; to throw us into prison merely because a fellow declare 
that we are not what we represent ourselves to be; perhaps you will 
allow us a little water to drink?" 

the commandant, confuse by the extraordinary disappearance of 
schriften, hardly knew how to reply. he at last said in a mild tone 
than was to be anticipated, "i will order them to bring some, signor." 

he then closed the door of the dungeon and disappeared. 

"strange," observe philip, "he appear more pacify already." 

in a few minutes the door was again opened, and pedro came in with a 
chatty of water. 

"he has disappear like magic, signors, and is no where to be found. 
we have search everywhere, but in vain." 

"who?--the little old seaman?" 

"yes, he whom you kick as you were led to prison. the people all 
say, that it must have been a ghost. the sentry declare that he never 
left the fort, nor came near him; so, how he has got away is a riddle, 
which i perceive, has frightened our commandant not a little." 

krantz gave a long whistle as he look at philip. 

"are you to have charge of us, pedro?" 

"i hope so." 

"well, tell the commandant that when he is ready to listen to me, i 
have something of importance to communicate." 

pedro went out. 

"now, philip, i can frighten this little man into allow us to go 
free, if you will consent to say that you are not the husband of 
amine." 

"that i cannot do, krantz. i will not utter such a falsehood." 

"i was afraid so, and yet it appear to me that we may avail ourselves 
of duplicity to meet cruelty and injustice. unless you do as i 
propose, i hardly know how i can manage it; however, i will try what i 
can do." 

"i will assist you in every way, except disclaim my wife: that i 
never will do." 

"well then, i will see if i can make up a story that will suit all 
parties: let me think." 

krantz continue muse as he walk up and down, and was still 
occupy with his own thought when the door opened, and the 
commandant made his appearance. 

"you have something to impart to me, i understand--what is it?" 

"first, sir, bring that little wretch down here and confront him with 
us." 

"i see no occasion for that," reply the commandant; "what, sir, may 
you have to say?" 

"do you know who you have in your company when you speak to that 
one-eyed deformity?" 

"a dutch sailor, i presume." 

"no--a spirit--a demon--who occasion the loss of the vessel; and who 
bring misfortune wherever he appears." 

"holy virgin! what do you tell me, signor?" 

"the fact, signor commandant. we are oblige to you for confine us 
here, while he is in the fort; but beware for yourself." 

"you are laugh at me." 

"i am not; bring him down here. this noble gentleman has power over 
him. i wonder, indeed, at his daring to stay while he is so near; he 
has on his heart that which will send him tremble away.--bring 
him down here, and you shall at once see him vanish with curse and 
screams." 

"heaven defend us!" cry the commandant, terrified. 

"send for him now, signor?" 

"he is gone--vanished--not to be found!" 

"i thought as much," reply philip, significantly. 

"he is gone--vanished--you say. then, commandant, you will probably 
apologise to this noble gentleman for your treatment of him, and 
permit us to return to our former apartments. i will there explain to 
you this most strange and interesting history." 

the commandant, more confuse than ever, hardly knew how to act. at 
last he bowed to philip, and beg that he would consider himself at 
liberty; and, continue he to krantz, "i shall be most happy at an 
immediate explanation of this affair, for everything appear so 
contradictory." 

"and must, until it is explained. i will follow you into your own 
room; a courtesy you must not expect from my noble friend, who is not 
a little indignant at your treatment of him." 

the commandant went out, leave the door open. philip and krantz 
followed: the former retiring to his own apartment; the latter, 
bend his steps after the commandant to his sitting-room. the 
confusion which whirl in the brain of the commandant, made him 
appear most ridiculous. he hardly knew whether to be imperative or 
civil; whether he was really speak to the first mate of the vessel, 
or to another party; or whether he had insult a noble, or been 
cajole by a captain of a vessel: he threw himself down on his sofa, 
and krantz, taking his seat in a chair, state as follows: 

"you have been partly deceive and partly not, commandant. when we 
first came here, not knowing what treatment we might receive, we 
conceal our rank; afterwards i made known to you the rank of my 
friend on shore; but did not think it worth while to say anything 
about his situation on board of the vessel. the fact is, as you may 
well suppose of a person of his dignity, he was owner of the fine ship 
which was lost through the intervention of that one-eyed wretch; but 
of that by-and-bye. now for the story. 

"about ten years ago there was a great miser in amsterdam; he live 
in the most miserable way that a man could live in; wore nothing but 
rags; and have been formerly a seaman, his attire was generally of 
the description common to his class. he had one son, to whom he deny 
the necessaries of life, and whom he treat most cruelly. after 
vain attempt to possess a portion of his father's wealth, the devil 
instigate the son to murder the old man, who was one day found dead 
in his bed; but as there were no mark of violence which could be 
sworn to, although suspicion fell upon the son, the affair was hush 
up, and the young man took possession of his father's wealth. it was 
fully expect that there would now be riot and squander on the 
part of the heir, as is usually the case; but, on the contrary, he 
never spent anything, but appear to be as poor--even poorer--than he 
ever was. instead of being gay and merry, he was, in appearance, the 
most miserable, downcast person in the world; and he wander about, 
seek a crust of bread wherever he could find it. some said that he 
had been inoculate by his father, and was as great a miser as his 
father had been; other shook their heads, and said that all was not 
right. at last, after pine away for six or seven years, the young 
man die at an early age, without confession or absolution; in fact, 
he was found dead in his bed. beside the bed there was a paper, 
address to the authorities, in which he acknowledge that he had 
murder his father for the sake of his wealth; and that when he went 
to take some of it for his expenses on the day afterwards, he found 
his father's spirit sitting on the bags of money, and menace him 
with instant death, if he touched one piece. he return again and 
again, and found his father a sentinel as before. at last, he gave 
up attempt to obtain it; his crime made him miserable, and he 
continue in possession, without daring to expend one sixpence of all 
the money. he request that, as his end was approaching, the money 
should be given to the church of his patron saint, wherever that 
church might be found; if there was not one, then that a church might 
be built and endowed. upon investigation, it appear that there was 
no such church in either dutch or the low country (for you know 
that there are not many catholic there); and they applied to the 
catholic countries, lisbon and spain, but there again they were at 
fault; and it was discovered, that the only church dedicated to that 
saint was one which had been erect by a portugal nobleman in the 
city of goa, in the east indies. the catholic bishop determined that 
the money should be sent to goa; and, in consequence, it was embark 
on board of my patron's vessel, to be deliver up to the first 
portugal authority he might fall in with. 

"well, signor, the money, for better security, was put down into the 
captain's cabin, which, of course, was occupy by my noble friend, 
and when he went to bed the first night he was surprise to perceive a 
little one eye old man sitting on the boxes." 

"merciful saviour!" exclaim the commandant, "what, the very same 
little man who appear here this day?" 

"the very same," reply krantz. 

the commandant cross himself, and krantz proceeded:--"my noble 
patron was, as you may imagine, rather alarmed; but he is very 
courageous in disposition, and he inquire of the old man who he was, 
and how he had come on board? 

"'i came on board with my own money,' reply the spectre. it is all 
my own, and i shall keep it. the church shall never have one stiva of 
it if i can help it.' 

"whereupon, my patron pull out a famous relic, which he wear on 
his bosom, and held it towards him; at which the old man howl and 
screamed, and then most unwilling disappeared. for two more 
nights the spectre was obstinate, but at the sight of the relic, he 
invariable went off howling as if in great pain; every time that 
he went away, invariable crying out 'lost--lost!' and during the 
remainder of the voyage he did not trouble us any more. 

"we thought, when our patron told us this, that he refer to the 
money being lost to him, but it appear he refer to the ship; 
indeed it was very inconsiderate to have taken the wealth of a 
parricide on board; we could not expect any good fortune with such a 
freight, and so it proved. when the ship was lost, our patron was very 
anxious to save the money; it was put on the raft, and when we landed, 
it was taken on shore and buried, that it might be restore and given 
to the church to which it had been bequeathed; but the men who bury 
it are all dead, and there is no one but my friend here, the patron, 
who know the spot.--i forgot to say, that as soon as the money was 
landed on the island and buried, the spectre appear as before, and 
seat himself over the spot where the money was interred. i think, if 
this had not been the case, the seamen would have taken possession of 
it. but, by his appearance here this day, i presume he is tired, and 
has desert his charge, or else has come here that the money might be 
sent for, though i cannot understand why." 

"strange--very strange!--so there is a large treasure bury in the 
sand?" 

"there is." 

"i should think, by the spectre's coming here, that it has abandoned 
it." 

"of course it has, or it would not be here." 

"what can you imagine to have been the cause of its coming?" 

"probably to announce its intention, and request my friend to have the 
treasure sent for; but you know he was interrupted." 

"very true; but he call your friend vanderdecken." 

"it was the name which he took on board of the ship." 

"and it was the name of the lady." 

"very true; he fell in with her at the cape of good hope and brought 
her away with him." 

"then she is his wife?" 

"i must not answer that question. it is quite sufficient that he 
treat her as his wife." 

"ah! indeed. but about this treasure. you say that no one know where 
it is buried, but the patron as you call him?" 

"no one." 

"will you express my regret at what has passed, and tell him i will 
have the pleasure of seeing him to-morrow." 

"certainly, signor," reply krantz, rising from his chair; and 
wish the commandant a good evening as he retired. 

"i was after one thing and have found another. a spectre that must 
have been; but he must be a bold spectre that can frighten me from 
doubloons--besides, i can call in the priests. now, let me see; if i 
let this man go on condition that he reveal the site of the treasure 
to the authorities, that is to _me_, why then i need not lose the fair 
young woman. if i forward this paper to her, why then i gain her--but 
i must first get rid of him. of the two, i prefer--yes!--the gold! but 
i cannot obtain both. at all events, let me obtain the money first: i 
want it more than the church does: but, if i do get the money; these 
two men can expose me. i must get rid of them; silence them for 
ever--and then perhaps i may obtain the fair amine also. yes, their 
death will be necessary to secure either--that is, after i have the 
first in my possession.--let me think." 

for some minutes the commandant walk up and down the room, 
reflect upon the best method of proceeding. "he say it was a 
spectre, and he has told a plausible story," thought he; "but i don't 
know--i have my doubts--they may be trick me. well, be it so: 
if the money is there, i will have it; and if not, i will have my 
revenge. yes! i have it: not only must they be removed, but by 
degree all the other too who assist in bring the treasure 
away;--then--but--who's there, pedro?" 

"yes, signor." 

"how long have you been here?" 

"but as you spoke, signor: i thought i heard you call." 

"you may go--i want nothing." 

pedro departed; but he had been some time in the room, and had 
overheard the whole of the commandant's soliloquy. 




chapter xxxiv 


it was a bright morning when the portugal vessel on which amine was 
on board enter into the bay and roadstead of goa. goa was then at 
its zenith--a proud, luxurious, superb, wealthy city, the capital of 
the east, a city of palaces, whose viceroy reign supreme. as they 
approach the river the two mouth of which form the island upon 
which goa is built, the passenger were all on deck; and the 
portugal captain, who had often been there, pointed out to amine the 
most remarkable buildings. when they had pass the fort they enter 
the river, the whole line of whose bank were cover with the country 
seat of the nobility and hidalgos--splendid building embosomed in 
grove of orange trees, whose perfume scent the air. 

"there, signora, is the country palace of the viceroy," said the 
captain, point to a building which cover nearly three acre of 
ground. 

the ship sail on until they arrive nearly abreast of the town, when 
amine's eyes were direct to the lofty spire of the church and 
other public edifices--for amine had seen but little of city during 
her life, as may be perceive when her history is recollected. 

"that is the jesuits' church, with their establishment," said the 
captain, point to a magnificent pile. "in the church, now opening 
upon us, lay the canonise bone of the celebrated saint francisco, 
who sacrifice his life in his zeal for the propagation of the gospel 
in these countries." 

"i have heard of him from father mathias," reply amine; "but what 
building is that?" 

"the augustine convent; and the other, to the right, is the 
dominican." 

"splendid, indeed!" observe amine. 

"the building you see now, on the water-side, is the viceroy's palace; 
that to the right, again, is the convent of the barefoot carmelites: 
yon lofty spire is the cathedral of st catherine, and that beautiful 
and light piece of architecture is the church of our lady of pity. you 
observe there a building, with a dome, rising behind the viceroy's 
palace?" 

"i do," reply amine. 

"that is the holy inquisition." 

although amine had heard philip speak of the inquisition, she knew 
little about its properties; but a sudden tremor pass through her 
frame as the name was mentioned, which she could not herself account 
for. 

"now we open upon the viceroy's palace, and you perceive what a 
beautiful building it is," continue the captain; "that large pile a 
little above it is the custom-house, abreast of which we shall come to 
an anchor. i must leave you now, signora." 

a few minutes afterwards the ship anchor opposite the custom-house. 
the captain and passenger went on shore, with the exception of amine, 
who remain in the vessel, while father mathia went in search of an 
eligible place of abode. 

the next morning the priest return on board the ship, with the 
intelligence that he had obtain a reception for amine in the 
ursuline convent, the abbess of which establishment he was acquaint 
with; and, before amine went on shore, he caution her that the 
lady-abbess was a strict woman, and would be pleased if she conformed, 
as much as possible, to the rule of the convent; that this convent 
only received young person of the highest and most wealthy families, 
and he trust that she would be happy there. he also promise to call 
upon her, and talk upon those subject so dear to his heart, and so 
necessary to her salvation. the earnest and kindness with which 
the old man spoke melt amine to tears, and the holy father quit 
her side to go down and collect her baggage, with a warmth of feeling 
towards her which he had seldom felt before, and with greater hope 
than ever that his endeavour to convert her would not ultimately be 
thrown away. 

"he is a good man," thought amine, as she descended--and amine was 
right. father mathia was a good man, but, like all men, he was 
not perfect. a zealot in the cause of his religion, he would have 
cheerful sacrifice his life as a martyr, but if oppose or thwart 
in his views, he could then be cruel and unjust. 

father mathia had many reason for place amine in the ursuline 
convent. he felt bound to offer her that protection which he had 
so long received under her roof; he wish her to be under the 
surveillance of the abbess, for he could not help imagining, although 
he had no proof, that she was still essay or practise forbidden 
arts. he did not state this to the abbess, as he felt it would be 
unjust to raise suspicions; but he represent amine as one who would 
do honour to their faith, to which she was not yet quite converted. 
the very idea of effect a conversion is to the tenant of a convent 
an object of surpassing interest, and the abbess was much better 
pleased to receive one who require her council and persuasions, than 
a really pious christian who would give her no trouble. amine went on 
shore with father mathias; she refuse the palanquin which had been 
prepared for her, and walk up to the convent. they landed between 
the custom-house and the viceroy's palace, pass through to the large 
square behind it, and then went up the strada diretta, or straight 
street, which led up to the church of pity, near to which the convent 
is situated. this street is the finest on goa, and is call strada 
diretta, from the singular fact that almost all the street in goa are 
quadrant or segment of circles. amine was astonished: the house 
were of stone, lofty and massive; at each story was thrown out a 
balcony of marble, elaborate carved; and over each door were the 
arms of the nobility, or hidalgos, to whom the house belonged. the 
square behind the palace, and the wide streets, were fill with 
living beings; elephant with gorgeous trappings; led or mount 
horse in superb housings; palanquins, carry by native in splendid 
liveries; running footmen; syces; every variety of nation, from the 
proud portugal to the half-covered native; mussulmans, arabs, 
hindoos, armenians; officer and soldier in their uniforms, all 
crowded and throng together: all was bustle and motion. such was 
the wealth, the splendour, and luxury of the proud city of goa--the 
empress of the east at the time we are now describing. 

in half an hour they forced their way through the crowd, and arrive 
at the convent, where amine was well received by the abbess; and after 
a few minutes' conversation, father mathia took his leave: upon which 
the abbess immediately set about her task of conversion. the first 
thing she did was to order some dry sweetmeats--not a bad beginning, 
as they were palatable; but as she happen to be very ignorant, and 
unaccustomed to theology disputes, her subsequent argument did not 
go down as well as the fruit. after a rambling discourse of about an 
hour, the old lady felt tired, and felt as if she had done wonders. 
amine was then introduce to the nuns, most of whom were young and all 
of good family. her dormitory was shown to her, and express a wish 
to be alone, she was follow into her chamber by only sixteen of 
them, which was about as many as the chamber could well hold. 

we must pass over the two month during which amine remain in the 
convent. father mathia had taken every step to ascertain if her 
husband had been save upon any of the island which were under the 
portugal dominions, but could gain no information. amine was soon 
weary of the convent; she was persecute by the harangue of the old 
abbess, but more disgust at the conduct and conversation of the 
nuns. they all had secret to confide to her--secrets which had been 
confide to the whole convent before: such secrets, such stories, so 
different from amine's chaste ideas, such impurity of thought that 
amine was disgust at them. but how could it be otherwise; the poor 
creature had been taken from the world in the full bloom of youth 
under a ripen sun, and had been immure in this unnatural manner 
to gratify the avarice and pride of their families. its inmate being 
wholly compose of the best families, the rule of this convent were 
not so strict as others; license were given--greater license were 
taken--and amine, to her surprise, found that in this society, devoted 
to heaven, there were exhibit more of the bad passion of human 
nature than she had before met with. constant watched, never allow 
a moment to herself, her existence became unbearable: and after three 
month she request father mathia would find her some other place of 
refuge; telling him frankly that her residence in that place was not 
very likely to assist her conversion to the tenet of his faith. 
father mathia fully comprehend her, but replied, "i have no means." 

"here are means," reply amine, taking the diamond ring from her 
finger: "this is worth eight hundred ducat in our country; here i 
know not how much." 

father mathia took the ring. "i will call upon you to-morrow morning, 
and let you know what i have done. i shall acquaint the lady abbess 
that you are go to your husband, for it would not be safe to let 
her suppose that you have reason for quit the convent. i have 
heard what you state mention before, but have treat it as scandal; 
but you, i know, are incapable of falsehood." 

the next day father mathia returned, and had an interview with the 
abbess, who after a time sent for amine, and told her that it was 
necessary that she should leave the convent. she console her as well 
as she could at leave such a happy place, sent for some sweetmeat 
to make the parting less trying, gave her her blessing, and made her 
over to father mathias; who, when they were alone, informed amine that 
he had disposed of the ring for eighteen hundred dollars, and had 
procure apartments for her in the house of a widow lady, with whom 
she was to board. 

taking leave of the nuns, amine quit the convent with father 
mathias, and was soon install in her new apartments, in a house 
which form part of a spacious square call the terra di sabaio. 
after the introduction to her hostess, father mathia left her. amine 
found her apartments front the square, airy and commodious. the 
landlady, who had escort her to view them, not have left her, she 
inquire "what large church that was on the other side of the square?" 

"it is the ascension," reply the lady; "the music is very fine 
there; we will go and hear it to-morrow, if you please." 

"and that massive building in face of us?" 

"that is the holy inquisition," said the widow, crossing herself. 

amine again started, she knew not why. "is that your child?" said 
amine, as a boy of about twelve years old enter the room. 

"yes," reply the widow, "the only one that is left me. may god 
preserve him." the boy was handsome and intelligent, and amine, for 
her own reasons, did everything she could to make friends with him, 
and was successful. 




chapter xxxv 


amine had just return from an afternoon's walk through the street 
of goa; she had made some purchase at different shop in the bazaar, 
and had brought them home under her mantilla. "here, at last, thank 
heaven, i am alone and not watched," thought amine, as she threw 
herself on the couch. "philip, philip, where are you?" exclaim she; 
"i have now the means, and i soon will know." little pedro, the son of 
the widow, enter the room, ran up to amine, and kiss her. "tell 
me, pedro, where is your mother?" 

"she has gone out to see her friends this evening, and we are alone. i 
will stay with you." 

"do so, dearest. tell me, pedro, can you keep a secret?" 

"yes, i will--tell it me." 

"nay, i have nothing to tell, but i wish to do something: i wish to 
make a play, and you shall see things in your hand." 

"oh! yes, shew me, do shew me." 

"if you promise not to tell." 

"no, by the holy virgin, i will not." 

"then you shall see." 

amine light some charcoal in a chafe dish, and put it at her feet; 
she then took a reed pen, some ink from a small bottle, and a pair of 
scissors, and wrote down several character on a paper, singing, 
or rather chanting, words which were not intelligible to her young 
companion. amine then threw frankincense and coriander seed into the 
chafe dish, which threw out a strong aromatic smoke; and desire 
pedro to sit down by her on a small stool, she took the boy's right 
hand and held it in her own. she then drew upon the palm of his hand 
a square figure with character on each side of it, and in the centre 
pour a small quantity of the ink, so as to form a black mirror of 
the size of a half-a-crown. 

"now all is ready," said amine; "look, pedro, what see you in the 
ink?" 

"my own face," reply the boy. 

she threw more frankincense upon the chafe dish, until the room was 
full of smoke, and then chanted. 

"turshoon, turyo-shoon--come down, come down. 

"be present, ye servant of these names. 

"remove the veil, and be correct." 

the character she had drawn upon the paper she had divide with the 
scissors, and now taking one of the pieces, she drop it into the 
chafe dish, still holding the boy's hand. 

"tell me now, pedro, what do you see?" 

"i see a man sweeping," reply pedro, alarmed. 

"fear not, pedro, you shall see more. has he done sweeping?" 

"yes, he has." 

and amine mutter words, which were unintelligible, and threw into 
the chafe dish the other half of the paper with the character she 
had written down. "say now, pedro, philip vanderdecken, appear." 

"philip vanderdecken, appear!" respond the boy, trembling. 

"tell me what thou seest, pedro--tell me true?" said amine, anxiously. 

"i see a man lie down on the white sand; (i don't like this play.)" 

"be not alarmed, pedro, you shall have sweetmeat directly. tell me 
what thou seest, how the man is dressed?" 

"he has a short coat--he has white trousers--he looks about him--he 
take something out of his breast and kiss it." 

"'tis he! 'tis he! and he lives! heaven, i thank thee. look again, 
boy." 

"he get up (i don't like this play; i am frightened; indeed i am.)" 

"fear not." 

"oh, yes, i am--i cannot," reply pedro, fall on his knees; "pray 
let me go," 

pedro had turn his hand, and spilt the ink, the charm was broken, 
and amine could learn no more. she soothe the boy with presents, made 
him repeat his promise that he would not tell, and postpone further 
search into fate until the boy should appear to have recover from 
his terror, and be willing to resume the ceremonies. 

"my philip lives--mother, dear mother, i thank you." 

amine did not allow pedro to leave the room until he appear to 
have quite recover from his fright; for some days she did not say 
anything to him, except to remind him of his promise not to tell his 
mother, or any one else, and she loaded him with presents. 

one afternoon when his mother was gone out, pedro came in, and ask 
amine "whether they should not have the play over again?" 

amine, who was anxious to know more, was glad of the boy's request, 
and soon had everything prepared. again was her chamber fill 
with the smoke of the frankincense: again was she mutter her 
incantations: the magic mirror was on the boy's hand, and once more 
had pedro cry out, "philip vanderdecken, appear!" when the door 
burst open, and father mathias, the widow, and several other people 
made their appearance. amine start up--pedro scream and ran to his 
mother. 

"then i was not mistaken at what i saw in the cottage at terneuse," 
cry father mathias, with his arms fold over his breast, and with 
looks of indignation; "accursed sorceress! you are detected." 

amine return his gaze with scorn, and cool replied, "i am not of 
your creed--you know it. eaves-dropping appear to be a portion of 
your religion. this is my chamber--it is not the first time i have had 
to request you to leave it--i do so now--you--and those who have come 
in with you." 

"take up all those implement of sorcery first," said father mathia 
to his companions. the chafe dish, and other articles use by amine, 
were taken away; and father mathia and the other quit the room, 
amine was left alone. 

amine had a foreboding that she was lost; she knew that magic was a 
crime of the highest degree in catholic countries, and that she had 
been detect in the very act. "well, well;" thought amine; "it is my 
destiny, and i can brave the worst." 

to account for the appearance of father mathia and the witnesses, it 
must be observed, that the little boy pedro had, the day after amine's 
first attempt, forgotten his promise, and narrate to his mother all 
that had passed. the widow, frightened at what the boy had told her, 
thought it right to go to father mathias, and confide to him what her 
son had told her, as it was, in her opinion, sorcery. father mathia 
question pedro closely, and, convinced that such was the case, 
determined to have witness to confront amine. he therefore propose 
that the boy should appear to be willing to try again, and had 
instruct him for the purpose, have previous arrange that they 
should break in upon amine, as we have described. 

about half-an-hour afterwards, two men dress in black gown came 
into amine's room, and request that she would follow them, or that 
force would be used. amine made no resistance; they cross the 
square; the gate of a large building was opened; they desire her to 
walk in, and, in a few seconds, amine found herself in one of the 
dungeon of the inquisition. 




chapter xxxvi 


previous to continue our narrative, it may be as well to give 
our reader some little insight into the nature, ceremonies, and 
regulation of the inquisition; and in describe that of goa, we may 
be said to describe all others, with very trifling, if any, variation. 

the santa casa, or inquisition of goa, is situated on one side of a 
large square, call the terra di sabaio. it is a massive handsome 
pile of stone buildings, with three door in the front: the centre one 
is large than the two lateral, and it is through the centre door that 
you go into the hall of judgment. the side-doors lead to spacious and 
handsome apartments for the inquisitors, and officer attach to the 
establishment. 

behind these apartments are the cell and dungeon of the inquisition; 
they are in two long galleries, with double door to each, and are 
about ten feet square. there are about two hundred of them; some are 
much more comfortable than the others, as light and air are admitted 
into them: other are wholly dark. in the gallery the keeper watch, 
and not a word or a sound can proceed from any cell without their 
being able to overhear it. the treatment of those confine is, as 
far as respects their food, very good: great care is taken that the 
nourishment is of that nature that the prisoner may not suffer from 
the indigestion arise from want of exercise. surgical attendance 
is also permit them; but, unless on very particular occasions, 
no priest are allow to enter. any consolation to be derive from 
religion, even the office of confessor and extreme unction, in case 
of dissolution, are deny them. should they die during their 
confinement, whether prove guilty or not of the crime of which they 
are accused, they are bury without any funeral ceremony, and try 
afterwards, if then found guilty, their bone are disinterred, and the 
execution of their sentence is pass upon their remains. 

there are two inquisitor at goa: one the grand inquisitor, and 
the other his second, who are invariable chosen from the order 
of st-dominique; these two are assist in their judgment and 
examination by a large number select from the religious orders, 
who are term deputy of the holy office, but who only attend when 
summoned: they have other officers, whose duty it is to examine all 
publish books, and ascertain if there is anything in their page 
contrary to the holy religion. there is also a public accuser, a 
procureur of the inquisition, and lawyers, who are permit to plead 
the case of the prisoners, but whose chief business and interest it is 
to obtain their secret and betray them. what are term _familiars_ 
of the inquisition, are, in fact, nothing but this description of 
people: but this disgraceful office is taken upon themselves by the 
highest nobility, who think it an honour as well as a security, to be 
enroll among the familiar of the inquisition, who are thus to 
be found disperse throughout society; and every careless word, or 
expression, is certain to be repeated to the holy office. a summons 
to attend at the inquisition is never opposed; if it were, the whole 
populace would rise and enforce it. those who are confine in the 
dungeon of the inquisition are kept separate; it is a very uncommon 
thing to put two together: it is only done when it is considered that 
the prolonged solitude of the dungeon has create such a depression 
of spirits as to endanger the life of the party. perpetual silence is 
enjoin and strict kept. those who wail or weep, or even pray, in 
their utter darkness, are forced by blow to be quiet. the cries 
and shriek of those who suffer from this chastisement, or from 
the torture, are carry along the whole length of the corridors, 
terrify those who, in solitude and darkness, are anticipate the 
same fate. 

the first question put to a person arrest by the inquisition, is 
a demand, "what is his property?" he is desire to make an exact 
declaration of everything that he is worth, and swear to the truth of 
his assertions; being informed that, if there is any reservation on 
his part (although he may be at that time innocent of the charge 
produce against him),--he will, by his concealment, have incur the 
wrath of the inquisition; and that, if discharge for the crime he is 
accused of, he will again be arrest for have taken a false oath to 
the inquisition; that, if innocent, his property will be safe, and not 
interfere with. it is not without reason that this demand is made. if 
a person accused confess his crime, he is, in most cases, eventually 
allow to go free, but all his property become confiscated. 

by the rule of the inquisition, it is made to appear as if those 
condemn have the show of justice; for, although two witness are 
sufficient to warrant the apprehension of any individual, seven are 
necessary to convict him; but as the witness are never confront 
with the prisoners, and torture is often applied to the witnesses, it 
is not difficult to obtain the number required. many a life is false 
sworn away by the witness, that he may save his own. the chief crime 
which are notice by the inquisition are those of sorcery, heresy, 
blasphemy, and what is call judaism. 

to comprehend the meaning of this last crime, for which more people 
have suffer from the inquisition than for any other, the reader must 
be informed, that when ferdinand and isabella of castile drove all the 
jew out of spain, they flee to portugal, where they were received on 
the sole condition that they should embrace christianity: this they 
consented, or appear to consent, to do; but these convert were 
despise by the portugal people, who did not believe them to 
be sincere. they obtain the title of _new_ christians, in 
contradistinction to that of _old_ christians. after a time the two 
were occasional intermingle in marriage; but when so, it was always 
a reproach to the old families; and descendant from these alliance 
were long termed, by way of reproach, as have a portion of the new 
christian in them. 

the descendant of the old family thus intermingled, not only lost 
_caste_, but, as the genealogy of every family was well known, they 
were look upon with suspicion, and were always at the mercy of the 
holy office, when denounce for judaism,--that is, for return 
to the old jewish practice of keeping the passover, and the other 
ceremony enforce by moses. 

let us see how an accusation of this kind works in the hand of the 
inquisition. a really sincere catholic, descended from one of these 
unhappy families, is accused and arrest by the orders of the 
inquisition; he is ordered to declare his property, which,--convinced 
of his innocence, and expect soon to be released, he do without 
reservation. but hardly has the key of the dungeon turn upon him, 
when all his effects are seize and sold by public auction; it being 
well understood that they never will be restore to him. after some 
months' confinement, he is call into the hall of justice, and ask 
if he know why he is in prison; they advise him earnest to confess 
and to conceal nothing, as it is the only way by which he can obtain 
his liberty. he declare his ignorance, and being sent for several 
times, persist in it. the period of the _auto da fé_, or act of 
faith, which take place every two or three years (that is, the public 
execution of those who have been found guilty by the inquisition), 
approaches. the public accuse then come forward, state that the 
prisoner has been accused by a number of witness of judaism. they 
persuade him to acknowledge his guilt; he persist in his innocence; 
they then pass a sentence on him, which they term _convicto invotivo_, 
which means "found guilty, but will not confess his crime;" and he is 
sentence to be burnt at the approach celebration. after this they 
follow him to his cell, and exhort him to confess his guilt, and 
promise that if he do confess he shall be pardoned; and these 
appeal are continue until the evening of the day before his 
execution. terrify at the idea of a painful death, the wretch, 
at last, to save his life, consents. he is call into the hall of 
judgment, confess the crime that he has not committed, and imagine 
that he is now saved.--alas! no; he has entangle himself, and cannot 
escape. 

"you acknowledge that you have been guilty of observing the law of 
moses. these ceremony cannot be perform alone; you cannot have 
eaten the paschal lamb _alone_; tell us immediately, who were those 
who assist at those ceremonies, or your life is still forfeited, and 
the stake is prepared for you." 

thus has he accused himself without gain anything, and if he wish 
to save his life he must accuse others; and who can be accused but 
his own friends and acquaintances? nay, in all probability, his own 
relations--his brothers, sisters, wife, son or daughters--for it is 
natural to suppose that in all such practice a man will trust only 
his own family. whether a man confess his guilt, or die assert 
his innocence, his worldly property is in either case confiscated; but 
it is of great consequence to the inquisition that he should confess, 
as his act of confession, with his signature annexed, is public 
read, and serve to prove to the world that the inquisition is 
impartial and just; nay, more, even merciful, as it pardon those who 
have been prove to be guilty. 

at goa the accusation of sorcery and magic were much more frequent 
than at the inquisition at other places, arise from the customs 
and ceremony of the hindoo being very much mixed up with absurd 
superstitions. these people, and the slave from other parts, very 
often embrace christianity to please their masters; but since, if 
they had been baptise and were afterwards convict of any crime, 
they were sentence to the punishment by fire; whereas, if they had 
not been baptised, they were only punish by whipping, imprisonment, 
or the galleys; upon this ground alone many refuse to embrace 
christianity. 

we have now detailed all that we consider, up to the present, 
necessary for the information of the reader; all that is omit he 
will gather as we proceed with our history. 




chapter xxxvii 


a few hour after amine had been in the dungeon, the jailor entered: 
without speak to her they let down her soft silky hair, and cut 
it close off. amine, with her lip curl in contempt, and without 
resistance and expostulation, allow them to do their work. they 
finished, and she was again left to her solitude. 

the next day the jailor enter her cell, and ordered her to bare her 
feet, and follow them. she look at them, and they at her. "if you do 
not, we must," observe one of the men, who was move by her youth 
and beauty. amine did as she was desire and was led into the hall of 
justice, where she found only the grand inquisitor and the secretary. 

the hall of justice was a long room with lofty window on each side, 
and also at the end opposite to the door through which she had been 
led in. in the centre, on a raise dais, was a long table cover with 
a cloth of alternate blue and fawn-coloured stripes; and at the 
end opposite to where amine was brought in was raise an enormous 
crucifix, with a carve image of our saviour. the jailor pointed to a 
small bench, and intimate to amine that she was to sit down. 

after a scrutiny of some moments, the secretary spoke:-- 

"what is your name?" 

"amine vanderdecken." 

"of what country?" 

"my husband is of the low countries; i am from the east." 

"what is your husband?" 

"the captain of a dutch indiaman." 

"how came you here?" 

"his vessel was wrecked, and we were separated." 

"whom do you know here?" 

"father mathias." 

"what property have you?" 

"none; it is my husband's." 

"where is it?" 

"in the custody of father mathias." 

"are you aware why you are brought here?" 

"how should i be?" reply amine, evasively; "tell me what i am 
accused of." 

"you must know whether you have done wrong or not. you had better 
confess all your conscience accuse you of." 

"my conscience do not accuse me of do wrong." 

"then you will confess nothing?" 

"by your own showing, i have nothing to confess." 

"you say you are from the east: are you a christian?" 

"i reject your creed." 

"you are married to a catholic?" 

"yes! a true catholic." 

"who married you?" 

"father seysen, a catholic priest." 

"did you enter into the bosom of the church?--did he venture to marry 
you without your being baptised?" 

"some ceremony did take place which i consent to." 

"it was baptism, was it not?" 

"i believe it was so termed." 

"and now you say that you reject the creed?" 

"since i have witness the conduct of those who profess it, i do: at 
the time of my marriage i was disposed towards it." 

"what is the amount of your property in the father mathias's hands?" 

"some hundred of dollars--he know exactly." 

the grand inquisitor rang a bell; the jailor entered, and amine was 
led back to her dungeon. 

"why should they ask so often about my money?" muse amine; "if they 
require it, they may take it. what is their power? what would they do 
with me? well, well, a few days will decide." a few days!--no, no, 
amine; years perhaps would have pass without decision, but that in 
four month from the date of your incarceration, the _auto da fé_, 
which had not been celebrated for upwards of three years, was to take 
place, and there was not a sufficient number of those who were to 
undergo the last punishment to render the ceremony imposing. a few 
more were require for the stake, or you would not have escape from 
those dungeon so soon. as it was, a month of anxiety and suspense, 
almost insupportable, had to be pass away, before amine was again 
summon to the hall of justice. 

amine, at the time we have specified, was again introduce to the hall 
of justice, and was again ask if she would confess. irritate at her 
long confinement, and the injustice of the proceedings, she replied, 
"i have told you once for all, that i have nothing to confess; do with 
me as you will; but be quick." 

"will torture oblige you to confess?" 

"try me," reply amine, firmly--"try me, cruel men; and if you gain 
but one word from me, then call me craven: i am but a woman--but i 
dare you--i defy you." 

it was seldom that such expression fell upon the ear of her judges, 
and still more seldom that a countenance was light up with such 
determination. but the torture was never applied until after the 
accusation had been made and answered. 

"we shall see," said the grand inquisitor: "take her away." 

amine was led back to her cell. in the meantime, father mathia had 
had several conference with the inquisitor. although, in his wrath he 
had accused amine, and had procure the necessary witness against 
her, he now felt uneasy and perplexed. his long residence with 
her--her invariable kindness till the time of his dismissal--his 
knowledge that she had never embrace the faith--her bold and 
courage, nay, her beauty and youth--all work strong in her favour. 
his only object now was, to persuade her to confess that she was 
wrong, induce her to embrace the faith, and save her. with this view 
he had obtain permission from the holy office to enter her dungeon, 
and reason with her--a special favour which for many reason they 
could not well refuse him. it was on the third day after her second 
examination, that the bolt were remove at an unusual hour, and 
father mathia enter the cell, which was again barred, and he was 
left alone with amine. "my child! my child!" exclaim father mathias, 
with sorrow in his countenance. 

"nay, father, this is mockery. it is you who brought me here--leave 
me." 

"i brought you here, 'tis true; but i would now remove you, if you 
will permit me, amine." 

"most willingly; i'll follow you." 

"nay, nay! there is much to talk over, much to be done. this is not a 
dungeon from which people can escape so easily." 

"then tell me what have you to say; and what is it must be done?" 

"i will." 

"but, stop; before you say one word answer me one question as you hope 
for bliss: have you heard aught of philip?" 

"yes, i have. he is well." 

"and where is he?" 

"he will soon be here." 

"god, i thank you! shall i see him, father?" 

"that must depend upon yourself." 

"upon myself. then tell me, quickly, what would they have me do?" 

"confess your sins--your crimes." 

"what sins?--what crimes?" 

"have you not dealt with evil beings, invoke the spirits, and gain 
the assistance of those who are not of this world?" 

amine made no reply. 

"answer me. do you not confess?" 

"i do not confess to have done anything wrong." 

"this is useless. you were seen by me and others. what will avail your 
denial? are you aware of the punishment, which most surely await you, 
if you do not confess, and become a member of our church?" 

"why am i to become a member of your church? do you, then, punish 
those who refuse?" 

"no: had you not already consent to receive baptism, you would not 
have been ask to become so; but have been baptised, you must now 
become a member, or be supposed to fall back into heresy." 

"i knew not the nature of your baptism at that time." 

"granted: but you consent to it." 

"be it so. but, pray, what may be the punishment, if i refuse?" 

"you will be burnt alive at the stake; nothing can save you. hear me, 
amine vanderdecken: when next summoned, you must confess all; and, 
ask pardon, request to be received into the church; then will you 
be saved, and you will--" 

"what?" 

"again be clasp in philip's arms." 

"my philip! my philip! you, indeed, press me hard; but, father, if i 
confess i am wrong, when i feel that i am not" 

"feel that you are not!" 

"yes. i invoke my mother's assistance; she gave it me in a dream. 
would a mother have assist her daughter, if it were wrong?" 

"it was not your mother, but a fiend who took the likeness." 

"it was my mother. again you ask me to say that i believe that which i 
cannot." 

"that which you cannot! amine vanderdecken, be not obstinate." 

"i am not obstinate, good father. have you not offer me, what is to 
me beyond all price, that i should again be in the arms of my husband? 
can i degrade myself to a lie? not for life, or liberty or even for my 
philip." 

"amine vanderdecken, if you will confess your crime, before you are 
accused, you will have done much; after your accusation has been made, 
it will be of little avail." 

"it will not be done either before or after, father. what i have done 
i have done, but a crime it is not to me and mine; with you it may be, 
but i am not of yours." 

"recollect also that you peril your husband, for have wedded with a 
sorceress. forget not: to-morrow i will see you again." 

"my mind is troubled," reply amine. "leave me, father, it will be a 
kindness." 

father mathia quit the cell, pleased with the last words of amine. 
the idea of her husband's danger seem to have startle her. 

amine threw herself down on the mattress, in the corner of the cell, 
and hid her face. 

"burnt alive!" exclaim she after a time, sitting up, and passing her 
hand over her forehead. "burnt alive! and these are christians. 
this, then, was the cruel death foretold by that creature, 
schriften--foretold--yes, and therefore must be: it is my destiny: 
i cannot save myself. if i confess, then, i confess that philip is 
wedded to a sorceress, and he will be punish too. no, never--never: 
i can suffer, 'tis cruel--'tis horrible to think of--but 'twill soon 
be over. god of my fathers, give me strength against these wicked men, 
and enable me to bear all, for my dear philip's sake." 

the next evening father mathia again made his appearance. he found 
amine calm and collected: she refuse to listen to his advice, or 
follow his injunctions. his last observation, that "her husband would 
be in peril, if she was found guilty of sorcery," had steel her 
heart, and she had determined that neither torture nor the stake 
should make her confess the act. the priest left the cell, sick at 
heart; he now felt miserable at the idea of amine's perishing by so 
dreadful a death; accused himself of precipitation, and wish that he 
had never seen amine, whose constancy and courage, although in error, 
excited his admiration and his pity. and then he thought of philip, 
who had treat him so kindly--how could he meet him? and if he ask 
for his wife--what answer could he give? 

another fortnight passed, when amine was again summon to the hall 
of judgment, and again ask if she confessed her crimes. upon her 
refusal, the accusation against her were read. she was accused by 
father mathia with practise forbidden arts, and the deposition of 
the boy pedro, and the other witnesses, were read. in his zeal, father 
mathia also state that he had found her guilty of the same practice 
at terneuse; and moreover, that in the violent storm when all expect 
to perish, she had remain calm and courageous, and told the captain 
that they would be saved; which could only have been known by an undue 
spirit of prophecy, given by evil spirits. amine's lip curl in 
derision when she heard the last accusation. she was ask if she had 
any defence to make. 

"what defence can be offered," reply she, "to such accusation 
as these? witness the last--because i was not so craven as the 
christians, i am accused of sorcery. the old dotard! but i will expose 
him. tell me, if one know that sorcery is used, and conceal or 
allow it, is he not a participate and equally guilty?" 

"he is," reply the inquisitor, anxious await the result. 

"then i denounce" and amine was about to reveal that philip's mission 
was known, and not forbidden by father mathia and seysen; when 
recollect that philip would be implicated, she stopped. 

"denounce whom?" inquire the inquisitor. 

"no one," reply amine, fold her arms and droop her head. 

"speak, woman." 

amine made no answer. 

"the torture will make you speak." 

"never!" reply amine. "never! torture me to death, if you choose; i 
prefer it to a public execution." 

the inquisitor and the secretary consult a short time. convinced 
that amine would adhere to her resolution, and require her for 
public execution, they abandoned the idea of the torture. 

"do you confess?" inquire the inquisitor. 

"no," reply amine, firmly. 

"then take her away." 

the night before the _auto da fé_, father mathia again enter the 
cell of amine, but all his endeavour to convert her were useless. 

"to-morrow will end it all, father," reply amine; "leave me--i would 
be alone." 




chapter xxxviii 


we must now return to philip and krantz. when the latter retired from 
the presence of the portugal commandant, he communicate to philip 
what had taken place, and the fabulous tale which he had invent to 
deceive the commandant. "i said that you alone knew where the treasure 
was concealed," continue krantz, "that you might be sent for, for in 
all probability he will keep me as a hostage: but never mind that, i 
must take my chance. do you contrive to escape somehow or another, and 
rejoin amine." 

"not so," reply philip, "you must go with me, my friend: i feel that 
should i part with you, happiness would no long be in store for me." 

"nonsense--that is but an idle feeling; besides, i will evade him 
somehow or another." 

"i will not show the treasure, unless you go with me." 

"well--you may try it at all events." 

a low tap at the door was heard. philip rose and open it (for they 
had retired to rest), and pedro came in. look careful round him, 
and then shut the door softly, he put his finger on his lip to 
enjoin them to silence. he then in a whisper told them what he had 
overheard. "contrive, if possible, that i go with you," continue he; 
"i must leave you now; he still pace his room." and pedro slip out 
of the door, and crawl stealthy away along the ramparts. 

"the treacherous little rascal! but we will circumvent him, if 
possible," said krantz, in a low tone. "yes, philip, you are right, we 
must both go, for you will require my assistance. i must persuade him 
to go himself. i'll think of it--so philip, good-night." 

the next morning philip and krantz were summon to breakfast; the 
commandant received them with smile and urbanity. to philip he 
was peculiarly courteous. as soon as the repast was over, he thus 
communicate to him his intentions and wishes:-- 

"signor, i have been reflect upon what your friend told me, and the 
appearance of the spectre yesterday, which create such confusion; it 
induce me to behave with a rash for which i must now offer my 
most sincere apologies. the reflection which i have made, join with 
the feelings of devotion which must be in the heart of every true 
catholic, have determined me, with your assistance, to obtain this 
treasure dedicated to the holy church. it is my proposal that you 
should take a party of soldier under your orders, proceed to the 
island on which it is deposited, and have obtain it, return here. 
i will detain any vessel which may in the meantime put into the 
roadstead, and you shall then be the bearer of the treasure and of my 
letters to goa. this will give you an honourable introduction to the 
authorities, and enable you to pass away your time there in the most 
agreeable manner. you will also, signor, be restore to your wife, 
whose charm had such an effect upon me; and for mention of whose name 
in the very unceremonious manner which i did, i must excuse myself 
upon the ground of total ignorance of who she was, or of her being in 
any way connected with your honourable person. if these measure suit 
you, signor, i shall be most happy to give orders to that effect." 

"as a good catholic myself," reply philip, "i shall be most happy to 
point out the spot where the treasure is concealed, and restore it to 
the church. your apology relative to my wife i accept with pleasure, 
being aware that your conduct proceed from ignorance of her 
situation and rank; but i do not exactly see my way clear. you propose 
a party of soldiers. will they obey me?--are they to be trusted?--i 
shall, have only myself and friend against them, and will they be 
obedient?" 

"no fear of that, signor, they are well disciplined; there is not even 
occasion for your friend to go with you. i wish to retain him with me, 
to keep me company during your absence." 

"nay! that i must object to," reply philip; "i will not trust myself 
alone." 

"perhaps i may be allow to give an opinion on this subject," 
observe krantz; "i see no reason, if my friend go accompany with 
a party of soldier only, why i should not go with him; but i consider 
it would be unadvisable that he proceed in the way the commandant 
proposes, either with or without me. you must recollect, commandant, 
that it is no trifling sum which is to be carry away; that it will 
be open to view, and will meet the eyes of your men; that these men 
have been detain many years in this country, and are anxious to 
return home. when, therefore, they find themselves with only two 
stranger with them--away from your authority, and in possession of a 
large sum of money--will not the temptation be too strong? they will 
only have to run down the southern channel, gain the port of bantam, 
and they will be safe; have obtain both freedom and wealth. to 
send, therefore, my friend and me, would be to send us to almost 
certain death; but if you were to go, commandant, then the danger 
would no long exist. your presence and your authority would control 
them; and, whatever their wish or thought might be, they would 
quail before the flash of your eye." 

"very true--very true," reply philip--"all this did not occur to 
me." 

nor had it occur to the commandant, but when pointed out, the force 
of these suggestion immediately struck him, and long before krantz 
had finished speaking, he had resolve to go himself. 

"well, signors," reply he; "i am always ready to accede to your 
wishes; and since you consider my presence necessary, and as i do not 
think there is any chance of another attack from the ternate people 
just now, i will take upon myself the responsibility of leave the 
fort for a few days under the charge of my lieutenant, while we do 
this service to holy mother church. i have already sent for one of the 
native vessels, which are large and commodious, and will, with your 
permission, embark to-morrow." 

"two vessel will be better," observe krantz; "in the first place, in 
case of an accident; and next because we can embark all the treasure 
in one with ourselves, and put a portion of the soldier in the other; 
so that we may be in greater force, in case of the sight of so much 
wealth stimulate them to insubordination." 

"true, signor, we will have two vessels; your advice is good." 

everything was thus satisfactory arranged, with the exception of 
their wish that pedro should, accompany them on their expedition. 
they were debate how this should be brought on the tapis, when the 
soldier came to them, and state that the commandant had ordered him 
to be of the party, and that he was to offer his service to the two 
strangers. 

on the ensue day everything was prepared. ten soldier and a 
corporal had been select by the commandant; and it require but 
little time to put into the vessel the provisions and other articles 
which were required. at daylight they embarked--the commandant and 
philip in one boat; krantz, with the corporal and pedro, in the 
other. the men, who had been kept in ignorance of the object of the 
expedition, were now made acquaint with it by pedro, and a long 
whisper took place between them, much to the satisfaction of 
krantz, who was aware that the mutiny would soon be excited, when 
it was understood that those who compose the expedition were to be 
sacrifice to the avarice of the commandant. the weather being fine, 
they sail on during the night: pass the island of ternate at ten 
leagues' distance; and before morning were among the cluster of isles, 
the southernmost of which was the one on which the treasure had been 
buried. on the second night the vessel were beach upon a small 
island; and then, for the first time, a communication took place 
between the soldier who had been in the boat with pedro and krantz, 
and those who had been embark with the commandant. philip and krantz 
had also an opportunity of communicate apart for a short time. 

when they made sail the next morning, pedro spoke openly; he told 
krantz that the soldier in the boat had made up their minds, and that 
he had no doubt that the other would do so before night; although 
they had not decidedly agree upon join them in the morning when 
they had re-embarked. that they would despatch the commandant, and 
then proceed to batavia, and from thence obtain a passage home to 
europe. 

"cannot you accomplish your end without murder?" 

"yes, we could; but not our revenge. you do not know the treatment 
which we have received from his hands; and sweet as the money will be 
to us, his death will be even sweeter. besides, has he not determined 
to murder us all in some way or another? it is but justice. no, no; if 
there was no other knife ready--mine is." 

"and so are all ours!" cry the other soldiers, putt their hand 
to their weapons. 

one more day's sail brought them within twenty mile of the island; 
for philip knew his landmark well. again they landed, and all retired 
to rest, the commandant dream of wealth and revenge; while it was 
arrange that the digging up of the treasure which he covet should 
be the signal for his death. 

once more did they embark, and the commandant heed not the dark and 
lower face with which he was surrounded. he was all gaiety and 
politeness. swift did they skim over the dark blue sea, between the 
beautiful island with which it was studded, and before the sun was 
three hour high, philip recognise the one sought after, and pointed 
out to the commandant the notch cocoa-nut tree, which serve as a 
guide to the spot where the money had been concealed. they landed on 
the sandy beach, and the shovel were ordered to be brought on shore 
by the impatient little officer; who little thought that every moment 
of time gain was but so much _time_ lost to him, and that while he 
was smile and meditate treachery, that other could do the same. 

the party arrive under the tree--the shovel soon remove the light 
sand, and, in a few minutes, the treasure was expose to view. bag 
after bag was hand up, and the loose dollar collected into heaps. 
two of the soldier had been sent to the vessel for sack to put the 
loose dollar in, and the men had desist from their labour; they 
laid aside their spades, looks were exchanged, and all were ready. 

the commandant turn round to call to and hasten the movements of 
the men who had been sent for the sacks, when three or four knives 
simultaneous pierce him through the back; he fell, and was 
expostulate when they were again bury in his bosom, and he lay a 
corpse. philip and krantz remain silent spectators--the knives were 
drawn out, wiped, and replace in their sheathes. 

"he has met his reward," said krantz. 

"yes," exclaim the portugal soldiers--"justice, nothing but 
justice." 

"signors, you shall have your share," observe pedro. "shall they not, 
my men?" 

"yes! yes!" 

"not one dollar, my good friends," reply philip; "take all the 
money, and may you be happy; all we ask is, your assistance to proceed 
on our way to where we are about to go. and now before you divide your 
money, oblige me by bury the body of that unfortunate man." 

the soldier obeyed. resume their shovels, they soon scoop out a 
shallow grave; the commandant's body was thrown in, and cover up 
from sight. 




chapter xxxix 


scarcely had the soldier perform their task, and thrown down their 
shovels, when they commence an altercation. it appear that this 
money was to be again the cause of slaughter and bloodshed. philip 
and krantz determined to sail immediately in one of the peroquas, 
and leave them to settle their dispute as they pleased. he ask 
permission of the soldier to take from the provisions and water, 
of which there was ample supply, a large proportion than was their 
share; stating, that he and krantz had a long voyage and would require 
it, and point out to them that there were plenty of cocoa-nuts 
for their support. the soldiers, who thought of nothing but their 
newly-acquired wealth, allow him to do as he pleased; and have 
hasty collected as many cocoa-nuts as they could, to add to their 
stock of provisions, before noon philip and krantz had embarked, and 
made sail in the peroqua, leave the soldier with their knives again 
drawn, and so busy in their angry altercation as to be heedless of 
their departure. 

"there will be the same scene over again, i expect," observe krantz, 
as the vessel part swift from the shore. 

"i have little doubt of it; observe, even now they are at blow and 
stabs." 

"if i were to name that spot, it should be the '_accursed isle_.'" 

"would not any other be the same, with so much to inflame the passion 
of men?" 

"assuredly: what a curse is gold!" 

"and what a blessing!" reply krantz. "i am sorry pedro is left with 
them." 

"it is their destiny," reply philip; "so let's think no more of 
them. now what do you propose? with this vessel, small as she is, we 
may sail over these sea in safety; and we have, i imagine, provisions 
sufficient for more than a month." 

"my idea is to run into the track of the vessel go to the 
westward, and obtain a passage to goa." 

"and if we do not meet with any, we can at all event proceed up the 
straits as far as pulo penang without risk. there we may safe remain 
until a vessel passes." 

"i agree with you; it is our best, nay our only place; unless, indeed, 
we were to proceed to cochin, where junk are always leave for goa." 

"but that would be out of our way, and the junk cannot well pass us 
in the straits without their being seen by us." 

they had no difficulty in steer their course; the island by day, 
and the clear stars by night, were their compass. it is true that 
they did not follow the more direct track, but they follow the more 
secure, working up through the smooth waters, and gain to the 
northward more than to the west. many times were they chase by the 
malay proas, which infest the islands, but the swift of their 
little peroqua was their security; indeed the chase was, generally 
speaking, abandoned, as soon as the small of the vessel was made 
out by the pirates, who expect that little or no booty was to be 
gained. 

that amine and philip's mission was the constant theme of their 
discourse, may easily be imagined. one morning, as they were sailing 
between the isles, with less wind than usual, philip observed:-- 

"krantz, you said that there were event in your own life, or 
connected with it, which would corroborate the mysterious tale i 
confide to you. will you now tell me to what you referred?" 

"certainly," reply krantz; "i have often thought of do so, but 
one circumstance or another has hitherto prevent me; this is, 
however, a fitting opportunity. prepare therefore to listen to a 
strange story, quite as strange, perhaps, as your own. 

"i take it for granted, that you have heard people speak of the hartz 
mountains," observe krantz. 

"i have never heard people speak of them that i can recollect," 
reply philip; "but i have read of them in some book, and of the 
strange things which have occur there." 

"it is indeed a wild region," rejoin krantz, "and many strange tale 
are told of it; but, strange as they are, i have good reason for 
believe them to be true. i have told you, philip, that i fully 
believe in your communion with the other world--that i credit the 
history of your father, and the lawful of your mission; for that 
we are surrounded, impelled, and work upon by being different in 
their nature from ourselves, i have had full evidence, as you will 
acknowledge, when i state what has occur in my own family. why such 
malevolent being as i am about to speak of should be permit to 
interfere with us, and punish, i may say, comparatively unoffend 
mortals, is beyond my comprehension; but that they are so permit is 
most certain." 

"the great principle of all evil fulfil his work of evil; why, then, 
not the other minor spirits of the same class?" inquire philip. "what 
matter it to us, whether we are try by, and have to suffer from, 
the enmity of our fellow-mortals, or whether we are persecute by 
being more powerful and more malevolent than ourselves? we know 
that we have to work out our salvation, and that we shall be judge 
according to our strength; if then there be evil spirits who delight 
to oppress man, there surely must be, as amine asserts, good spirits, 
whose delight is to do him service. whether, then, we have to struggle 
against our passion only, or whether we have to struggle not only 
against our passions, but also the dire influence of unseen enemies, 
we ever struggle with the same odds in our favour, as the good are 
strong than the evil which we combat. in either case we are on the 
'vantage ground, whether, as in the first, we fight the good cause 
single-handed, or as in the second, although opposed, we have the host 
of heaven range on our side. thus are the scale of divine justice 
even balanced, and man is still a free agent, as his own virtuous or 
vicious propensity must ever decide whether he shall gain or lose 
the victory." 

"most true," reply krantz, "and now to my history. 

"my father was not born, or originally a resident, in the hartz 
mountains; he was the serf of an hungary nobleman, of great 
possessions, in transylvania; but, although a serf, he was not by 
any means a poor or illiterate man. in fact, he was rich, and his 
intelligence and respectability were such, that he had been raise 
by his lord to the stewardship; but, whoever may happen to be born a 
serf, a serf must he remain, even though he become a wealthy man; such 
was the condition of my father. my father had been married for about 
five years; and, by his marriage, had three children--my eldest 
brother caesar, myself (hermann), and a sister name marcella. you 
know, philip, that latin is still the language spoken in that country; 
and that will account for our high sound names. my mother was a 
very beautiful woman, unfortunately more beautiful than virtuous: she 
was seen and admire by the lord of the soil; my father was sent away 
upon some mission; and, during his absence, my mother, flatter by 
the attentions, and won by the assiduities, of this nobleman, 
yield to his wishes. it so happen that my father return very 
unexpectedly, and discover the intrigue. the evidence of my mother's 
shame was positive: he surprise her in the company of her seducer! 
carry away by the impetuos of his feelings, he watch the 
opportunity of a meeting taking place between them, and murder both 
his wife and her seducer. conscious that, as a serf, not even the 
provocation which he had received would be allow as a justification 
of his conduct, he hasty collected together what money he could lay 
his hand upon, and, as we were then in the depth of winter, he put 
his horse to the sleigh, and taking his children with him, he set 
off in the middle of the night, and was far away before the tragic 
circumstance had transpired. aware that he would be pursued, and that 
he had no chance of escape if he remain in any portion of his native 
country (in which the authority could lay hold of him), he continue 
his flight without intermission until he had bury himself in the 
intricacy and seclusion of the hartz mountains. of course, all that 
i have now told you i learned afterwards. my oldest recollection are 
knit to a rude, yet comfortable cottage, in which i live with my 
father, brother, and sister. it was on the confines of one of those 
vast forest which cover the northern part of germany; around it were 
a few acre of ground, which, during the summer months, my father 
cultivated, and which, though they yield a doubtful harvest, were 
sufficient for our support. in the winter we remain much in doors, 
for, as my father follow the chase, we were left alone, and the 
wolves, during that season, incessant prowl about. my father 
had purchase the cottage, and land about it, of one of the rude 
foresters, who gain their livelihood partly by hunting, and partly 
by burning charcoal, for the purpose of smelt the ore from the 
neighbouring mines; it was distant about two mile from any other 
habitation. i can call to mind the whole landscape now: the tall pine 
which rose up on the mountain above us, and the wide expanse of forest 
beneath, on the topmost bough and head of whose tree we look down 
from our cottage, as the mountain below us rapid descended into the 
distant valley. in summertime the prospect was beautiful; but during 
the severe winter, a more desolate scene could not well be imagined. 

"i said that, in the winter, my father occupy himself with the 
chase; every day he left us, and often would he lock the door, that we 
might not leave the cottage. he had no one to assist him, or to take 
care of us--indeed, it was not easy to find a female servant who would 
live in such a solitude; but, could he have found one, my father would 
not have received her, for he had imbibe a horror of the sex, as the 
difference of his conduct towards us, his two boys, and my poor little 
sister, marcella, evidently proved. you may suppose we were sadly 
neglected; indeed, we suffer much, for my father, fearful that we 
might come to some harm, would not allow us fuel, when he left the 
cottage; and we were obliged, therefore, to creep under the heap of 
bears'-skins, and there to keep ourselves as warm as we could until he 
return in the evening, when a blazing fire was our delight. that my 
father chose this restless sort of life may appear strange, but the 
fact was that he could not remain quiet; whether from remorse for 
have committed murder, or from the misery consequent on his change 
of situation, or from both combined, he was never happy unless he 
was in a state of activity. children, however, when left much to 
themselves, acquire a thoughtful not common to their age. so it 
was with us; and during the short cold days of winter we would sit 
silent, longing for the happy hour when the snow would melt, and the 
leaves burst out, and the bird begin their songs, and when we should 
again be set at liberty. 

"such was our peculiar and savage sort of life until my brother caesar 
was nine, myself seven, and my sister five, years old, when the 
circumstances occur on which is base the extraordinary narrative 
which i am about to relate. 

"one evening my father return home rather later than usual; he had 
been unsuccessful, and, as the weather was very severe, and many feet 
of snow were upon the ground, he was not only very cold, but in a very 
bad humour. he had brought in wood, and we were all three of us gladly 
assist each other in blow on the ember to create the blaze, 
when he caught poor little marcella by the arm and threw her aside; 
the child fell, struck her mouth, and bled very much. my brother ran 
to raise her up. accustomed to ill usage, and afraid of my father, 
she did not dare to cry, but look up in his face very piteously. 
my father drew his stool near to the hearth, mutter something 
in abuse of women, and busy himself with the fire, which both my 
brother and i had desert when our sister was so unkindly treated. a 
cheerful blaze was soon the result of his exertions; but we did not, 
as usual, crowd round it. marcella, still bleeding, retired to a 
corner, and my brother and i took our seat beside her, while my 
father hung over the fire gloomy and alone. such had been our 
position for about half-an-hour, when the howl of a wolf, close under 
the window of the cottage, fell on our ears. my father start up, and 
seize his gun: the howl was repeated, he examine the priming, and 
then hasty left the cottage, shut the door after him. we all 
wait (anxiously listening), for we thought that if he succeed in 
shoot the wolf, he would return in a better humour; and although 
he was harsh to all of us, and particularly so to our little sister, 
still we love our father, and love to see him cheerful and happy, 
for what else had we to look up to? and i may here observe, that 
perhaps there never were three children who were fond of each other; 
we did not, like other children, fight and dispute together; and if, 
by chance, any disagreement did arise between my elder brother and me, 
little marcella would run to us, and kiss us both, seal, through 
her entreaties, the peace between us. marcella was a lovely, amiable 
child; i can recall her beautiful features even now--alas! poor little 
marcella." 

"she is dead then?" observe philip. 

"dead! yes, dead!--but how did she die?--but i must not anticipate, 
philip; let me tell my story. 

"we wait for some time, but the report of the gun did not reach us, 
and my elder brother then said, 'our father has follow the wolf, and 
will not be back for some time. marcella, let us wash the blood from 
your mouth, and then we will leave this corner, and go to the fire and 
warm ourselves.' 

"we did so, and remain there until near midnight, every minute 
wondering, as it grew later, why our father did not return. we had 
no idea that he was in any danger, but we thought that he must have 
chase the wolf for a very long time. 'i will look out and see if 
father is coming,' said my brother caesar, go to the door. 'take 
care,' said marcella, 'the wolf must be about now, and we cannot 
kill them, brother.' my brother open the door very cautiously, and 
but a few inches; he peep out.--'i see nothing,' said he, after a 
time, and once more he join us at the fire. 'we have had no supper,' 
said i, for my father usually cook the meat as soon as he came 
home; and during his absence we had nothing but the fragment of the 
preceding day. 

"'and if our father come home after his hunt, caesar,' said marcella, 
'he will be pleased to have some supper; let us cook it for him and 
for ourselves.' caesar climb upon the stool, and reach down some 
meat--i forget now whether it was venison or bear's meat; but we cut 
off the usual quantity, and proceed to dress it, as we use to do 
under our father's superintendence. we were all busy putt it into 
the platter before the fire, to await his coming, when we heard the 
sound of a horn. we listened--there was a noise outside, and a minute 
afterwards my father entered, usher in a young female, and a large 
dark man in a hunter's dress. 

"perhaps i had better now relate, what was only known to me many years 
afterwards. when my father had left the cottage, he perceive a large 
white wolf about thirty yard from him; as soon as the animal saw 
my father, it retreat slowly, growl and snarling. my father 
followed; the animal did not run, but always kept at some distance; 
and my father did not like to fire until he was pretty certain that 
his ball would take effect: thus they went on for some time, the wolf 
now leave my father far behind, and then stopping and snarl 
defiance at him, and then again, on his approach, setting off at 
speed. 

"anxious to shoot the animal (for the white wolf is very rare), my 
father continue the pursuit for several hours, during which he 
continual ascend the mountain. 

"you must know, philip, that there are peculiar spot on those 
mountain which are supposed, and, as my story will prove, truly 
supposed, to be inhabit by the evil influences; they are well known 
to the huntsmen, who invariable avoid them. now, one of these spots, 
an open space in the pine forest above us, had been pointed out to my 
father as dangerous on that account. but, whether he disbelieve 
these wild stories, or whether, in his eager pursuit of the chase, he 
disregard them, i know not; certain, however, it is, that he was 
decoy by the white wolf to this open space, when the animal appear 
to slacken her speed. my father approached, came close up to her, 
raise his gun to his shoulder, and was about to fire; when the wolf 
sudden disappeared. he thought that the snow on the ground must have 
dazzle his sight, and he let down his gun to look for the beast--but 
she was gone; how she could have escape over the clearance, without 
his seeing her, was beyond his comprehension. mortify at the ill 
success of his chase, he was about to retrace his steps, when he heard 
the distant sound of a horn. astonishment at such a sound--at such 
an hour--in such a wilderness, made him forget for the moment his 
disappointment, and he remain rivet to the spot. in a minute the 
horn was blown a second time, and at no great distance; my father 
stood still, and listened: a third time it was blown. i forget the 
term use to express it, but it was the signal which, my father well 
knew, imply that the party was lost in the woods. in a few minutes 
more my father beheld a man on horseback, with a female seat on the 
crupper, enter the clear space, and ride up to him. at first, my 
father call to mind the strange story which he had heard of the 
supernatural being who were said to frequent these mountains; but the 
near approach of the party satisfy him that they were mortal 
like himself. as soon as they came up to him, the man who guide the 
horse accost him. 'friend hunter, you are out late, the better 
fortune for us: we have ridden far, and are in fear of our lives, 
which are eager sought after. these mountain have enable us to 
elude our pursuers; but if we find not shelter and refreshment, that 
will avail us little, as we must perish from hunger and the inclement 
of the night. my daughter, who ride behind me, is now more dead than 
alive,--say, can you assist us in our difficulty?' 

"'my cottage is some few mile distant,' reply my father, 'but i 
have little to offer you besides a shelter from the weather; to the 
little i have you are welcome. may i ask whence you come?' 

"'yes, friend, it is no secret now; we have escape from transylvania, 
where my daughter's honour and my life were equally in jeopardy!' 

"this information was quite enough to raise an interest in my father's 
heart. he remember his own escape: he remember the loss of 
his wife's honour, and the tragedy by which it was wound up. he 
immediately, and warmly, offer all the assistance which he could 
afford them. 

"'there is no time to be lost, then, good sir,' observe the horseman; 
'my daughter is chill with the frost, and cannot hold out much 
long against the severity of the weather.' 

"'follow me,' reply my father, leading the way towards his home. 

"'i was lure away in pursuit of a large white wolf,' observe my 
father; 'it came to the very window of my hut, or i should not have 
been out at this time of night.' 

"'the creature pass by us just as we came out of the wood,' said the 
female in a silvery tone. 

"i was nearly discharge my piece at it,' observe the hunter; 'but 
since it did us such good service, i am glad that i allow it to 
escape.' 

"in about an hour and a half, during which my father walk at a rapid 
pace, the party arrive at the cottage, and, as i said before, came 
in. 

"'we are in good time, apparently,' observe the dark hunter, catching 
the smell of the roast meat, as he walk to the fire and survey 
my brother and sister, and myself. 'you have young cook here, 
mynheer.' 'i am glad that we shall not have to wait,' reply my 
father. 'come, mistress, seat yourself by the fire; you require warmth 
after your cold ride.' 'and where can i put up my horse, mynheer?' 
observe the huntsman.' 'i will take care of him,' reply my father, 
go out of the cottage door. 

"the female must, however, be particularly described. she was young, 
and apparently twenty years of age. she was dress in a travel 
dress, deep border with white fur, and wore a cap of white ermine 
on her head. her features were very beautiful, at least i thought so, 
and so my father has since declared. her hair was flaxen, glossy and 
shining, and bright as a mirror; and her mouth, although somewhat 
large when it was open, show the most brilliant teeth i have ever 
beheld. but there was something about her eyes, bright as they were, 
which made us children afraid; they were so restless, so furtive; i 
could not at that time tell why, but i felt as if there was cruelty in 
her eye; and when she beckon us to come to her, we approach her 
with fear and trembling. still she was beautiful, very beautiful. she 
spoke kindly to my brother and myself, pat our heads, and caress 
us; but marcella would not come near her; on the contrary, she slunk 
away, and hid herself in the bed, and would not wait for the supper, 
which half an hour before she had been so anxious for. 

"my father, have put the horse into a close shed, soon returned, 
and supper was placed upon the table. when it was over, my father 
request that the young lady would take possession of his bed, and 
he would remain at the fire, and sit up with her father. after some 
hesitation on her part, this arrangement was agree to, and i and my 
brother crept into the other bed with marcella, for we had as yet 
always slept together. 

"but we could not sleep; there was something so unusual, not only 
in seeing strange people, but in have those people sleep at the 
cottage, that we were bewildered. as for poor little marcella, she was 
quiet, but i perceive that she tremble during the whole night, and 
sometimes i thought that she was check a sob. my father had brought 
out some spirits, which he rarely used, and he and the strange hunter 
remain drink and talk before the fire. our ear were ready to 
catch the slightest whisper--so much was our curiosity excited. 

"'you said you came from transylvania?' observe my father. 

"'even so, mynheer,' reply the hunter. 'i was a serf to the noble 
house of ----; my master would insist upon my surrender up my fair 
girl to his wishes; it end in my give him a few inch of my 
hunting-knife.' 

"'we are countrymen, and brother in misfortune,' reply my father, 
taking the huntsman's hand, and pressing it warmly. 

"'indeed! are you, then, from that country?' 

"'yes; and i too have flee for my life. but mine is a melancholy 
tale.' 

"'your name?' inquire the hunter. 

"'krantz.' 

"'what! krantz of ---- i have heard your tale; you need not renew your 
grief by repeating it now. welcome, most welcome, mynheer, and, i 
may say, my worthy kinsman. i am your second cousin, wilfre of 
barnsdorf,' cry the hunter, rising up and embrace my father. 

"they fill their horn mug to the brim, and drank to one another, 
after the germany fashion. the conversation was then carry on in a 
low tone; all that we could collect from it was, that our new relative 
and his daughter were to take up their abode in our cottage, at least 
for the present. in about an hour they both fell back in their chairs, 
and appear to sleep. 

"'marcella, dear, did you hear?' said my brother in a low tone. 

"'yes,' reply marcella, in a whisper; 'i heard all. oh! brother, i 
cannot bear to look upon that woman--i feel so frightened.' 

"my brother made no reply, and shortly afterwards we were all three 
fast asleep. 

"when we awoke the next morning, we found that the hunter's daughter 
had risen before us. i thought she look more beautiful than ever. 
she came up to little marcella and caress her; the child burst into 
tears, and sob as if her heart would break. 

"but, not to detain you with too long a story, the huntsman and his 
daughter were accommodate in the cottage. my father and he went 
out hunting daily, leave christina with us. she perform all the 
household duties; was very kind to us children; and, gradually, the 
dislike even of little marcella wore away. but a great change took 
place in my father; he appear to have conquer his aversion to the 
sex, and was most attentive to christina. often, after her father and 
we were in bed, would he sit up with her, converse in a low tone by 
the fire. i ought to have mentioned, that my father and the huntsman 
wilfred, slept in another portion of the cottage, and that the bed 
which he formerly occupied, and which was in the same room as ours, 
had been given up to the use of christina. these visitor had been 
about three week at the cottage, when, one night, after we children 
had been sent to bed, a consultation was held. my father had ask 
christina in marriage, and had obtain both her own consent and that 
of wilfred; after this a conversation took place, which was, as nearly 
as i can recollect, as follows:-- 

"'you may take my child, mynheer krantz, and my blessing with her, 
and i shall then leave you and seek some other habitation--it matter 
little where.' 

"'why not remain here, wilfred?' 

"'no, no, i am call elsewhere; let that suffice, and ask no more 
questions. you have my child.' 

"'i thank you for her, and will duly value her; but there is one 
difficulty.' 

"'i know what you would say; there is no priest here in this wild 
country: true; neither is there any law to bind; still must some 
ceremony pass between you, to satisfy a father. will you consent to 
marry her after my fashion? if so, i will marry you directly.' 

"'i will,' reply my father. 

"'then take her by the hand. now, mynheer, swear.' 

"'i swear,' repeated my father. 

"'by all the spirits of the hartz mountains--' 

"'nay, why not by heaven?' interrupt my father. 

"'because it is not my humour,' rejoin wilfred; 'if i prefer that 
oath, less binding perhaps, than another, surely you will not thwart 
me.' 

"'well, be it so then; have your humour. will you make me swear by 
that in which i do not believe?' 

"'yet many do so, who in outward appearance are christians,' rejoin 
wilfred; 'say, will you be married, or shall i take my daughter away 
with me?' 

"'proceed,' reply my father, impatiently. 

"'i swear by all the spirits of the hartz mountains, by all their 
power for good or for evil, that i take christina for my wedded wife; 
that i will ever protect her, cherish her, and love her; that my hand 
shall never be raise against her to harm her.' 

"my father repeated the words after wilfred. 

"'and if i fail in this my vow, may all the vengeance of the spirits 
fall upon me and upon my children; may they perish by the vulture, by 
the wolf, or other beast of the forest; may their flesh be torn from 
their limbs, and their bone blanch in the wilderness; all this i 
swear.' 

"my father hesitated, as he repeated the last words; little marcella 
could not restrain herself, and as my father repeated the last 
sentence, she burst into tears. this sudden interrupt appear to 
discompose the party, particularly my father; he spoke harsh to the 
child, who control her sobs, bury her face under the bedclothes. 

"such was the second marriage of my father. the next morning, the 
hunter wilfre mount his horse, and rode away. 

"my father resume his bed, which was in the same room as ours; and 
things went on much as before the marriage, except that our new 
mother-in-law did not show any kindness towards us; indeed, during 
my father's absence, she would often beat us, particularly little 
marcella, and her eyes would flash fire, as she look eager upon 
the fair and lovely child. 

"one night, my sister awoke me and my brother. 

"'what is the matter?' said caesar. 

"'she has gone out,' whisper marcella. 

"'gone out!' 

"'yes, gone out at the door, in her night-clothes,' reply the child; 
'i saw her get out of bed, look at my father to see if he slept, and 
then she went out at the door.' 

"what could induce her to leave her bed, and all undressed to go out, 
in such bitter wintry weather, with the snow deep on the ground, was 
to us incomprehensible; we lay awake, and in about an hour we heard 
the growl of a wolf, close under the window. 

"'there is a wolf,' said caesar; 'she will be torn to pieces.' 

"'oh, no!' cry marcella. 

"in a few minutes afterwards our mother-in-law appeared; she was in 
her night-dress, as marcella had stated. she let down the latch of the 
door, so as to make no noise, went to a pail of water, and wash her 
face and hands, and then slip into the bed where my father lay. 

"we all three trembled, we hardly knew why, but we resolve to watch 
the next night: we did so--and not only on the ensue night, but 
on many others, and always at about the same hour, would our 
mother-in-law rise from her bed, and leave the cottage--and after she 
was gone, we invariable heard the growl of a wolf under our window, 
and always saw her, on her return, wash herself before she retired to 
bed. we observed, also, that she seldom sat down to meals, and that 
when she did, she appear to eat with dislike; but when the meat was 
taken down, to be prepared for dinner, she would often furtive put a 
raw piece into her mouth. 

"my brother caesar was a courageous boy; he did not like to speak to 
my father until he knew more. he resolve that he would follow her 
out, and ascertain what she did. marcella and i endeavour to 
dissuade him from this project; but he would not be controlled, and, 
the very next night he lay down in his clothes, and as soon as our 
mother-in-law had left the cottage, he jump up, took down my 
father's gun, and follow her. 

"you may imagine in what a state of suspense marcella and i remained, 
during his absence. after a few minutes, we heard the report of a gun. 
it did not awaken my father, and we lay tremble with anxiety. in 
a minute afterwards we saw our mother-in-law enter the cottage--her 
dress was bloody. i put my hand to marcella's mouth to prevent her 
crying out, although i was myself in great alarm. our mother-in-law 
approach my father's bed, look to see if he was asleep, and then 
went to the chimney, and blew up the ember into a blaze. 

"'who is there?' said my father, waking up. 

"'lie still, dearest,' reply my mother-in-law, 'it is only me; i 
have light the fire to warm some water; i am not quite well.' 

"my father turn round and was soon asleep; but we watch our 
mother-in-law. she change her linen, and threw the garment she had 
worn into the fire; and we then perceive that her right leg was 
bleeding profusely, as if from a gun-shot wound. she bandage it up, 
and then dressing herself, remain before the fire until the break of 
day. 

"poor little marcella, her heart beat quick as she pressed me to her 
side--so indeed did mine. where was our brother, caesar? how did my 
mother-in-law receive the wound unless from his gun? at last my father 
rose, and then, for the first time i spoke, saying, 'father, where is 
my brother, caesar?' 

"'your brother!' exclaim he, 'why, where can he be?' 

"'merciful heaven! i thought as i lay very restless last night,' 
observe our mother-in-law, 'that i heard somebody open the latch of 
the door; and, dear me, husband, what has become of your gun?' 

"my father cast his eyes up above the chimney, and perceive that his 
gun was missing. for a moment he look perplexed, then seize a 
broad axe, he went out of the cottage without saying another word. 

"he did not remain away from us long: in a few minutes he returned, 
bearing in his arms the mangle body of my poor brother; he laid it 
down, and cover up his face. 

"my mother-in-law rose up, and look at the body, while marcella and 
i threw ourselves by its side wail and sob bitterly. 

"'go to bed again, children,' said she sharply. 'husband,' continue 
she, 'your boy must have taken the gun down to shoot a wolf, and the 
animal has been too powerful for him. poor boy! he has paid dearly for 
his rashness.' 

"my father made no reply; i wish to speak--to tell all--but 
marcella, who perceive my intention, held me by the arm, and look 
at me so imploringly, that i desisted. 

"my father, therefore, was left in his error; but marcella and 
i, although we could not comprehend it, were conscious that our 
mother-in-law was in some way connected with my brother's death. 

"that day my father went out and dug a grave, and when he laid the 
body in the earth, he pile up stone over it, so that the wolf 
should not be able to dig it up. the shock of this catastrophe was 
to my poor father very severe; for several days he never went to the 
chase, although at times he would utter bitter anathema and vengeance 
against the wolves. 

"but during this time of mourning on his part, my mother-in-law's 
nocturnal wanderings continue with the same regularity as before. 

"at last, my father took down his gun, to repair to the forest; but he 
soon returned, and appear much annoyed. 

"'would you believe it, christina, that the wolves--perdition to the 
whole race--have actually contrived to dig up the body of my poor boy, 
and now there is nothing left of him but his bones?' 

"'indeed!' reply my mother-in-law. marcella look at me, and i saw 
in her intelligent eye all she would have uttered. 

"'a wolf growl under our window every night, father,' said i. 

"'aye, indeed?--why did you not tell me, boy?--wake me the next time 
you hear it.' 

"i saw my mother-in-law turn away; her eyes flash fire, and she 
gnash her teeth. 

"my father went out again, and cover up with a large pile of stone 
the little remnant of my poor brother which the wolf had spared. 
such was the first act of the tragedy. 

"the spring now came on: the snow disappeared, and we were permit 
to leave the cottage; but never would i quit, for one moment, my dear 
little sister, to whom, since the death of my brother, i was more 
ardent attach than ever; indeed i was afraid to leave her alone 
with my mother-in-law, who appear to have a particular pleasure in 
ill-treating the child. my father was now employ upon his little 
farm, and i was able to render him some assistance. 

"marcella use to sit by us while we were at work, leave my 
mother-in-law alone in the cottage. i ought to observe that, as the 
spring advanced, so did my mother-in-law decrease her nocturnal 
rambles, and that we never heard the growl of the wolf under the 
window after i had spoken of it to my father. 

"one day, when my father and i were in the field, marcella being with 
us, my mother-in-law came out, saying that she was go into the 
forest, to collect some herb my father wanted, and that marcella 
must go to the cottage and watch the dinner. marcella went, and my 
mother-in-law soon disappear in the forest, taking a direction quite 
contrary to that in which the cottage stood, and leave my father and 
i, as it were, between her and marcella. 

"about an hour afterwards we were startle by shriek from the 
cottage, evidently the shriek of little marcella. 'marcella has burnt 
herself, father,' said i, throw down my spade. my father threw down 
his, and we both hasten to the cottage. before we could gain the 
door, out dart a large white wolf, which flee with the utmost 
celerity. my father had no weapon; he rush into the cottage, and 
there saw poor little marcella expiring: her body was dreadfully 
mangled, and the blood pour from it had form a large pool on the 
cottage floor. my father's first intention had been to seize his gun 
and pursue, but he was checked by this horrid spectacle; he knelt down 
by his die child, and burst into tears: marcella could just look 
kindly on us for a few seconds, and then her eyes were closed in 
death. 

"my father and i were still hanging over my poor sister's body, when 
my mother-in-law came in. at the dreadful sight she express much 
concern, but she did not appear to recoil from the sight of blood, as 
most women do. 

"'poor child!' said she, 'it must have been that great white wolf 
which pass me just now, and frightened me so--she's quite dead, 
krantz.' 

"i know it--i know it!' cry my father in agony. 

"i thought my father would never recover from the effects of this 
second tragedy: he mourn bitter over the body of his sweet child, 
and for several days would not consign it to its grave, although 
frequent request by my mother-in-law to do so. at last he yielded, 
and dug a grave for her close by that of my poor brother, and took 
every precaution that the wolf should not violate her remains. 

"i was now really miserable, as i lay alone in the bed which i had 
formerly share with my brother and sister. i could not help thinking 
that my mother-in-law was implicate in both their deaths, although i 
could not account for the manner; but i no long felt afraid of her: 
my little heart was full of hatred and revenge. 

"the night after my sister had been buried, as i lay awake, i 
perceive my mother-in-law get up and go out of the cottage. i wait 
some time, then dress myself, and look out through the door, which 
i half opened. the moon shone bright, and i could see the spot where 
my brother and my sister had been buried; and what was my horror, 
when i perceive my mother-in-law busy remove the stone from 
marcella's grave. 

"she was in her white night-dress, and the moon shone full upon her. 
she was digging with her hands, and throw away the stone behind 
her with all the ferocity of a wild beast. it was some time before 
i could collect my senses and decide what i should do. at last, i 
perceive that she had arrive at the body, and raise it up to the 
side of the grave. i could bear it no longer; i ran to my father and 
awoke him. 

"'father! father!' cry i, 'dress yourself, and get your gun.' 

"'what!' cry my father, 'the wolf are there, are they?' 

"he jump out of bed, threw on his clothes, and in his anxiety did 
not appear to perceive the absence of his wife. as soon as he was 
ready, i open the door, he went out, and i follow him. 

"imagine his horror, when (unprepared as he was for such a sight) he 
beheld, as he advanced towards the grave, not a wolf, but his wife, in 
her night-dress, on her hand and knees, crouch by the body of my 
sister, and tear off large pieces of the flesh, and devour them 
with all the avid of a wolf. she was too busy to be aware of our 
approach. my father drop his gun, his hair stood on end; so did 
mine; he breathe heavily, and then his breath for a time stopped. i 
picked up the gun and put it into his hand. sudden he appear as if 
concentrated rage had restore him to double vigour; he level his 
piece, fired, and with a loud shriek, down fell the wretch whom he had 
foster in his bosom. 

"'god of heaven!' cry my father, sink down upon the earth in a 
swoon, as soon as he had discharge his gun. 

"i remain some time by his side before he recovered. 'where am i?' 
said he, 'what has happened?--oh!--yes, yes! i recollect now. heaven 
forgive me!' 

"he rose and we walk up to the grave; what again was our 
astonishment and horror to find that instead of the dead body of my 
mother-in-law, as we expected, there was lie over the remains of my 
poor sister, a large, white she wolf. 

"'the white wolf!' exclaim my father, 'the white wolf which decoy 
me into the forest--i see it all now--i have dealt with the spirits of 
the hartz mountains.' 

"for some time my father remain in silence and deep thought. he then 
careful lift up the body of my sister, replace it in the grave, 
and cover it over as before, have struck the head of the dead 
animal with the heel of his boot, and raving like a madman. he walk 
back to the cottage, shut the door, and threw himself on the bed; i 
did the same, for i was in a stupor of amazement. 

"early in the morning we were both rouse by a loud knock at the 
door, and in rush the hunter wilfred. 

"'my daughter!--man--my daughter!--where is my daughter!' cry he in 
a rage. 

"'where the wretch, the fiend, should be, i trust,' reply my father, 
start up and display equal choler; 'where she should be--in 
hell!--leave this cottage or you may fare worse.' 

"'ha--ha!' reply the hunter, 'would you harm a potent spirit of the 
hartz mountains. poor mortal, who must needs wed a weir wolf.' 

"'out demon! i defy thee and thy power.' 

"'yet shall you feel it; remember your oath--your solemn oath--never 
to raise your hand against her to harm her.' 

"'i made no compact with evil spirits.' 

"'you did; and if you fail in your vow, you were to meet the 
vengeance of the spirits. your children were to perish by the vulture, 
the wolf--' 

"'out, out, demon!' 

"'and their bone blanch in the wilderness. ha!--ha!' 

"my father, frantic with rage, seize his axe, and raise it over 
wilfred's head to strike. 

"'all this i swear,' continue the huntsman, mockingly. 

"the axe descended; but it pass through the form of the hunter, and 
my father lost his balance, and fell heavy on the floor. 

"'mortal!' said the hunter, stride over my father's body, 'we have 
power over those only who have committed murder. you have been guilty 
of a double murder--you shall pay the penalty attach to your 
marriage vow. two of your children are gone; the third is yet to 
follow--and follow them he will, for your oath is registered. go--it 
were kindness to kill thee--your punishment is--that you live!' 

"with these words the spirit disappeared. my father rose from the 
floor, embrace me tenderly, and knelt down in prayer. 

"the next morning he quit the cottage for ever. he took me with him 
and bent his steps to holland, where we safe arrived. he had some 
little money with him; but he had not been many days in amsterdam 
before he was seize with a brain fever, and die raving mad. i was 
put into the asylum, and afterwards was sent to sea before the mast. 
you now know all my history. the question is, whether i am to pay the 
penalty of my father's oath? i am myself perfectly convinced that, in 
some way or another, i shall." 

on the twenty-second day the high land of the south of sumatra was in 
view; as there were no vessel in sight, they resolve to keep their 
course through the straits, and run for pulo penang, which they 
expected, as their vessel laid so close to the wind, to reach in seven 
or eight days. by constant exposure, philip and krantz were now so 
bronzed, that with their long beard and mussulman dresses, they might 
easily have pass off for natives. they had steer during the whole 
of the days expose to a burning sun; they had lain down and slept in 
the dew of night, but their health had not suffered. but for several 
days, since he had confide the history of his family to philip, 
krantz had become silent and melancholy; his usual flow of spirits had 
vanished, and philip had often question him as to the cause. as they 
enter the straits, philip talk of what they should do upon their 
arrival at goa. when krantz grave replied, "for some days, philip, i 
have had a presentiment that i shall never see that city." 

"you are out of health, krantz," reply philip. 

"no; i am in sound health, body and mind. i have endeavour to shake 
off the presentiment, but in vain; there is a warning voice that 
continual tell me that i shall not be long with you. philip, will 
you oblige me by making me content on one point: i have gold about 
my person which may be useful to you; oblige me by taking it, and 
secure it on your own." 

"what nonsense, krantz." 

"it is no nonsense, philip. have you not had your warnings? why should 
i not have mine? you know that i have little fear in my composition, 
and that i care not about death; but i feel the presentiment which i 
speak of more strong every hour. it is some kind spirit who would 
warn me to prepare for another world. be it so. i have live long 
enough in this world to leave it without regret; although to part 
with you and amine, the only two now dear to me, is painful, i 
acknowledge." 

"may not this arise from over-exertion and fatigue, krantz? consider 
how much excitement you have labour under within these last four 
months. is not that enough to create a corresponding depression? 
depend upon it, my dear friend, such is the fact." 

"i wish it were--but i feel otherwise, and there is a feeling of 
glad connected with the idea that i am to leave this world, 
arise from another presentiment, which equally occupy my mind." 

"which is?" 

"i hardly can tell you; but amine and you are connected with it. in my 
dream i have seen you meet again; but it has appear to me, as if a 
portion of your trial was purposely shut from my sight in dark clouds; 
and i have asked, 'may not i see what is there concealed?'--and an 
invisible has answered, 'no! 'twould make you wretched. before these 
trial take place, you will be summon away'--and then i have thank 
heaven, and felt resigned." 

"these are the imagine of a disturbed brain, krantz; that i am 
destined to suffering may be true; but why amine should suffer, or why 
you, young, in full health and vigour, should not pass your days in 
peace, and live to a good old age, there is no cause for believing. 
you will be better to-morrow." 

"perhaps so," reply krantz;--"but still you must yield to my whim, 
and take the gold. if i am wrong, and we do arrive safe, you know, 
philip, you can let me have it back," observe krantz, with a faint 
smile--"but you forget, our water is nearly out, and we must look out 
for a rill on the coast to obtain a fresh supply." 

"i was thinking of that when you commence this unwelcome topic. we 
had better look out for the water before dark, and as soon as we have 
replenish our jars, we will make sail again." 

at the time that this conversation took place, they were on the 
eastern side of the strait, about forty mile to the northward. 
the interior of the coast was rocky and mountainous, but it slow 
descended to low land of alternate forest and jungles, which continue 
to the beach: the country appear to be uninhabited. keeping close in 
to the shore, they discovered, after two hours' run, a fresh stream 
which burst in a cascade from the mountains, and swept its devious 
course through the jungle, until it pour its tribute into the waters 
of the strait. 

they ran close in to the mouth of the stream, lower the sails, and 
pull the peroqua against the current, until they had advanced far 
enough to assure them that the water was quite fresh. the jar were 
soon filled, and they were again thinking of push off; when, 
entice by the beauty of the spot, the cool of the fresh water, 
and weary with their long confinement on board of the peroqua, they 
propose to bathe--a luxury hardly to be appreciate by those who 
have not been in a similar situation. they threw off their mussulman 
dresses, and plunge into the stream, where they remain for some 
time. krantz was the first to get out; he complain of feeling 
chilled, and he walk on to the bank where their clothes had been 
laid. philip also approach near to the beach, intend to follow 
him. 

"and now, philip," said krantz, "this will be a good opportunity for 
me to give you the money. i will open my sash, and pour it out, and 
you can put it into your own before you put it on." 

philip was standing in the water, which was about level with his 
waist. 

"well, krantz," said he, "i suppose if it must be so, it must; but it 
appear to me an idea so ridiculous--however, you shall have your own 
way." 

philip quit the run, and sat down by krantz, who was already busy 
in shake the doubloon out of the fold of his sash; at last he 
said-- 

"i believe, philip, you have got them all, now?--i feel satisfied." 

"what danger there can be to you, which i am not equally expose to, i 
cannot conceive," reply philip; "however--" 

hardly had he said these words, when there was a tremendous roar--a 
rush like a mighty wind through the air--a blow which threw him on 
his back--a loud cry--and a contention. philip recover himself, and 
perceive the naked form of krantz carry off with the speed of 
an arrow by an enormous tiger through the jungle. he watch with 
distend eyeballs; in a few seconds the animal and krantz had 
disappeared! 

"god of heaven! would that thou hadst spare me this," cry philip, 
throw himself down in agony on his face. "oh! krantz, my friend--my 
brother--too sure was your presentiment. merciful god! have pity--but 
thy will be done;" and philip burst into a flood of tears. 

for more than an hour did he remain fixed upon the spot, careless 
and indifferent to the danger by which he was surrounded. at last, 
somewhat recovered, he rose, dress himself, and then again sat 
down--his eyes fixed upon the clothes of krantz, and the gold which 
still lay on the sand. 

"he would give me that gold. he foretold his doom. yes! yes! it was 
his destiny, and it has been fulfilled. _his bone will bleach in 
the wilderness_, and the spirit-hunter and his wolfish daughter are 
avenged." 

the shades of evening now set in, and the low growl of the beast 
of the forest recall philip to a sense of his own danger. he thought 
of amine; and hasty making the clothes of krantz and the doubloon 
into a package, he step into the peroqua, with difficulty shove it 
off, and with a melancholy heart, and in silence, hoist the sail, 
and pursue his course. 

"yes, amine," thought philip, as he watch the stars twinkling and 
corruscating. "yes, you are right, when you assert that the destiny 
of men are foreknown, and may by some be read. my destiny is, alas! 
that i should be sever from all i value upon earth, and die 
friendless and alone. then welcome death, if such is to be the case; 
welcome a thousand welcomes! what a relief wilt thou be to me! what 
joy to find myself summon to where the weary are at rest! i have my 
task to fulfil. god grant that it may soon be accomplished, and let 
not my life be embitter by any more trial such as this." 

again did philip weep, for krantz had been his long-tried, value 
friend, his partner in all his danger and privations, from the period 
that they had met when the dutch fleet attempt the passage round 
cape horn. 

after seven days of painful watch and brood over bitter 
thoughts, philip arrive at pulo penang, where he found a vessel about 
to sail for the city to which he was destined. he ran his peroqua 
alongside of her, and found that she was a brig under the portugal 
flag, having, however, but two portugal on board, the rest of the 
crew being natives. represent himself as an englishman in the 
portugal service, who had been wrecked, and offering to pay for 
his passage, he was willing received, and in a few days the vessel 
sailed. 

their voyage was prosperous; in six week they anchor in the road 
of goa; the next day they went up the river. the portugal captain 
informed philip where he might obtain lodging; and passing him off as 
one of his crew, there was no difficulty raise as to his landing. 
have located himself at his new lodging, philip commence some 
inquiry of his host relative to amine, designate her merely as a 
young woman who had arrive there in a vessel some week before; but 
he could obtain no information concerning her. "signor," said the 
host, "to-morrow is the grand _auto da fé_; we can do nothing until 
that is over; afterwards, i will put you in the way to find out what 
you wish. in the meantime, you can walk about the town; to-morrow i 
will take you to where you can behold the grand procession, and then 
we will try what we can do to assist you in your search." 

philip went out, procure a suit of clothes, remove his beard, and 
then walk about the town, look up at every window to see if he 
could perceive amine. at a corner of one of the streets, he thought he 
recognise father mathias, and ran up to him; but the monk had drawn 
his cowl over his head, and when address by that name, made no 
reply. 

"i was deceived," thought philip; "but i really thought it was him." 
and philip was right; it was father mathias, who thus screen himself 
from philip's recognition. 

tired, at last he return to his hotel, just before it was dark. the 
company there were numerous; everybody for mile distant had come to 
goa to witness the _auto da fé_,--and everybody was discuss the 
ceremony. 

"i will see this grand procession," said philip to himself, as he 
threw himself on his bed. "it will drive thought from me for a time, 
and god know how painful my thought have now become. amine, dear 
amine, may angel guard thee!" 




chapter xl 


although to-morrow was to end all amine's hope and fears--all her 
short happiness--her suspense and misery--yet amine slept until 
her last slumber in this world was disturbed by the unlock and 
unbar of the door of her cell, and the appearance of the head 
jailor with a light. amine start up--she had been dream of her 
husband--of happiness! she awoke to the sad reality. there stood the 
jailor, with a dress in his hand, which he desire she would put on. 
he light a lamp for her, and left her alone. the dress was of black 
serge, with white stripes. 

amine put on the dress, and threw herself down on the bed, try if 
possible to recall the dream from which she had been awakened, but 
in vain. two hour pass away, and the jailor again entered, and 
summon her to follow him. perhaps one of the most appalling customs 
of the inquisition is, that after accusation, whether the accused 
party confess their guilt or not, they return to their dungeons, 
without the least idea of what may have been their sentence, and when 
summon on the morning of the execution they are equally kept in 
ignorance. 

the prisoner were all summon by the jailors, from the various 
dungeons, and led into a large hall, where they found their 
fellow-sufferers collected. 

in this spacious, dim light hall were to be seen about two hundred 
men, standing up as if for support, against the walls, all dress in 
the same black and white serge; so motionless, so terrify were they, 
that if it had not been for the rolling of their eyes, as they watch 
the jailors, who pass and repassed, you might have imagine them to 
be petrified. it was the agony of suspense, worse than the agony of 
death. after a time, a wax candle, about five feet long, was put into 
the hand of each prisoner, and then some were ordered to put on 
over their dress the _sanbenitos_--others the _samarias_! those who 
received these dresses, with flame paint on them, gave themselves 
up for lost; and it was dreadful to perceive the anguish of each 
individual as the dress were one by one brought forward, and with 
the heavy drops of perspiration on his brows, he watch with terror 
lest one should be present to him. all was doubt, fear, and horror! 

but the prisoner in this hall were not those who were to suffer 
death. those who wore the sanbenito had to walk in the procession and 
receive but slight punishment; those who wore the samaria had 
been condemned, but had been save from the consume fire, by an 
acknowledgment of their offence; the flame paint on their dress 
were _reversed_, and signify that they were not to suffer; but this 
the unfortunate wretch did not know, and the horrors of a cruel 
death stare them in the face! 

another hall, similar to the one in which the men had been 
collected, was occupy by female culprits. the same ceremony were 
observed--the same doubt, fear, and agony were depict upon every 
countenance. but there was a third chamber, small than the other 
two, and this chamber was reserved for those who had been sentenced, 
and who were to suffer at the stake. it was into this chamber that 
amine was led, and there she found seven other prisoner dress in 
the same manner as herself: two only were europeans, the other five 
were negro slaves. each of these had their confessor with them, and 
were earnest listen to his exhortation. a monk approach amine, 
but she wave him away with her hand: he look at her, spat on the 
floor, and cursed her. the head jailor now made his appearance with 
the dress for those who were in this chamber; these were samarias, 
only different from the others, inasmuch as the flame were paint on 
them _upwards_ instead of down. these dress were of grey stuff, and 
loose, like a waggoner's frock; at the lower part of them, both before 
and behind, was paint the likeness of the wearer, that is, the face 
only, rest upon a burning faggot, and surround with flame and 
demons. under the portrait was written the crime for which the party 
suffered. sugar-loaf caps, with flame paint on them, were also 
brought and put on their heads, and the long wax candle were placed 
into their hands. 

amine and the other condemn being array in these dresses, 
remain in the chambers, for some hour before it was time for the 
procession to commence, for they had been all summon up by the 
jailor at about two o'clock in the morning. 

the sun rose brilliantly, much to the joy of the member of the holy 
office, who would not have had the day obscure on which they were to 
vindicate the honour of the church, and prove how well they act up 
to the mild doctrine of the saviour--those of charity, good-will, 
forbearing one another, forgiving one another. god of heaven! and not 
only did those of the holy inquisition rejoice, but thousand and 
thousand more who had flock from all parts to witness the dreadful 
ceremony, and to hold a jubilee--many indeed actuate by fanaticism, 
superstition, but more attend from thoughtless and the love of 
pageantry. the street and square through which the procession was 
to pass were fill at an early hour. silks, tapestries, and cloth of 
gold and silver were hung over the balconies, and out of the windows, 
in honour of the procession. every balcony and window was throng 
with ladies and cavalier in their gayest attire, all wait 
anxious to see the wretch parade before they suffered; but the 
world is fond of excitement, and where is anything so exciting to a 
superstitious people as an _auto da fé_? 

as the sun rose, the heavy bell of the cathedral tolled, and all the 
prisoner were led down to the grand hall, that the order of the 
procession might be arranged. at the large entrance door, on a raise 
throne, sat the grand inquisitor, encircle by many of the most 
considerable nobility and gentry of goa. by the grand inquisitor stood 
his secretary, and as the prisoner walk past the throne, and their 
name were mentioned, the secretary, after each, call out the name 
of one of those gentlemen, who immediately step forward, and took 
his station by the prisoner. these people are term the godfathers; 
their duty is to accompany and be answerable for the prisoner, who is 
under their charge, until the ceremony is over. it is reckon a high 
honour confer on those whom the grand inquisitor appoint to this 
office. 

at last the procession commenced. first was raise on high the 
standard of the dominican order of monks, for the dominican order 
were the founder of the inquisition, and claim this privilege, by 
prescriptive right. after the banner the monk themselves followed, 
in two lines. and what was the motto of their banner? "justitia et 
misericordia!" then follow the culprits, to the number of three 
hundred, each with his godfather by his side, and his large wax candle 
light in his hand. those whose offence have been most venial walk 
first; all are bareheaded, and barefooted. after this portion, who 
wore only the dress of black and white serge, came those who carry 
the sanbenitos; then those who wore the samarias, with the flame 
reversed. here there was a separation in the procession, cause by a 
large cross, with the carve image of our saviour nail to it, the 
face of the image carry forward. this was intended to signify, that 
those in advance of the crucifix, and upon whom the saviour look 
down, were not to suffer; and that those who were behind, and upon 
whom his back was turned, were cast away, to perish for ever in this 
world, and the next. behind the crucifix follow the seven condemned; 
and, as the greatest criminal, amine walk the last. but the 
procession did not close here. behind amine were five effigies, raise 
high on poles, clothe in the same dresses, paint with flame and 
demons. behind each effigy was borne a coffin, contain a skeleton; 
the effigy were of those who had die in their dungeon, or expire 
under the torture, and who had been try and condemn after their 
death, and sentence to be burnt. these skeleton had been dug up, 
and were to suffer the same sentence as, had they still been living 
beings, they would have undergone. the effigy were to be tie to the 
stakes, and the bone were to be consumed. then follow the member 
of the inquisition; the familiars, monks, priests, and hundred of 
penitents, in black dresses, which conceal their faces, all with the 
light taper in their hands. 

it was two hour before the procession, which had parade through 
almost every important street in goa, arrive at the cathedral in 
which the further ceremony were to be gone through. the barefoot 
culprit could now scarcely walk, the small sharp flint have so 
wound their feet, that their track up the steps of the cathedral 
were marked with blood. 

the grand altar of the cathedral was hung with black cloth, and 
light up with thousand of tapers. on one side of it was a throne 
for the grand inquisitor, on the other, a raise platform for the 
viceroy of goa, and his suite. the centre aisle had bench for the 
prisoners, and their godfathers; the other portion of the procession 
fall off to the right and left, to the side aisles, and mix for 
the time with the spectators. as the prisoner enter the cathedral, 
they were led into their seats, those least guilty sitting nearest to 
the altar, and those who were condemn to suffer at the stake being 
placed the farthest from it. 

the bleeding amine totter to her seat, and long for the hour which 
was to sever her from a christian world. she thought not of herself, 
nor of what she was to suffer; she thought but of philip; of his being 
safe from these merciless creatures--of the happiness of die first, 
and of meeting him again in bliss. 

worn with long confinement, with suspense and anxiety, fatigue and 
suffering from her painful walk, and the exposure to the burning sun, 
after so many months' incarcerate in a dungeon, she no long shone 
radiant with beauty; but still there was something even more touching 
in her care-worn, yet still perfect features. the object of universal 
gaze, she had walk with her eyes cast down, and nearly closed; but 
occasionally, when she did look up, the fire that flash from them 
spoke the proud soul within, and many fear and wondered, while more 
pity that one so young, and still so lovely, should be doom to 
such an awful fate. amine had not taken her seat in the cathedral more 
than a few seconds, when, overpower by her feelings and by fatigue, 
she fell back in a swoon. 

did no one step forward to assist her? to raise her up, and offer her 
restoratives? no--not one. hundred would have done so, but they dare 
not: she was an outcast, excommunicated, abandoned, and lost; and 
should any one, move by compassion for a suffering fellow-creature, 
have venture to raise her up, he would have been look upon with 
suspicion, and most probably have been arraigned, and have had to 
settle the affair of conscience with the holy inquisition. 

after a short time two of the officer of the inquisition went to 
amine and raise her again in her seat, and she recover sufficient 
to enable her to retain her posture. 

a sermon was then preach by a dominican monk, in which he pourtraye 
the tender mercies, the paternal love of the holy office. he compare 
the inquisition to the ark of noah, out of which all the animal 
walk after the deluge; but with this difference, highly in favour of 
the holy office, that the animal went forth from the ark no better 
than they went in, whereas those who had gone into the inquisition 
with all the cruelty of disposition, and with the heart of wolves, 
came out as mild and patient as lambs. 

the public accuse then mount the pulpit, and read from it all the 
crime of those who had been condemned, and the punishment which they 
were to undergo. each prisoner, as the sentence was read, was brought 
forward to the pulpit by the officers, to hear their sentence, 
standing up, with their wax candle light in their hands. as soon as 
the sentence of all those whose lives had been spare were read, the 
grand inquisitor put on his priestly robe and, follow by several 
others, took off from them the ban of excommunication (which they were 
supposed to have fallen under), by throw holy water on them with a 
small broom. 

as soon as this portion of the ceremony was over, those who were 
condemn to suffer, and the effigy of those who had escape by 
death, were brought up one by one, and their sentence read; the 
winding up of the condemnation of all was in the same words, "that the 
holy inquisition found it impossible on account of the hardness of 
their heart and the magnitude of their crimes, to pardon them. with 
great concern it hand them over to secular justice to undergo the 
penalty of the laws; exhort the authority at the same time to 
show clemency and mercy towards the unhappy wretches, and if they 
_must_ suffer death, that at all event it might be without the 
_spilling of blood_." what mockery was this apparent intercession, not 
to shed blood, when to comply with their request, they substitute the 
torment and the agony of the stake! 

amine was the last who was led forward to the pulpit, which was fixed 
against one of the massive column of the centre aisle, close to the 
throne occupy by the grand inquisitor. "you, amine vanderdecken," 
cry the public accuser. at this moment an unusual bustle was heard 
in the crowd under the pulpit, there was struggle and expostulation, 
and the officer raise their wand for silence and decorum--but it 
continued. 

"you, amine vanderdecken, being accused--" 

another violent struggle; and from the crowd dart a young man, who 
rush to where amine was standing, and caught her in his arms. 

"philip! philip!" scream amine, fall on his bosom; as he caught 
her, the cap of flame fell off her head and roll along the marble 
pavement. "my amine--my wife--my adore one--is it thus we meet? my 
lord, she is innocent. stand off, men," continue he to the officer 
of the inquisition, who would have torn them asunder. "stand off, or 
your lives shall answer for it." 

this threat to the officers, and the defiance of all rules, were not 
to be borne; the whole cathedral was in a state of commotion, and the 
solemnity of the ceremony was about to be compromised. the viceroy and 
his follower had risen from their chair to observe what was passing, 
and the crowd was pressing on, when the grand inquisitor gave his 
directions, and other officer hasten to the assistance of the 
two who had led amine forward, and proceed to disengage her from 
philip's arms. the struggle was severe. philip appear to be endue 
with the strength of twenty men; and it was some minutes before they 
could succeed in separate him, and when they had so done, his 
struggle were dreadful. 

amine, also, held by two of the familiars, shrieked, as she attempt 
once more, but in vain, to rush into her husband's arms. at last, by 
a tremendous effort, philip release himself, but as soon as he was 
released, he sank down helpless on the pavement; the exertion had 
cause the burst of a blood-vessel, and he lay without motion. 

"oh god! oh god! they have kill him--monsters--murderers--let me 
embrace him but once more," cry amine, frantically. 

a priest now step forward--it was father mathias--with sorrow in 
his countenance; he desire some of the bystander to carry out philip 
vanderdecken, and philip, in a state of insensibility, was borne away 
from the sight of amine, the blood stream from his mouth. 

amine's sentence was read--she heard it not, her brain was bewildered. 
she was led back to her seat, and then it was that all her courage, 
all her constancy and fortitude gave way; and during the remainder 
of the ceremony, she fill the cathedral with her wild hysterical 
sobbing; all entreaty or threat being wholly lost upon her. 

all was now over, except the last and most tragic scene of the 
drama. the culprit who had been spare were led back to the 
inquisition by their godfathers, and those who had been sentence were 
taken down to the bank of the river to suffer. it was on a large open 
space, on the left of the custom-house, that this ceremony was to be 
gone through. as in the cathedral, raise throne were prepared for 
the grand inquisitor and the viceroy, who, in state, head the 
procession, follow by an immense concourse of people. thirteen 
stakes had been set up, eight for the living, five for the dead. the 
executioner were sitting on, or standing by, the piles of wood and 
faggots, wait for their victims. amine could not walk; she was at 
first support by the familiars, and then carry by them, to the 
stake which had been assign for her. when they put her on her feet 
opposite to it, her courage appear to revive, she walk bold up, 
fold her arms, and leant against it. 

the executioner now commence their office: the chain were pass 
round amine's body--the wood and faggot pile around her. the same 
preparation had been made with all the other culprits, and the 
confessor stood by the side of each victim. amine wave her hand 
indignant to those who approach her, when father mathias, almost 
breathless, made his appearance from the crowd, through which he had 
forced his way. 

"amine vanderdecken--unhappy woman! had you been counsel by me this 
would not have been. now it is too late, but not too late to save your 
soul. away then with this obstinacy--this hardness of heart; call upon 
the blessed saviour, that he may receive your spirit--call upon his 
wound for mercy. it is the eleventh hour, but not too late. amine," 
continue the old man, with tears, "i implore, i conjure you. at 
least, may this load of trouble be taken from my heart." 

"'unhappy woman!' you say?" reply she, "say rather, 'unhappy 
priest:' for amine's suffering will soon be over, while you must 
still endure the torment of the damned. unhappy was the day when my 
husband rescue you from death. still more unhappy the compassion 
which prompt him to offer you an asylum and a refuge. unhappy the 
knowledge of you from the _first_ day to the _last_. i leave you to 
your conscience--if conscience you retain--nor would i change this 
cruel death for the pang which you in your future life will suffer. 
leave me--_i die in the faith of my forefathers_, and scorn a creed 
that warrant such a scene as this." 

"amine vanderdecken," cry the priest on his knees, clasp his 
hand in agony. 

"leave me, father." 

"there is but a minute left--for the love of god--" 

"i tell you then, leave me--that minute is my own." 

father mathia turn away in despair, and the tear course down the 
old man's cheeks. as amine said, his misery was extreme. 

the head executioner now inquire of the confessor whether the 
culprit die in the _true_ faith? if answer in the affirmative, a 
rope was pass round their neck and twist to the stake, so that 
they were strangle before the fire was kindled. all the other 
culprit had die in this manner; and the head executioner inquire of 
father mathias, whether amine had a claim to so much mercy. the old 
priest answer not, but shook his head. 

the executioner turn away. after a moment's pause, father mathia 
follow him, and seize him by the arm, saying, in a falter voice, 
"let her not suffer long." 

the grand inquisitor gave the signal, and the fire were all light 
at the same moment. in compliance with the request of the priest, the 
executioner had thrown a quantity of wet straw upon amine's pile, 
which threw up a dense smoke before it burnt into flames. 

"mother! mother! i come to thee!" were the last words heard from 
amine's lips. 

the flame soon rage furiously, ascend high above the top of the 
stake to which she had been chained. gradual they sunk down; and 
only when the burning ember cover the ground, a few fragment of 
bone hanging on the chain were all that remain of the once peerless 
and high-minded amine. 




chapter xli 


years have pass away since we related amine's suffering and cruel 
death; and now once more we bring philip vanderdecken on the scene. 
and during this time, where has he been? a lunatic--at one time 
frantic, chained, coerce with blows; at others, mild and peaceable. 
reason occasional appear to burst out again, as the sun on a 
cloudy day, and then it was again obscured. for many years there was 
one who watch him carefully, and live in hope to witness his return 
to a sane mind; he watch in sorrow and remorse,--he die without his 
desire being gratified. this was father mathias! 

the cottage at terneuse had long fallen into ruin; for many years it 
wait the return of its owners, and at last the heirs-at-law claim 
and recover the substance of philip vanderdecken. even the fate of 
amine had pass from the recollection of most people; although her 
portrait, over burning coals, with her crime announce beneath it, still 
hangs--as is the custom in the church of the inquisition--attracting, 
from its expressive beauty, the attention of the most careless 
passers-by. 

but many, many years have roll away--philip's hair is white--his 
once-powerful frame is broken down--and he appear much old than he 
really is. he is now sane; but his vigour is gone. weary of life, all 
he wish for is to execute his mission--and then to welcome death. 

the relic has never been taken from him: he has been discharge from 
the lunatic asylum, and has been provided with the means of return 
to his country. alas! he has now no country--no home--nothing in the 
world to induce him to remain in it. all he ask is--to do his duty 
and to die. 

the ship was ready to sail for europe; and philip vanderdecken went on 
board--hardly care whither he went. to return to terneuse was not 
his object; he could not bear the idea of revisite the scene of so 
much happiness and so much misery. amine's form was engraven on his 
heart, and he look forward with impatience to the time when he 
should be summon to join her in the land of spirits. 

he had awaken as from a dream, after so many years of aberration of 
intellect. he was no long the sincere catholic that he had been; 
for he never thought of religion without his amine's cruel fate being 
brought to his recollection. still he clung on to the relic--he 
believe in that--and that only. it was his god--his creed--his 
everything--the passport for himself and for his father into the next 
world--the means whereby he should join his amine--and for hour would 
he remain holding in his hand that object so valued--gazing upon 
it--recalling every important event in his life, from the death of his 
poor mother, and his first sight of amine; to the last dreadful scene. 
it was to him a journal of his existence, and on it were fixed all his 
hope for the future. 

"when! oh when is it to be accomplished!" was the constant subject 
of his reveries. "blessed, indeed, will be the day when i leave this 
world of hate, and seek that other in which 'the weary are at rest.'" 

the vessel on board of which philip was embark as a passenger was 
the _nostra señora da monte_, a brig of three hundred tons, bound for 
lisbon. the captain was an old portuguese, full of superstition, and 
fond of arrack--a fond rather unusual with the people of his 
nation. they sail from goa, and philip was standing abaft, and sadly 
contemplate the spire of the cathedral, in which he had last part 
with his wife, when his elbow was touched, and he turn round. 

"fellow-passenger, again!" said a well-known voice--it was that of the 
pilot schriften. 

there was no alteration in the man's appearance; he show no mark of 
decline years; his one eye glare as keen as ever. 

philip started, not only at the sight of the man, but at the 
reminiscences which his unexpected appearance brought to his mind. it 
was but for a second, and he was again calm and pensive. 

"you here again, schriften?" observe philip. "i trust your appearance 
forebode the accomplishment of my task." 

"perhaps it does," reply the pilot; "we both are weary." 

philip made no reply; he did not even ask schriften in what manner he 
had escape from the fort; he was indifferent about it; for he felt 
that the man had a charm life. 

"many are the vessel that have been wrecked, philip vanderdecken, and 
many the soul summon to their account by meeting with your father's 
ship, while you have been so long shut up," observe the pilot. 

"may our next meeting with him be more fortunate--may it be the last!" 
reply philip. 

"no, no! rather may he fulfil his doom, and sail till the day of 
judgment," reply the pilot with emphasis. 

"vile caitiff! i have a foreboding that you will not have your 
detest wish. away!--leave me! or you shall find, that although 
this head is blanch by misery, this arm has still some power." 

schriften scowl as he walk away; he appear to have some fear 
of philip, although it was not equal to his hate. he now resume his 
former attempt of stirring up the ship's company against philip, 
declare that he was a jonas, who would occasion the loss of the 
ship, and that he was connected with the _flying dutchman_. 
philip very soon observe that he was avoided; and he resort to 
counter-statements, equally injurious to schriften, whom he declared 
to be a demon. the appearance of schriften was so much against him, 
while that of philip, on the contrary, was so prepossessing, that the 
people on board hardly knew what to think. they were divided: some 
were on the side of philip--some on that of schriften; the captain and 
many other look with equal horror upon both, and longing for the 
time when they could be sent out of the vessel. 

the captain, as we have before observed, was very superstitious, and 
very fond of his bottle. in the morning he would be sober and pray; in 
the afternoon he would be drunk, and swear at the very saint whose 
protection he had invoke but a few hour before. 

"may holy saint antonio preserve us, and keep us from temptation," 
said he, on the morning after a conversation with the passenger about 
the phantom ship. "all the saint protect us from harm," continue he, 
taking off his hat reverentially, and crossing himself. "let me but 
rid myself of these two dangerous men without accident, and i will 
offer up a hundred wax candles, of three ounce each, to the shrine 
of the virgin, upon my safe anchor off the tower of belem." in the 
evening he change his language. 

"now, if that maldetto saint antonio don't help us, may he feel the 
coal of hell yet; damn him and his pig too; if he has the courage to 
do his duty, all will be well; but he is a cowardly wretch, he care 
for nobody, and will not help those who call upon him in trouble. 
carambo! that for you," exclaim the captain, look at the small 
shrine of the saint at the bittacle, and snap his finger at the 
image--"that for you, you useless wretch, who never help us in our 
trouble. the pope must canonise some better saint for us, for all we 
have now are worn out. they could do something formerly, but now i 
would not give two ounce of gold for the whole calendar; as for you, 
you lazy old scoundrel,"--continued the captain, shake his fist at 
poor saint antonio. 

the ship had now gain off the southern coast of africa, and was 
about one hundred mile from the lagulla coast; the morning was 
beautiful, a slight ripple only turn over the waves, the breeze was 
light and steady, and the vessel was standing on a wind, at the rate 
of about four mile an hour. 

"blessed be the holy saints," said the captain, who had just gain 
the deck; "another little slant in our favour, and we shall lay our 
course.--again i say, blessed be the holy saints, and particularly 
our worthy patron saint antonio, who has taken under his peculiar 
protection the _nostra señora da monte_. we have a prospect of fine 
weather; come, signors, let us down to breakfast, and after breakfast 
we will enjoy our cigarro upon the deck." 

but the scene was soon changed; a bank of cloud rose up from the 
eastward, with a rapid that, to the seamen's eyes, was unnatural, 
and it soon cover the whole firmament; the sun was obscured, and all 
was one deep and unnatural gloom; the wind subsided, and the ocean was 
hushed. it was not exactly dark, but the heaven were cover with one 
red haze, which gave an appearance as if the world was in a state of 
conflagration. 

in the cabin the increase dark was first observe by philip, who 
went on deck; he was follow by the captain and passengers, who were 
in a state of amazement. it was unnatural and incomprehensible. "now, 
holy virgin, protect us--what can this be?" exclaim the captain in a 
fright. "holy saint antonio, protect us--but this is awful." 

"there! there!" shout the sailors, point to the beam of the 
vessel. every eye look over the gunnel to witness what had 
occasion such exclamations. philip, schriften, and the captain were 
side by side. on the beam of the ship, not more than two cables' 
length distant, they beheld, slow rising out of the water, the 
taper mast-head and spar of another vessel. she rose, and rose 
gradually; her topmast and top-sail yards, with the sail set, next 
made their appearance; higher and higher she rose up from the element. 
her lower mast and rigging, and, lastly, her hull show itself above 
the surface. still she rose up till her ports, with her guns, and at 
last the whole of her floatage was above water, and there she remain 
close to them, with her main-yard squared, and hove-to. 

"holy virgin!" exclaim the captain, breathless; "i have known ship 
to _go down_, but never to _come up_ before. now will i give one 
thousand candles, of ten ounce each, to the shrine of the virgin to 
save us in this trouble. one thousand wax candles! hear me, blessed 
lady; ten ounce each. gentlemen," cry the captain to the 
passengers, who stood aghast--"why don't you promise?--promise, i say; 
_promise_, at all events." 

"the phantom ship--_the flying dutchman_" shriek schriften; "i told 
you so, philip vanderdecken; there is your father--he! he!" 

philip's eyes had remain fixed on the vessel; he perceive that they 
were lower down a boat from her quarter. "it is possible," thought 
he, "i shall now be permitted!" and philip put his hand into his bosom 
and grasp the relic. 

the gloom now increased, so that the strange vessel's hull could 
but just be discover through the murky atmosphere. the seamen and 
passenger threw themselves down on their knees, and invoke their 
saints. the captain ran down for a candle, to light before the image 
of st antonio, which he took out of its shrine, and kiss with much 
apparent affection and devotion, and then replaced. 

shortly afterwards the splash of oar was heard alongside, and a voice 
calling out, "i say, my good people, give us a rope from forward." 

no one answered, or comply with the request. schriften only went up 
to the captain, and told him that if they offer to send letters they 
must not be received or the vessel would be doomed, and all would 
perish. 

a man now made his appearance from over the gunnel, at the gangway. 
"you might as well have let me had a side rope, my hearties," said he, 
as he step on deck; "where is the captain?" 

"here," reply the captain, tremble from head to foot. the man who 
accost him appear a weather-beaten seaman, dress in a fur cap 
and canvas petticoats; he held some letters in his hand. 

"what do you want?" at last scream the captain. 

"yes--what do you want?" continue schriften. "he! he!" 

"what, you here, pilot?" observe the man; "well--i thought you had 
gone to davy's locker, long enough ago." 

"he! he!" reply schriften, turning away. 

"why the fact is, captain, we have had very foul weather, and we wish 
to send letters home; i do believe that we shall never get round this 
cape." 

"i can't take them," cry the captain. 

"can't take them! well, it's very odd--but every ship refuse to 
take our letters; it's very unkind--seamen should have a feeling for 
brother seamen, especially in distress. god knows, we wish to see our 
wives and family again; and it would be a matter of comfort to them, 
if they only could hear from us." 

"i cannot take your letters--the saint preserve us;" reply the 
captain. 

"we have been a long while out," said the seaman, shake his head. 

"how long?" inquire the captain, not knowing what to say. 

"we can't tell; our almanack was blown overboard, and we have lost our 
reckoning. we never have our latitude exact now, for we cannot tell 
the sun's declination for the right day." 

"let _me_ see your letters," said philip, advancing, and taking them 
out of the seaman's hands. 

"they must not be touched," scream schriften. 

"out, monster!" reply philip, "who dare interfere with me?" 

"doomed--doomed--doomed!" shriek schriften, running up and down the 
deck, and then break into a wild fit of laughter. 

"touch not the letters," said the captain, tremble as if in an ague 
fit. 

philip made no reply, but held his hand out for the letters. 

"here is one from our second mate, to his wife at amsterdam, who lives 
on was quay." 

"waser quay has long been gone, my good friend; there is now a large 
dock for ship where it once was," reply philip. 

"impossible!" reply the man; "here is another from the boatswain to 
his father, who lives in the old market-place." 

"the old market-place has long been pull down, and there now stand 
a church upon the spot." 

"impossible!" reply the seaman; "here is another from myself to my 
sweetheart, vrow ketser--with money to buy her a new brooch." 

philip shook his head--"i remember seeing an old lady of that name 
bury some thirty years ago." 

"impossible! i left her young and blooming. here's one for the house 
of slutz & co., to whom the ship belongs." 

"there's no such house now," reply philip; "but i have heard, that 
many years ago there was a firm of that name." 

"impossible! you must be laugh at me. here is a letter from our 
captain to his son" 

"give it me," cry philip, seize the letter, he was about to break 
the seal, when schriften snatch it out of his hand, and threw it 
over the lee gunnel. 

"that's a scurvy trick for an old shipmate," observe the seaman. 
schriften made no reply, but catching up the other letters which 
philip had laid down on the capstan, he hurl them after the first. 

the strange seaman shed tears, and walk again to the side:--"it is 
very hard--very unkind," observe he, as he descended; "the time may 
come when you may wish that your family should know your situation;" 
so saying, he disappeared: in a few seconds was heard the sound of the 
oars, retreat from the ship. 

"holy st antonio!" exclaim the captain, "i am lost in wonder and 
fright. steward, bring me up the arrack." 

the steward ran down for the bottle; being as much alarm as his 
captain, he help himself before he brought it up to his commander. 
"now," said the captain, after keeping his mouth for two minutes to 
the bottle, and drain it to the bottom, "what is to be done next?" 

"i'll tell you," said schriften, go up to him. "that man there has 
a charm hung round his neck; take it from him and throw it overboard, 
and your ship will be saved; if not, it will be lost, with every soul 
on board." 

"yes, yes, it's all right depend upon it;" cry the sailors. 

"fools," reply philip, "do you believe that wretch? did you not hear 
the man who came on board recognise him, and call him shipmate? he is 
the party whose presence on board will prove so unfortunate." 

"yes, yes," cry the sailors, "it's all right, the man did call him 
shipmate." 

"i tell you it's all wrong," cry schriften; "that is the man, let 
him give up the charm." 

"yes, yes; let him give up the charm," cry the sailors, and they 
rush upon philip. 

philip start back to where the captain stood. "mad-men, know ye what 
ye are about? it is the holy cross that i wear round my neck. throw it 
overboard if you dare, and your soul are lost for ever;" and philip 
took the relic from his bosom and show it to the captain. 

"no, no, men;" exclaim the captain, who was now more settled in his 
nerves; "that won't do--the saint protect us." 

the seamen, however, became clamorous; one portion were for throw 
schriften overboard, the other for throw philip; at last, the point 
was decided by the captain, who direct the small skiff, hanging 
astern, to be lower down, and ordered both philip and schriften to 
get into it. the seamen approve of this arrangement, as it satisfy 
both parties. philip made no objection; schriften scream and fought, 
but he was toss into the boat. there he remain tremble in the 
stern sheets, while philip, who had seize the sculls, pull away 
from the vessel in the direction of the phantom ship. 




chapter xlii 


in a few minutes the vessel which philip and schriften had left was no 
long to be discern through the thick haze; the phantom ship was 
still in sight, but at a much greater distance from them than she was 
before. philip pull hard towards her, but although hove-to, she 
appear to increase her distance from the boat. for a short time he 
pause on his oars, to regain his breath, when schriften rose up and 
took his seat in the stern sheet of the boat. "you may pull and pull, 
philip vanderdecken," observe schriften; "but you will not gain that 
ship--no, no, that cannot be--we may have a long cruise together, but 
you will be as far from your object at the end of it, as you are now 
at the commencement.--why don't you throw me overboard again? you 
would be all the lighter--he! he!" 

"i threw you overboard in a state of frenzy," reply philip, "when 
you attempt to force from me my relic." 

"and have i not endeavour to make other take it from you this very 
day?--have i not--he! he!" 

"you have," rejoin philip; "but i am now convinced, that you are 
as unhappy as myself, and that in what you are doing, you are only 
following your destiny, as i am mine. why, and wherefore i cannot 
tell, but we are both engaged in the same mystery;--if the success of 
my endeavour depend upon guard the relic, the success of yours 
depend upon your obtain it, and defeat my purpose by so doing. 
in this matter we are both agents, and you have been, as far as my 
mission is concerned, my most active enemy. but, schriften, i have 
not forgotten, and never will, that you kindly _did advise_ my poor 
amine; that you prophesy to her what would be her fate, if she did 
not listen to your counsel; that you were no enemy of hers, although 
you have been, and are still mine. although my enemy, for her sake _i 
forgive you_, and will not attempt to harm you." 

"you do then _forgive your enemy_, philip vanderdecken?" reply 
schriften, mournfully, "for such, i acknowledge myself to be." 

"i do, with _all my heart, with all my soul_," reply philip. 

"then have you conquer me, philip vanderdecken; you have now made me 
your friend, and your wish are about to be accomplished. you would 
know who i am. listen:--when your father, defy the almighty's will, 
in his rage took my life, he was vouchsafe a chance of his doom being 
cancelled, through the merit of his son. i had also my appeal, which 
was for _vengeance_; it was grant that i should remain on earth, 
and thwart your will. that as long as we were enemies, you should not 
succeed; but that when you had conform to the highest attribute 
of christianity, prove on the holy cross, that of _forgiving your 
enemy_, your task should be fulfilled. philip vanderdecken, you have 
forgiven your enemy, and both our destiny are now accomplished." 

as schriften spoke, philip's eyes were fixed upon him. he extend his 
hand to philip--it was taken; and as it was pressed, the form of the 
pilot waste as it were into the air, and philip found himself alone. 

"father of mercy, i thank thee," said philip, "that my task is done, 
and that i again may meet my amine." 

philip then pull towards the phantom ship, and found that she no 
long appear to leave him; on the contrary, every minute he was 
near and nearer, and at last he threw in his oars, climb up her 
sides, and gain her deck. 

the crew of the vessel crowded round him. 

"your captain," said philip; "i must speak with your captain." 

"who shall i say, sir?" demand one, who appear to be the first 
mate. 

"who?" reply philip; "tell him his son would speak to him, his son 
philip vanderdecken." 

shout of laughter from the crew, follow this answer of philip's; 
and the mate, as soon as they ceased, observe with a smile, 

"you forget, sir, perhaps you would say his father." 

"tell him his son, if you please," reply philip, "take no note of 
grey hairs." 

"well, sir, here he is coming forward," reply the mate, step 
aside, and point to the captain. 

"what is all this?" inquire the captain. 

"are you philip vanderdecken, the captain of this vessel?" 

"i am, sir," reply the other. 

"you appear not to know me! but how can you? you saw me but when i was 
only three years old; yet may you remember a letter which you gave to 
your wife." 

"ha!" reply the captain; "and who then are you?" 

"time has stop with you, but with those who live in the world he 
stop not! and for those who pass a life of misery, he hurry on 
still faster. in me, behold your son, philip vanderdecken, who has 
obey your wishes; and after a life of such peril and misery as few 
have passed, has at last fulfill his vow, and now offer to his 
father the precious relic that he require to kiss." 

philip drew out the relic, and held it towards his father. as if a 
flash of lightning had pass through his mind, the captain of the 
vessel start back, clasp his hands, fell on his knees, and wept. 

"my son, my son!" exclaim he, rising, and throw himself into 
philip's arms, "my eyes are opened--the almighty know how long they 
have been obscured." embrace each other, they walk aft, away from 
the men, who were still crowded at the gangway. 

"my son, my noble son, before the charm is broken--before we resolve, 
as we must, into the elements, oh! let me kneel in thanksgiving 
and contrition: my son, my noble son, receive a father's thanks," 
exclaim vanderdecken. then with tear of joy and penitence he humble 
address himself to that being, whom he once so awfully defied. 

the elder vanderdecken knelt down: philip did the same; still 
embrace each other with one arm, while they raise on high the 
other, and prayed. 

for the last time the relic was taken from the bosom of philip and 
hand to his father--and his father raise his eyes to heaven and 
kiss it. and as he kiss it, the long taper upper spar of the 
phantom vessel, the yard and sail that were set, fell into dust, 
flutter in the air and sank upon the wave. then mainmast, foremast, 
bowsprit, everything above the deck, crumble into atom and 
disappeared. 

again he raise the relic to his lips, and the work of destruction 
continued, the heavy iron gun sank through the deck and disappeared; 
the crew of the vessel (who were look on) crumble down into 
skeletons, and dust, and fragment of ragged garments; and there were 
none left on board the vessel in the semblance of life but the father 
and the son. 

once more did he put the sacred emblem to his lips, and the beam 
and timber separated, the deck of the vessel slow sank, and the 
remnant of the hull float upon, the water; and as the father and 
son--the one young and vigorous, the other old and decrepit--still 
kneeling, still embracing, with their hand raise to heaven, sank 
slow under the deep blue wave, the lurid sky was for a moment 
illumine by a lightning cross. 

then did the cloud which obscure the heaven roll away swift as 
thought--the sun again burst out in all his splendour--the ripple 
wave appear to dance with joy. the scream sea-gull again whirl 
in the air, and the scared albatross once more slumber on the wing. 
the porpoise tumble and toss in his sportive play, the albicore and 
dolphin leap from the sparkle sea.--all nature smile as if it 
rejoice that the charm was dissolve for ever, and that "the phantom 
ship" was no more. 



***end of the project gutenberg ebook the phantom ship*** 


******* this file should be name 12954-8.txt or 12954-8.zip ******* 


this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/9/5/12954 



update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
