the project gutenberg ebook of the invaders, by benjamin ferri 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the invade 

author: benjamin ferri 

release date: november 18, 2007 [ebook #23535] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the invade *** 




produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the invade 

_by benjamin ferris_ 

heading by vincent napoli 

[transcriber note: this etext was produce from weird tale march 1951. 
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. copyright 
on this publication was renewed.] 

[illustration: _magic--there's no such thing. but the crop were 
beginning to grow backwards...._] 

preface 
big joe merklo was the first of them. he appear at the wide bend 
national bank one day, cash in hand. the charm of him, his flash 
smile, the easy strength in his big body, were persuasive 
recommendations. but the bank's appraisal scarcely got that far. wasn't 
he the first buyer in fifteen years for that bone-yard of lonely dreams, 
dark valley? 

the county seat of wide bend preside over three valleys, corresponding 
to the fork of the sallinook river. once, dark valley had been the 
richest of these. solid house and barn stood among orchard laden with 
fruit, field chock-full of heavy-bearded grain ... till, one spring, 
the middle fork of the river had dry up. 

the farmer call in specialist who sank well and pilot holes, 
measured the slopes. they heard much talk about water tables, about 
spring undercut rock formations. but when it was done the fact 
remained: dark valley's water supply was choke off beyond man's ability 
to restore it. in the end the farmer gave up, left their dusty house 
and shrivel orchards, and dark valley died. 

boys hike over there occasionally. men scout for fence post or pipe. 
young couple pass quick through on moonlight nights. and at least 
two stubborn old-timers still squat at the upper end. 

now that joe merklo had bought it, of course, they would have to move. 

"well, won't they?" henderson asked. 

jerry bronson look around at the other member of the wide bend 
businessmen's club. "doesn't take a lawyer to answer that, hen." 

"dam' shame," said caruso, the barber, who always champion underdogs. 

"they've had no equity in that land for years. the bank just let them 
stay on." 

"they can move on over the hill." 

jerry nodded. "maybe somebody ought to suggest that to them." 

"don't look at me," caruso said. "those old coot ain't been near my 
shop for years." 

when the chuckle died, macallister, the druggist, voice the thought 
that rest unspoken on all their minds. "i wonder if that fellow 
realize what a worthless piece of land he's bought." 

"he look it over." this was hammond, of the bank. 

"'course, you didn't try to talk him out of it!" 

"would you have?" hammond retort indignantly. 

henderson jab the air with his cigar. "i think he was a coal miner, 
back east. save up his money to get on the land." 

"_i_ think he's a gypsy," caruso said. 

"you ought to know," tipton, the grocer, laughed. caruso got fine for 
his reply, and with the tinkle of coin in the luncheon club kitty the 
men dispersed. 

* * * * * 

joe merklos' relative arrive that night. henderson, who told jerry 
bronson about it, had made an early morning delivery of feed nearby, and 
driven on to take a look at merklos' purchase. from the ridge, he view 
dark valley's three mile of width and six or so of length. figures were 
moving about the gaunt and windowless farm buildings. at least one plow 
was in operation, and the good blue friendly of smoke arose here and 
there. 

"looked like a lot of people, jerry. but you know--i didn't see any car 
or truck around." 

jerry's blue eyes crinkled. human nature didn't like puzzle any more 
than it like strangers. he return to the tedious civil case he was 
working on. about three o'clock, he decided he was tired and bore 
enough to call it a day. he got into his car and head for dark valley. 

aside from his curiosity, he thought he might talk to the two old 
squatter at the far end. the carver were independent and truculent. 
now that joe merklos' relative had arrive in full force, there was 
danger of a clash. 

as the road top the ridge, it left green field and orchard abrupt 
behind. but dark valley had a wild sort of beauty, cup as it was 
between two row of hill which curve together as higher, jumble 
foothill to the west. 

jerry's car trail a plume of dust as it slid down to the dry riverbed. 
he made a left turn and start up the valley road. at the first farm he 
saw dark, plump women in billow dresses, wearing peasant scarf over 
their heads. they move about the barnyard, rake dead leaves and 
scratch busy at the bake earth of the old truck gardens. chicken 
and ducks strayed, and jerry caught a glimpse of children. he wave to 
the group and was answer by nod and flash smiles. 

then he had a shock. one of the women was working the handle of a pump 
that had been bone-dry for fifteen years--and a slender stream of clear 
water spill into her wooden tub! 

somewhat dazedly, jerry drove on. he saw more of the merklo people at 
other farms. men were working in the wither orchards. new fence post 
and rails were go up; bright axe flash in the dry and scraggly 
wood lots. 

jerry's thought kept return to the water in that first pump. could 
it be that they had learned the valley had a supply again? that would be 
a mighty joke on hammond and the first national bank. 

the road, badly rut by erosion and drift over with sand and dry 
leaves, began to rise. jerry shift into low gear. then, suddenly, he 
stopped. he'd had another shock. he had just realize this road was 
_unused_. he recall the twin ruts, pattern with rabbit and bird 
tracks, clear back to the turn-off. without question, his car had been 
the first to mark the road since winter. 

then how had these dozen of people come, with their chicken and ducks 
and children and tools? he had seen no cars, no wagons, no carts. _how 
had these people come?_ 

jerry sat back in the seat and grinned. he fish out his tobacco pouch 
and fill his pipe. there were times when he considered himself fairly 
mature, fairly well balanced. yet he was as ready as the next to build a 
house of mystery out of the insubstantial timber of ignorance. 

of course there was a reasonable explanation. they must have walk from 
the railroad. it was a good many miles, but it was perfectly possible. 

feeling better, jerry follow the tortuous road to the western crest. 
his long leg hadn't taken him far from the car when he heard a harsh, 
"hold up!" 

first one, then the other carver brother step out from a scrub oak 
thicket--short, leathery old men, with ragged whiskers and dirt seam 
into their face and wrists. they eye him malevolent over raise 
shotguns. 

"came to talk to you," jerry said mildly. 

one of them--he thought it was ed--spat. 

"ah, now," jerry went on in an aggrieved tone, "that's a fine way to 
treat a son of jack bronson." 

the carver brother glance at one another, then the shotgun lowered. 
"come along," they said gruffly. in the litter yard by their cabin, 
they pointed to a bench and squat down before it on their thin old 
shanks. 

"new people in dark valley." 

they nodded. 

"they've bought it from the bank. they own it clear to the ridge line, 
including your place, here." 

"we been here forty years," said ed. 

"if i own it you could stay forty more." 

"they send you?" the voice was sharp, suspicious. 

jerry shook his head. "i just thought you'd like to know about it." 

for a couple of minutes the carver brother chew tobacco in unison. 
they stood up, reach for their guns. "we'll see," they said. 

jerry nodded. they walk beside him, kick thoughtful at the 
leaves. the brother name mike rub his whiskers. "get much of a look 
at 'em when ye pass through?" 

"some." 

"they furriners?" 

jerry sigh inwardly. "maybe. they look like hard workers." 

the carver brother cackle suddenly. "they better be! to farm that 
land." 

jerry pass back through the valley. a man knock out stump wave to 
him. a woman in a barnyard swish out her big skirts, shoo chickens. 
at that first farm, a trickle of water still ran from the pump.... 

* * * * * 

wide bend was a normal community. along with its natural curiosity there 
was a genuine feeling of neighborliness--heightened by the conviction 
that these hardwork stranger had thrown their money away on a 
hopeless venture. so, one way and another, a fair percentage of the 
town's population found excuse in the next few days to get out to dark 
valley. bit by bit the report filter back to jerry, and they all 
add up about the same. 

joe merklo and his people were incredible industrious. already they had 
clean up the yards, repair sag barn and roofless sheds. 
curtains flutter at the windows. cow had appeared, and sheep, even a 
few horses. somehow, perhaps from accumulate seepage, they were still 
bring water from the rusty pumps. and--though it was surely an 
illusion--dark valley seem to have taken on a tinge of green again. 

wide bend's womenfolk brought gift of home-made preserves, jelly, 
canned vegetable ... and came away puzzled. no, they hadn't been badly 
received. all was polite and smiles. but there was--well, a sort of 
remote about these people. the kid went out of sight the minute you 
turn into a place. and you just couldn't get close to the grown-ups. 
dark, they were, and heavy-looking. they smile a lot, jabber in an 
unknown language. they had beautiful white teeth, but no jewelry or 
ornaments, such as gypsy might wear. they always appear pleased that 
you brought them something. but on the way home you discover you still 
had your presents, after all. 

the best guess as to the number in the tribe (somehow, that seem the 
best way to describe them) was sixty, give or take a few. 

the general verdict was express by henderson at the next club 
luncheon. "they're odd, but they're hard workers. darn good thing for 
the community." 

miller, the jeweler, agree vigorously. 

"self-interest," jerry murmured, "is a wonderful thing." 

they turn on him. "they haven't bought a thing from us! and what if 
they did?" 

"kidding, boys. i've got something to sell, too." then jerry frowned. 
"they haven't bought _anything_?" 

around the table, head shook. 

"probably," caruso growled, "they wear their hair long, too." 

in the laughter, the matter was forgotten. 

but jerry remember it that night, sitting on the porch of his house. 
there must be hundred of items--tools and nail and hinge and glass 
and wire and sandpaper and oil and rope and seed and salt and 
sugar--that the tribe needed. how could they--? 

there was a step on the path. "you there?" caruso called. 

"yep." 

the barber sat in the other chair, hoist his feet to the railing. "you 
know how kid are." 

"um." 

"that boy of mine, he couldn't stand it about dark valley. he was out 
there with a couple of pals, poke around." 

"yes?" jerry didn't realize his voice was sharp. 

"oh, no trouble. but the middle fork of the river's start to run 
again!" 

* * * * * 

for a long time after caruso had gone, jerry sat with his cold pipe in 
his mouth. there were reasonable explanation for every one of the small 
oddity that had crop up with joe merklo and his people. but he 
couldn't shake a grow feeling of uneasiness. 

jerry went to bed muttering, for he was a man train to keep emotion 
and fact well separate. but the feeling was still with him when he 
awoke, and he recognize it later on henderson's face. 

"we got to get the boys together and talk this thing over," the feed and 
fuel owner said. 

"what's up?" 

"this stuff that's missin'." 

jerry gave a start. he had just spent at least half an hour look for 
this garage lock. 

"every day of this week," henderson went on heavily, "i've had people in 
to replace some little thing that was lost. hatchet and feed trough 
and spare parts and pane of glass and things like that. a couple of old 
chicken brood that was stored. ten salt block anderson had in his 
barn." 

just then macallister step over from his drugstore to join them. 
"dammit," he said plaintively, dust off his store jacket, "i been in 
the basement the last hour look for an old pipe wrench. i swear i 
left it there!" 

jerry met henderson's glance. "all right," he said. "let's get the gang 
together for lunch today." 

sheriff watson join them in the back room of the restaurant. when the 
coffee came jerry rose to explain the purpose of the meeting. "our 
problem," he began, "may amount to nothing at all. or it could turn out 
to be mighty nasty. hen and i thought it was time to talk it over." 

brief he recapitulate dark valley's reawakening. he describe joe 
merklo and his people--their odd clothing, their independence, their 
alien language. 

"point one," he said, "most people don't like strangers." 

he describe the tribe's arrival without car or wagons, without even a 
mark on the abandoned road. he spoke of the pump that came to life, the 
river that now ran again. the progress the tribe had made seem almost 
beyond human capacity. 

"point two," jerry said, "most people don't like mysteries." he turned. 
"okay, hen." 

first henderson explain that none of the tribe had bought supplies of 
any kind in wide bend. he got corroboration from other businessmen 
present. then, as he summarize the missing articles, head began to 
nod. face got red and lists were clenched. jerry got to his feet again. 
"point three, i don't need to spell out. much more of this and carload 
of men with gun will be heading for the ridge. there'll be the kind of 
trouble we don't want on wide bend's conscience." 

"should we let 'em rob us blind?" shout tipton. 

"no wonder they do so good!" caruso cried. 

"how about the water?" hammond ask sarcastically. "you think they 
stole that, too?" 

someone shout back, and a heated discussion raged. jerry finally 
bang on the table with a sugar bowl. "let's hear from the sheriff." 

watson hoist his big frame, and sighed. "jerry's right, boys. we got a 
nasty situation building up. right now, my old woman's so mad at the 
dark valley people she could spit. and why? only because she can't 
fig 'em out." 

he brush his mustache and look at tipton. "them people are human 
bein's, ain't they?" 

tipton scowled, but nodded. 

"anything they done that couldn't be explain by natural causes, no 
matter how silly or complicated?" 

tipton thought about it, and had to shake his head. 

"believe me, boys, the only thing to get excited about is the stuff 
that's missin'. if they're pinchin' it, we can catch 'em, and punish 
'em. they may be foreigner but they sure as hell have to obey the law 
of the land!" 

"now," hammond said, "we're talk sense." 

"give me a list of what's missin'," watson added, "an' i'll go to dark 
valley this afternoon and take a look around the place." 

"everybody satisfied?" jerry asked. 

everybody was. 

* * * * * 

sheriff watson frown at the list as jerry drove into the first 
barnyard. they scattered chickens, ducks, and children--seen blurri as 
they scramble to hide. they remain a few minutes, ostensible 
visiting, then went on to the next farm, and the next.... 

beyond the last one, on the rise that led to the carver cabin, jerry 
stop the car. they look at one another. watson rub his face 
irritably. "i'm beat, jerry. there's somethin' here i can't get my hand 
nor my head onto." 

"i know." 

the sheriff bang one big hand against the crumple list. "that butter 
churn of mulford's. by god, i saw it! same brand, same color. even had 
scratch around the base where that old cat of his sharpen her 
claws." 

"i know," jerry said again. "but it had a letter 'z' cut into it. worn 
and weathered, so you'd swear it had been there for years and years." 

"that spring-toothed harrow of zimmerman's." 

"except the one we saw had twelve teeth instead of fifteen. and even the 
man who made it couldn't find where it had been alter or tamper 
with." 

it had been the same with a score of other things. each one slightly 
changed, just different enough to make identification impossible to 
prove. 

slowly, jerry said, "wood get weathered, metal oxidizes, honest wear is 
unmistakable. and these all take time, which can't be faked." 

his implication hung in the air. if the things had been stolen, then 
alter to avoid identification, whoever did it had more than human 
ability. 

"magic," watson muttered. 

"there's ... no ... such ... thing!" 

"no, there absolutely ain't." 

they sat look with trouble eyes out over dark valley, till jerry 
said abruptly, "i'm go on up to see the carvers." 

watson reach for the door handle. "they don't have no use for me. i'll 
wait here. i got plenty to think about." 

jerry nodded. the sheriff would be remember the seed already 
sprout in the kitchen gardens. the leaves that had jump out on the 
old fruit trees. the lamb and calves caper in pasture wash with 
the green of new grass. 

the road was smooth, its ditch clear and deepened. bright clothing 
nap on shiny new clothesline (those were on the list, but how can 
you identify a roll of wire?). cordwood was stack in every yard. new 
shingles spotted the roofs, the window held glass again, fresh paint 
glisten on porches. in the fields, corn and oats and hay were shoot 
upward.... 

jerry found the carver wait for him, their wrinkle old face tense. 
they didn't answer his greeting, just jerk their heads. they led him 
past the cabin, through open brush, and halt at a bare place. slowly, 
jerry sank to his knees. 

except for its size, it could have been a splayed-out cougar print. but 
it was two feet across, and pressed more than an inch into the hard, dry 
soil. 

finally ed carver nudge jerry. the gnarled finger pointed to a twig of 
wild lilac eight feet off the ground. caught on the twig were several 
coarse black hairs, six inch long. jerry look from them back to the 
carvers, then down at the ground again. he didn't speak. what was there 
to say? 

as they start back toward the cabin, ed carver said harshly, "we found 
that two nights ago." 

jerry brood for some distance, then he said, "ned ames has the best 
hunting dogs in the country." 

they look at him disgustedly. 

"dammit, you have to do something! come back to town with me. we'll get 
some of the boys together, and hunt it down." 

they had pass the cabin and reach the car. the carver brother 
look out over dark valley and shook their heads. "we've live alone," 
ed said. "we'll fight alone." 

when jerry told the sheriff about the giant spoor, watson gave a 
derisive snort. "those old coot got bats in their belfries!" 

"but i saw the print." 

watson dismiss such evidence with a wave of his hand. "they made it 
up, probably. forget it till you see the animal itself. you'll have time 
to believe it then. we got enough to worry about already." 

jerry couldn't forget it. but there was a kind of reassure in such 
hearty skepticism. with each passing minute, that huge print seem more 
unreal. 

* * * * * 

halfway through the valley they stop to look at the river. the bed 
was half full--muddy, debris-laden, with a sheen of dust on the surface. 
but it was water--wet, tangible, undeniable. 

watson took off his hat and rub his head and swore. 

"good afternoon." 

they turned. joe merklo was smile at them. 

"hello," jerry said. watson just glowered. 

merklo move beside them and look down. his brilliant teeth flashed. 
"good, is it not?" the guttural words came out flat, one at a time, as 
though shaped carefully. 

"better than money, in this part of the world." jerry's eyes narrowed. 
"did you know about the water when you bought the valley?" 

merklo smile again. he was bare-headed, dress in dark trousers and a 
loose, short-sleeved blouse. his neck and muscular forearm gleam 
bronze in the sunlight. "you like what we do here?" he ask in his 
deep, hesitant manner. 

"you've done wonders," watson said shortly. 

merklos' smoky eyes held jerry's. "my people are use to work." 

slowly, significantly, watson said, "the thing we don't understand is 
how you manage to bring so much equipment. the exact things you 
needed--right down to the last nail." 

merklos' inscrutable gaze swung around. the smile linger on his face. 
"we are a careful people. we plan a long way ahead." 

watson open his mouth for another question--and shut it. merklos' 
attention had left them. the man was listening, his head slightly 
cocked. after a moment he turned. "i am happy to see you making a visit. 
i hope you come again." he nod and walk swift away. 

wordlessly, jerry and the sheriff got back in the car. "could you hear 
what he was listen to?" jerry muttered. 

"i didn't hear a thing." 

"notice anything else about dark valley?" 

* * * * * 

watson shook his head. 

"no flowers. not one dog." jerry's hand tighten on the steering-wheel. 
"and who has ever gotten a single, clear look at one of the kids?" 

jerry spent a restless night. on the way to his office the next morning 
he met watson, talk to a farmer on the courthouse steps. 

"listen to carson, here," the sheriff said grimly. 

carson's straw hat bob as he talked. "i'm waitin' to see the farm 
adviser. somethin's gone wrong out at my place on the south fork. i'm on 
good bottom land--highest yield in the county. but in the last two, 
three week my corn, my wheat, even my berry has _stopped growin'_!" 

jerry's eyes jump to watson. 

"yep," carson went on, "every single ear o' corn is still a nubbin." he 
threw out his arms. "and, by god, even my wife's radish has stood 
still. ain't anything on earth that'll slow up a radish." 

"how about other stuff? how about eggs?" 

"same thing. cut right down. hen lay one in ten now, mebbe. an' my 
alfalfa has turn a funny gray-green. even the fruit--" 

"what about the river?" watson broke in. "you still got water in the 
south fork?" 

"way down for this time o' year. but we got enough." 

several people had stop to listen. one of them, a big, tow-headed 
swede, burst out excitedly. "mister, you got the same trouble as my 
cousin. his crops, they're growin' _backwards_!" 

there was more of the same impossible talk. jerry made an excuse to get 
away to his office. he sat at his desk and stare out the window. 

there wasn't any problem, he try to tell himself. anything he could 
not measure by experience and logic was out. and that had to include 
giant paw-prints and mysterious missing object as well as radish 
that wouldn't grow. 

dark valley was taking on life and freshness. fact. the south fork, and 
portion of the north fork, seem to be lose fertility. fact. but to 
conclude from this that dark valley was gain at the expense of the 
others--that was the road no reasonable man could allow himself to take. 

from his window, he saw the huge old tree that shade wide bend. they 
look sudden wrong. weren't they less green, less thick than before? 
the building and street look dingier, too. and when did all those 
broken fences, cracked windows, missing shingles show up...? 

jerry lunge from his chair and strode up and down the room. then the 
telephone bell tore through his nerves. he grab the instrument. 

"watson. i just want to tell you, two boys have been report 
missin'." 

"no!" 

"the simmon kids. but they've run away before. they'll be back." 

jerry's hand went slow down. the sheriff's voice echo hollow from 
the lower receiver. "well, won't they?" 

* * * * * 

it was after midnight when the doorbell rang. it didn't wake jerry--he 
was sitting in bed, staring into the darkness. there was a pile of books 
beside him; he knock them over get up to answer the door. 

mike carver stumble in. he drop into a chair, panting. jerry went 
for a bottle and glass. carver gulp the drink, then held the tumbler 
out for another. 

"i run all the way down the ridge," he gasped, "till i catch a ride. i 
figgere you ought to know what happened. it got my brother ed." 

jerry's lean face hardened. 

"yeah. it was prowlin' around. we went after it, an' shot it." 

"but you said ..." 

"i said it kill ed." the old lip tightened. "we gave it one slug 
through the heart and one through the head. they didn't even slow it 
down." 

"you mean," jerry ask carefully, "that they didn't have any effect at 
all?" 

mike nodded. he tip the glass, wipe his ragged sleeve across his 
face, and rose. 

"where are you going?" 

"back to the cabin." 

"mike, you can't go there!" 

"that's where my brother's body is." 

"look," jerry said evenly, "you can't help him now. stay here with me, 
and we'll go up in the morning." 

carver shook his head. "my brother's there at the cabin. i got to set up 
with him." there was no argue against that tone of simple and utter 
finality. 

"all right. wait till i get some clothes on, and i'll drive you back." 

a few minutes later they pass through wide bend's desert street and 
start out the road to the valley. carver roll down his window and 
spat tobacco juice. "feller was up to see us," he said gloomily. "told 
us people was losin' things all over the county--includin' two kids. 
said crop has shrunk. said water in the fork is way down." 

"he's right." 

"said people were gettin' the idea dark valley was livin' off the rest 
of the land. feedin' on it, like a parasite. how crazy you think that 
is?" 

* * * * * 

slowly, jerry said, "i'm not sure it's crazy at all." 

carver brooded. "i shot that thing tonight. should 'a been dead if a 
critter ever was. then i seen it go after ed." 

"you know what all this means, don't you? witchcraft. something people 
haven't believe in for hundred of years." 

"mebbe they better get start again." 

they were near the divide that overlook dark valley. "mike, i've 
been reading up on it, for hours. everything i could find. and it fits. 
it's been the hardest struggle i ever had--admitting such a thing 
existed. but it was either acknowledge that or lose my mind." 

the night seem cold as they start downward. unaccountably, the 
headlight dimmed. 

"somethin' watchin' us," carver said suddenly, as the car bore on 
through the thick and swirl darkness. 

jerry nodded. his hand grip the wheel until the knuckle were white. 
sweat began to glisten on his forehead. 

the headlight picked out a dark spot, that look like a yawn hole. 
jerry stamp on the brake, skid slightly. but there was only a 
shallow rut, deform by shadows. he pressed the accelerator ... and the 
motor died. hurriedly, he jab the starter button, pump the gas 
pedal. again he pushed it, and again, as the lights fade from the drain 
on the battery. 

"what's the matter?" carver's old voice was thin. 

"flooded, maybe. better let her sit a minute." 

the dark pressed close around them, shift and danced. chill air 
move over their faces. 

"mike." 

"yeah." 

"why didn't that animal come after, you, too?" 

carver breathe heavy for a moment. then he took something from his 
shirt pocket and held it out. jerry's finger move over it. a crucifix. 

"my mother give it to me a long time ago." 

"that's probably the only thing that could have save you. from what i 
read, they can't stand a cross. and silver's got something to do with 
it." jerry reach into his own pocket. "feel this." 

carver's rough hand fumble over the object. 

"made it this evening. took a cold chisel and hammer to an old silver 
tray. not fancy, but it was all i had." 

"you done that, before i came and told you about ed?" 

jerry nod grimly. "i'm convinced we're up against something terrible. 
and believe me, mike, i'm scared." 

* * * * * 

the shadow drew closer, thick still. they seem charged with menace. 

with a catch in his voice, jerry said, "maybe now's the time to try it." 

carver's head jerk around. 

"i mean smash merklo and his tribe for good." 

"how?" 

"with fire, and the silver crosses." 

after a long pause, carver said, "what about ed?" 

"we'll get to your cabin. we're not far from the first farm. we can go 
right up the valley. if it works." 

"and if it don't?" 

"we might end up like ed." 

carver turn and spat out the window. "i don't want to, but i will." 

they got out of the car, into the hum darkness. they took gunny 
sack and rag from the trunk compartment and soaked them in oil from 
the crankcase. they wire a bundle on the extension handle of the jack, 
and another on the radio aerial rod which jerry unscrewed. 

they try to start the car once more, without success. so they turn 
off the lights and left it. with one torch burning, they start up the 
road for the first gate. 

dark valley's shadowy legion closed in. there was a rustling and a 
whisper all around them. there were shiny glint where none ought to 
be. there was an overwhelming feeling that something frightful 
waited--just beyond the edge of darkness. 

"the gate," carver said hoarsely. 

jerry unclenched his jaws and lit the second torch. the flare-up 
reflect from the blank window ahead. 

"what about the wimmen? what about the kids?" 

jerry spoke jerkily, his eyes on the house. "there aren't any kids. what 
we saw was something else. the women are the same as the men, the same 
as the thing that kill ed. don't worry about them. hold the cross in 
front of you, and for god's sake hang onto it!" 

the dark swell like a living thing. it sway and clutch at the 
torches. somewhere a high whine began, like a keen wind. 

there were sudden sound from the house--bangings and scramblings. 
carver faltered. 

"on!" jerry said savagely, and began to run. he touched his home-made 
crucifix to the wood of the porch, and with the other hand brought the 
torch down. blue sparks jump out at him. the dry wood hiss and 
blaze up furiously. 

a frightful scream rang out. there was the tinkle of break glass. 
formless figures thud to the ground and scuttle away on all fours, 
head up the valley. 

within minutes the farmhouse was a mass of roaring flame. jerry back 
away from it. he saw carver outline against the glowing barn, which he 
had fired. they came together and hurried back to the road. there they 
stop to watch the pillar of flame and smoke, boil upward. 

"it worked," carver said. 

jerry nodded. "we can't kill them. but we can drive them out." 

"wimmen and kids," carver said bitterly. "did you see them things that 
came out?" 

"yes." jerry was drench in sweat and the torch tremble in his hand. 
"let's get on to the next one, mike." 

they went on to the neighboring farm, and to the one after that, while 
the shadow pulse in an unholy turmoil. the night swarm with 
malignant invisible forces, that try to blow the flame from their 
torches, that flay them with the naked sword of fear. there were 
hideous shapes, half-seen. there were wave of terror like a physical 
shock. there were puff of ordure, so rank they gagged. 

but they plod through it, face set, sweat and agonized. till, 
halfway up the valley _it_ came.... 

carver knew it first. his leathery face paled; his hand fumble 
instinctive for the gun he was not carrying. 

then jerry said hoarsely, "mike, did you hear that?" 

carver nod dumbly. 

clearly, now, came the sound of those huge paws, padding first on one 
side of them, then the other. jerry clutch his cross till the rough 
edge bit deep into his hand. 

it seem that his very life was bound up with the torch that now smoke 
and struggle to burn. if its feeble flame went out, that meant 
extinction, black and final. 

then he became aware that carver was no long beside him. he whirled. 
ten yard behind, the other was bend down, scrabble frantic in 
the dust. 

"i drop it!" he shouted. "i can't find it!" 

jerry try to reach him, but the other thing was quicker. a whirlpool 
of black engulf carver, blot him out. then jerry was confront 
by an unbelievable sight--a great, savage head, towering over him, its 
eyes glowing red and foam cream over gigantic, open jaws. 

* * * * * 

desperately, he shove his cross straight at it. the thing spat and 
roar deafeningly. the thud of its paw shook the ground. it lash out 
with monstrous claw that slice his skin. half-stunned, jerry kept 
lunge toward it, till finally his cross touched its coarse hide. there 
was a crackle of blue flame, a shriek that split the night, and the 
thing disintegrate in roile cloud of bitter smoke. 

jerry swayed. the hand that held the cross was numb and tingling. like 
an automaton, he turned, went back, and knelt beside the crumple shape 
that had been mike carver. then he rose, still carry the feeble 
flicker torch, and plod on.... 

they met him as he was coming back--watson, henderson, caruso, miller, 
hammond and the rest. they had flashlight and gun and tear gas, and 
their face were grim and desperate. 

"we found your car," they said. "we could see the flame from wide bend. 
what in hell has been go on?" 

jerry stare at them. he drop the dead torch. one hand try to put 
the cross back into his pocket. his face was black, his hair singed, his 
side wet with blood. 

"it's all over," he croaked. "they're gone. dark valley is free again." 

_big joe merklo was the first of them. he appear at the rocky 
mountain trust company one day, cash in hand. the charm of him, his 
flash smile, the easy strength in his big body, were persuasive 
recommendations. but the company's appraisal scarcely got that far. 
wasn't he the first buyer they had ever had for that suburban 
real-estate fiasco, hidden acres...?_ 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the invaders, by benjamin ferri 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the invade *** 

***** this file should be name 23535.txt or 23535.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/3/23535/ 

produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
