the project gutenberg ebook of the monster, by s. m. tenneshaw 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the monster 

author: s. m. tenneshaw 

release date: march 25, 2008 [ebook #24913] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the monster *** 




produce by greg weeks, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









the monster 

by s. m. tenneshaw 


what will cosmic ray do to a living organism? 
will they destroy life, or produce immortality? 
the eminent dr. blair gaddon thought he knew ... 

preface 
fred trent pull his coupe into the curb and lean his head out the 
open window beside him. 

"hi, joan, need any help?" 

he call to a trim-looking girl in a nurse's uniform. joan drake was 
holding on to a leash with both hands, and her slender body was tug 
against the leash as she strained against the pull of a great dane on 
the other end. 

she look over her shoulder as trent call out, her blonde hair 
glint in the warm afternoon sunlight. blue eyes smile an impish 
greeting at him. 

"hello, fred. no thanks. brutu and i get along famously." 

trent open the car door and got out. he walk up the sidewalk and 
stood beside the girl. 

[illustration: they watch as white-hot flame shot from the base of 
the cradle rocket. there was a tremendous roaring, and then the rocket 
slow lift upward.] 

"business must be mighty slack for the great gland specialist, stanley 
fenwick. is this all he can find for his pretty nurse to do?" 

the girl sniffed. "walking brutu around has its compensations. at least 
he doesn't get fresh--like some people i know." 

fred grin as he saw the huge dog sudden turn on its leash and raise 
itself off the ground to stick out a long rapier-like tongue and lick 
the girl's cheek before she could move her head away. 

"down, brutus! down!" she call out, half-laughing. 

trent step in and pull the big animal away from the girl, pat 
the dog's head as he did so. 

"what was that you said about get fresh?" trent ask her. "looks to 
me like the dog's life is the best around the fenwick offices." 

"just don't get any ideas!" joan drake shot back. 

"i've already got them," he replied. "which remind me, am i seeing you 
tonight?" 

the girl held a tight grip on the leash and look at him coyly. 

"let's see. we'll take in a movie, stop for a bite to eat at joe's 
hamburger palace, and then drive out to north butte. you'll park the car 
and then you'll ask me when i'm go to quit my job and settle down 
raise a family for you, and i'll say--" 

"you'll say not until i get the biggest scoop in arizona, a big raise, 
and a bonus as a down payment on a house," he complete her sentence. 

"there! you see? we might just as well not have our date. in effect, 
we've had it already." 

he look at her for a long moment, and when he spoke again his voice 
had lost its humorous note. 

"you forgot one very important item. when i ask you that usual question, 
and after you give your usual answer, i'll take you in my arms and tell 
you how much you mean to me, and--" 

"you win," she interrupt him. "i had forgotten about that." 

* * * * * 

the dog start to pull against the leash again and fred reach out to 
help her hold the big animal in check. then she look at him again. 

"what bring you to the outskirts of tucson? don't tell me there's a big 
story break on the edge of town." 

he shook his head. "not exactly. i'm on my way to the rocket research 
prove grounds. just a routine story on the experiment they're go to 
pull off this evening. i've got to interview mathieson, gaddon, and a 
few other scientist on the project." 

the girl laughed. "that's something of a coincidence. dr. blair gaddon 
is in dr. fenwick's office right now." 

fred trent's eyebrow raise in surprise. 

"that so? something wrong with him?" 

"no. he's just have a physical checkup. seem to be worried about his 
heart. dr. fenwick didn't need me since it's a routine job, so i took 
brutu for a walk." 

trent nodded. "that's a bit of luck. i think i'll stick around and give 
gaddon a lift out to the prove grounds. i want to talk to him 
anyway." 

"in that case," the girl replied, "you can give me a hand putt brutu 
back in his kennel. once he get out he's something of a problem." 

fred nodded, taking the leash from her hand and feeling the big dog tug 
against him. 

"never could figure out why fenwick want a big hound like this. seem 
to me a terrier would be more practical." 

"that's a matter of taste," joan answered. "dr. fenwick is very fond of 
brutus--and so am i for that matter. but tell me something about this 
experiment you're covering." 

they had turn in at a large spain type house that trent knew serve 
as a combination living quarters and office for the famous gland 
specialist. he shrugged. 

"don't know much about it myself. they're shoot off this new type 
rocket, a really big affair, loaded with all sort of instruments. some 
sort of experiment with cosmic rays. the rocket will go up to the outer 
layer of the earth's atmosphere, where a clock mechanism will release 
a parachute-attached section contain the instruments. this will float 
back to the surface of the earth. 

"there is one interesting thing about it though. they're also including 
a live animal with the instruments. a cat i believe. they want to see 
what effect the cosmic ray will have on a living creature." 

the girl turn a shock face toward him as they walk up the steps to 
the front door of the house. trent could see a panel in the center of 
the door that open from the inside, and over it, the sign, _doctor is 
in, please ring_. 

"but i think that's positively cruel!" joan drake said earnestly. 
"subjecting an innocent animal to what may be certain death!" 

fred laugh at her concern. "hold on, now. you should be the last one 
to take such an attitude. doesn't medical science experiment on animal 
to find out about human ailments?" 

"that's different," the girl insisted, opening the door and leading the 
way into a long hall. "doctors know what they are doing--but this is a 
sheer waste of life ..." 

* * * * * 

trent let the dog pull him down the hall toward a door at the end which 
he knew open on the backyard where the great dane was kept. 

"seems to me it's much the same thing," he answer her. "scientists 
want to explore the mystery of space, and the only way to do it is 
with an animal. or would you like to make the trip--maybe i can arrange 
it? would make a big story, just the one i've been wait for." 

"i believe you would at that!" she mocked, opening the rear door. 
"here, give me the leash." 

trent hand over the leash to her and watch as she release the huge 
dog. brutu flick out a long tongue once again and caught the girl's 
cheek in a wet caress before she straightened. 

"brutus! now get along with you!" 

the dog took a leisurely bound through the door and into the backyard. 
trent glance through the door at the tall fenced-in yard with the large 
kennel that might well have serve as a small garage. he stood beside 
the girl watch the big animal romp for a few moments, then she shut 
the door and they turn back down the hall. 

"i'll have to go inside now, fred," she said. "if you want to wait for 
gaddon, have a seat. it shouldn't be long." 

she start to turn in at a door marked private, when fred pull her 
gently around and before she could stop him, had kiss her. 

"i was get mighty jealous of brutus. now i feel better." 

"i don't know which of you i prefer," she shot back, then smile and 
pull away from him. 

he watch her open the office door and close it after her. 

* * * * * 

he had lit his second cigarette and gotten halfway through his third 
magazine on the rack beside the chair when the office door open again. 
he heard the pleasant voice of dr. stanley fenwick. 

"if every man had a heart as strong as yours, blair, we wouldn't need 
half the doctor we have." 

then he heard the deep, gruff voice of dr. blair gaddon half laugh. 

"thanks a lot, fenwick. you've taken a load off my mind. goodbye, miss 
drake." 

he heard joan reply and then saw dr. fenwick usher the physicist out 
into the hall. 

trent rose as the two men approached. 

"why, hello, trent," dr. fenwick said. 

trent nod at the tall, white-coated figure of the famous gland 
specialist. 

"afternoon, doctor." 

fenwick smile at him. "don't tell me you're wait to see me?" 

fred shook his head. "not exactly. i was wait to see dr. gaddon 
though. i was on my way out to the prove grounds and i happen to 
stop by and talk to miss drake." he turn to the physicist, a bulky man 
with firm, hard features, who move his large body with an almost 
cat-like grace. 

"i hope you don't mind, dr. gaddon. possibly i can give you a lift back 
out to the base. i'm covering the launch for my paper." 

gaddon smile at him. "but of course i don't mind. and i'll take you up 
on that offer. it'll save me a trip back to town to take one of the 
staff cars." 

* * * * * 

the words had a friendly note to them, as did the smile on gaddon's 
face. and yet, somehow, fred trent found that he did not like this man. 
it was nothing he could put his finger on, nothing he could rationalize, 
unless it was the cold calculating look in the scientist's eyes. 

"that's fine, doctor," trent replied. "shall we go?" 

he turn and said good-bye to fenwick and pass a smile glance at 
the girl. he could see her blush slightly as fenwick caught the glance 
and laughed. then they were out of the house and trent led the way to 
his car. 

inside, he start the motor and drove away. beside him, gaddon lit a 
cigar and blew a long plume of smoke through the open window. 

"you said you want to talk to me, trent?" 

fred nodded. "that's right, doctor. i'm writing up the rocket experiment 
for my paper, and i thought maybe you could give me a few detail of 
interest." he pause for a moment, then asked: "would it be too personal 
to ask if your visit to dr. fenwick had anything to do with the coming 
experiment?" 

gaddon shot a quick glance at him. 

"why do you ask that?" 

fred trent shrugged. "it was just a thought. i heard dr. fenwick talk 
about your heart, but you look pretty healthy to me, so i thought maybe 
it was because fenwick is a gland specialist and you might be talk to 
him about examine the cat after the rocket returns ..." 

gaddon laugh roughly. "a mighty clever reasoning, trent, but not quite 
correct. the fact is, i was seeing the doctor for personal reasons. just 
a physical checkup. it had nothing to do with the rocket experiment or 
the effect of the cosmic ray on the animal we're including in the 
experiment." 

"it was just a thought, doctor," trent replied, as he move the coupe 
out on the open highway away from tucson and toward the rocket prove 
grounds on the desert flat in the distance. 

"so now that we've disposed of that, what else would you like to know?" 
gaddon ask him, a peculiar edge to his voice that trent did not miss. 

"well, i would like to get a first hand bit of information on just 
exactly what you plan to prove with this experiment. if i'm correct, dr. 
mathieson, the head of the project, contend that cosmic ray may be 
lethal, and this experiment is to prove his point." 

the physicist snorted. "it is no secret that mathieson and myself 
disagree violent on that subject." 

trent's eyebrow raised. "is that so? i wasn't aware of it?" 

gaddon paused, seeing that his words had slip out too freely. finally 
he said, "what i meant to say, trent, is that up until now it has not 
been a public issue of disagreement. and i would prefer to have it 
remain a private matter until after the experiment." 

"i see," trent mused. "you have my word that i won't print anything you 
say without your permission. but just what is the difference of opinion 
between you and mathieson?" 

gaddon took a long pull at his cigar and wait a few moments before 
replying. it was apparent to trent that he was debate continue the 
subject with a newspaperman. but trent had gauge the man correctly. 
there was a flair of vanity in gaddon that dated back to his english 
ancestry. trent remember that gaddon, quite a figure in english 
scientific circles, had create a stir when he had come over to the 
united states to assist in rocket research at the arizona prove 
grounds. it seem that gaddon had not want to take a back seat to the 
famed america scientist, mathieson. it had made a few gossip column in 
the newspaper before washington put an official clamp on the matter. 

* * * * * 

now, as trent wait for the englishman to reply, he could almost sense 
the thought that were go through gaddon's mind. the englishman was 
debate whether to take an open stand against the viewpoint of his 
america colleague. but trent felt that the britain stubborn in the 
man would make him reveal his own theories. especially since trent had 
already promise not to print anything without gaddon's permission. that 
would give him an opportunity to gloat safely, should his own idea be 
proven correct. 

"very well, trent, i'll take you at your professional word to keep this 
matter confidential. but if what i contend is correct, you'll have a big 
story to tell." 

trent wait expectantly, not wanting to break the englishman's train of 
thought. 

"the fact is, trent, that mathieson is all wrong. to go even further, 
most of your america scientist don't have the haziest idea of exactly 
what the cosmic ray are. we in britain have made quite exhaustive 
study of the phenomena." 

trent didn't bother to argue with him. he only nod his head. it would 
have been silly, he knew, to contradict gaddon, to tell him that the 
english didn't know a thing more about the cosmic ray than the america 
scientists, that america science had made, and was continual making, 
exhaustive research into that scientific field of study on as great if 
not more so a scale than britain could possibly achieve. it was only 
gaddon's vanity talking, trent knew, so he let him put in the barb of 
ridicule, waiting. 

"i was sent over here, as you may know, to aid in the current 
experiment. to formulate it as a matter of fact. this test is being 
conduct to determine just what effect cosmic ray will have on a 
living organism. as i said, mathieson, and your other scientist are of 
the opinion that the ray are lethal. that they will destroy life. in 
effect, that they are death rays. 

"but i contend that they are wrong. what would you say if i told you 
that cosmic ray are the very source of life and energy in the 
universe?" 

trent whistle judiciously, and noted that gaddon's face smile at the 
apparent surprise trent evinced. 

"you find that a startle statement?" 

trent nodded. "i'd say that it sound like the beginning of a very 
interesting theory." 

"and you would be right," gaddon replied, warm to his subject. "it is 
my contention that the cosmic ray will prove to be the fountain of 
youth that men have sought through the ages. that they will react on the 
gland of a living creature and produce immortality. 

"now take your choice. whose theory would you rather believe? 
mathieson's idiot claim of a death ray, or mine as a source of the 
utmost benefit to science?" 

trent took a moment before replying. when he did so, he spoke with tact, 
and also with the feeling that his trip to fenwick's office had proven 
very valuable. for there was a story here. a big story. 

"i'd say, doctor, that i'd like to believe your theory was correct. but 
isn't it a little premature to be so definite about it?" 

gaddon snorted. "no more premature than mathieson's. and i'll tell you 
something else, trent. you may not realize it, but you're about to take 
part in what may be the biggest story of the century. and when it 
breaks, you'll remember our conversation here. i intend to prove that 
your america scientist are wrong." 

trent notice the personal emphasis that gaddon put in his last 
statement, but he was drawn away from the conversation as he turn the 
coupe into the guarded entrance to the prove grounds. 

there was a moment of credential flash to the guards, and a 
respectful salute to the scientist in the car beside trent. then trent 
move his coupe through the entrance and up the cement roadway to the 
administration building. 

as gaddon got out of the car he turn to trent. 

"i'll leave you here. the member of the press will be conduct to the 
launch site at dusk. i'll see you then. in the meantime, don't forget 
that you've given your word not to release any of the information i've 
given you." 

trent nod and watch him walk away. he follow the englishman with 
his eyes, a frown crossing his face. there was something too cocksure 
about the man. his ridicule of america scientist could be ignored, but 
the way he spoke about his theory, as if it had already been a proven 
fact against the idea of mathieson.... 

a faint chill ran up fred trent's back. he couldn't explain it. but it 
was there. an ominous note of foreboding. 

he shrug it off and left his car to walk toward the administration 
building. 

* * * * * 

the remain hour of the afternoon drag by in a monotony of idle 
speculation. trent listen to the gather newspapermen discuss the 
coming experiment at dusk, accompany them as dr. mathieson, the head 
of the project, conduct them on a tour of the project, to the 
launch site, and then back to the central building. 

the launch site itself had been an impressive sight. the huge 
rockets, much in appearance like the famed v2 of world war ii, but on a 
much large scale, were cradle in their launch platform like some 
huge monster about to be unleash into the unsuspect heavens. 

they had listen as mathieson explain the various number of 
instrument that were being included in the first rocket, to record its 
hurtle trip through the atmosphere to the outermost layer of the 
earth's surface. 

and they had been told of the other, and to the gather newspapermen, 
the most interesting part, the inclusion of a cat in the rocket, in a 
large oxygen-fed chamber, to study the effects of the cosmic ray on a 
living creature. 

then back to the central building. back to wait. and the tension began 
to mount. for the shadow were lengthening, the sun sink behind the 
horizon to the west. the moment was now close at hand. 

* * * * * 

a stocky figure detached itself from the shadow beside the huge bulk of 
the laboratory building and slow edge out into the dusk. 

it pause momentarily, to survey the scene. sharp eyes scan the 
loom rocket and their launch platforms, watchful, alert. they 
finally settled upon the armed guard who walk a measured distance back 
and forth in front of the rockets. then the figure move forward again, 
cautiously, purposefully. 

the distance from the giant rocket shorten gradually, and then the 
guard, turning to retrace his steps, saw the approach figure. 

there was a snap sound as a rifle was brought into position, and a 
rap command bark out. 

"halt! who go there?" 

the shadowy figure halt abrupt a short distance away from the guard. 
and a voice answered. 

"dr. blair gaddon." 

the guard's rifle snap into present arms and then back to the 
soldier's right shoulder. 

"oh, it's you, sir. is there anything wrong? the launch is set for 
fifteen minutes from now, isn't it?" 

gaddon walk slow up to the soldier and the guard could then see his 
face in the thicken shadows. 

"that's right," gaddon replied. "i'm making a last minute inspection." 

the guard nodded. "dr. mathieson and the newspapermen will be along any 
minute, sir?" 

gaddon move close to the soldier, and then sudden his hand came out 
of his coat pocket and there was a gun in it. 

"drop your rifle, soldier. quick!" 

the guard stare at the scientist in shock astonishment. 

"what is this, sir? a gag?" 

gaddon motion with his gun. 

"it is no gag! do as i say--or must i shoot?" 

* * * * * 

there was an ominous note in gaddon's voice. and a strained quality to 
it that told the guard the man meant what he said. very slow the 
soldier remove the rifle from his shoulder and drop it to the 
ground. 

gaddon motion with his gun. 

"now step back! move!" 

the guard move slow back a pace, and then the englishman step 
forward and kick the rifle away from the man. then he motion around 
the rocket. 

"now move over around the side of the number one rocket to the far side 
of number two." 

he watch as the guard turn and began to walk slow around the huge 
base of the wait rocket. he follow the soldier. 

"i don't know what this is all about, dr. gaddon," the guard protested. 
"but i can tell you one thing, you're play with the united states 
government right now. when dr. mathieson hear about this--" 

"when dr. mathieson hear about this, soldier, i'll be a long way from 
here--out at the edge of space itself!" 

gaddon could hear the guard draw in his breath sharply, but the man kept 
walking around to the far side of the second rocket cradle. 

"you can't mean that you're go to go up--" 

the soldier's voice broke off uncertain and gaddon laugh shortly. 

"you are a discerning man, soldier. that is exactly what i intend to do. 
and i warn you, don't make a false move or i'll shoot. my plan are made 
and i intend to carry them out!" 

they had reach the far side of the second rocket now, away from view 
of the rest of the buildings, out of sight. away in the distance the 
faint outline of the great wire fence circle the test grounds 
could be seen, and beyond that, the twinkling lights of tucson, already 
visible in the dusk. 

"this is far enough," gaddon said suddenly. 

he watch as the soldier halted. then gaddon move up quick behind 
the man. before the soldier sense what was about to occur, gaddon's 
hand raise over his head and the butt of the weapon in his hand crash 
against the back of the man's head. 

there was a soft groan in the shadow as the soldier crumple limp to 
the ground. in the silence that followed, gaddon's tense breathing was 
the only sound. he look down at the still body of the unconscious man, 
then he quick turn and retrace his footstep back the way he had 
come. 

when he had reach the far side of the first rocket, he stop before 
the metal steps of the cradle leading up to the closed door of the 
rocket. he look quick about him, making sure that nobody was in 
close proximity, then he threw his gun under the rocket beside the rifle 
of the soldier, and ran up the steps. 

a cool breeze sprang up in the western night and whisper soft around 
gaddon as he fumble for a moment with a switch set in the smooth side 
of the rocket beside the seal door. 

there was a click, finally, and the door slid open. 

gaddon took a last look about him and then quiet slip through the 
opening. a moment later there was the sound of the door slide shut. 

inside the rocket, gaddon lit a small pocket flash and look around 
him. a soft sound struck his ears. the mew sound of a cat. he turn 
the flash on the startle animal and a low laughter crept from his 
throat. 

he move through the large instrument chamber then and sat on the floor 
beside the cat. 

then the flash went out and his laughter came again ... 

* * * * * 

"all right, gentlemen, the time has come. in a few minutes an automatic 
control, synchronize with control in the rocket will be set off in the 
main laboratory building. if we want to watch the launch we'll have 
to hurry." 

fred trent listen to the voice of mathieson, and saw the famed 
america scientist start out of the central lobby toward the launch 
site. the gather newspapermen followed, their voice fill with 
excitement now that the moment had come. 

trent follow along with them, but felt a peculiar tense within 
him. he had been watch for gaddon to make his appearance. but as yet 
the englishman had not show up. was it possible that he wasn't go 
to watch the rocket launching? as trent follow the other out into the 
gathering night, he frown to himself. it was certainly strange. and 
entire unlike the bluster manner gaddon had display on the drive 
back from tucson. or had the man sudden realize that he had made a 
fool of himself and was taking this easy way out? 

but that too didn't seem natural. and trent found himself edging 
forward through the ranks of the newsmen, until he had reach the side 
of mathieson. 

the scientist was talk to one of the journalist as they round the 
corner of the administration building. now the rocket were in sight, 
standing tall and immense in the shadows. 

mathieson held his hand up in a gesture of halt, and the men behind him 
drew into a compact circle. 

fred turn to mathieson. 

"dr. mathieson, isn't dr. gaddon go to be here for the launching?" 

the head of the rocket project turn to trent. fred could see a 
sudden puzzle look in his eyes. 

"yes, that is strange ..." then he laughed. "i suppose gaddon is in the 
laboratory supervise the fire controls. well, if he wants to miss 
the show, that's his fault. he know the schedule." 

trent accept the scientist's words without replying. but he still 
wasn't satisfied. what was it that gaddon had said in the car about the 
biggest story of the year? what had the man meant? question after 
question arose in trent's mind as he stood there, and always the queer 
feeling inside him grew in intensity. he could not place his finger on 
it, but somehow, he knew that something was wrong. 

but then his suspicion were put aside for the moment as he heard 
mathieson say: 

"all right, gentlemen, the time is nearly here. in precisely one minute 
the rocket will be fired." 

the statement was made with a quiet eagerness, and then sudden the 
gather witness grew silent. 

trent's eyes, along with the others, fasten on the loom bulk of the 
wait rocket. 

and the seconds tick off in fred's mind. 

as he count them, he thought that it seem impossible that within a 
very few moments that gigantic hulk of smooth, taper metal would 
dislodge itself from the cradle it rest in with a burst of roaring 
flame. that in another few seconds it would shoot into the blacken 
sky, and in a few short minutes would reach unbelievable heights in the 
heavens, to the edge of space itself before the automatic control 
release the instrument section to be return safe to earth. 

and the seconds passed. 

"time!" 

trent heard the voice of mathieson rap the word out sharply. 

and then there was a roar of sound from the cradle rocket. 

a spear of flame shot from its base, explode the night into a 
brilliant display of pyrotechnics. 

* * * * * 

the roaring grew loud as the tremendous power of the now unleash 
rocket took hold of the night air. fred watch as the flame grew 
white-hot bright, and then he saw the gigantic rocket shudder in its 
cradle. 

the shudder grew into a spasm of movement, and then slowly, but steady 
grow faster, the rocket lift from its cradle. 

fred's eyes were fasten on the rocket now, a feeling of awe sweeping 
through him. he sudden realize how puny man was against the forces 
man could unleash. forces that here were being utilize to scientific 
ends, but forces that upon a moment's notice, could in turn be unleash 
upon the rest of humanity in a burning, devastating terror of death. 

and as the thought flit across his mind, he saw the rocket gather 
speed as it left its cradle. it was now rising in a swift, sure arc, 
lashing into the dark sky like a fury. 

and then the terrible speed of the rocket took hold against the forces 
of gravity and it shot into the heavens, its roaring becoming a fade 
hiss of sound, the brilliant flash of flame from its explode tubes, a 
recede beacon of light that gradual fade to a pinpoint far over 
their heads. 

after the terrific thunder of sound that had accompany the launch 
of the rocket, the sudden silence now was almost palpable. the gather 
witness stood mutely, awe still in their eyes, their ear still 
ring with the sound of the takeoff. 

finally the voice of mathieson broke the quiet night air. 

"well, gentlemen, that's it. tomorrow morning we'll scout the return 
section. it should land somewhere in the open country to the south. 
we've compute that pretty carefully. i guess that's about all for--" 

his voice broke off sudden and fred trent heard what must have 
distracted the scientist. 

a man was shouting from the vicinity of the second rocket, and as they 
looked, a dim figure could be seen staggering away from the side of the 
other rocket, coming slow toward them. 

"good lord!" mathieson breathed. "what's that man do out there? he 
could have been killed!" 

then sudden they saw the staggering figure stumble on the ground. 

and then trent and the other were racing across the ground to the side 
of the fallen man. 

when they reach him, mathieson came forward and knelt beside the 
figure. 

"why, it's one of the guards!" he said in shock surprise. 

and it was then that the strange feeling of foreboding hit fred again. 
as he knelt beside the groan guard, it swept over him in a chill 
wave. he lift the man's head from the ground and the guard open his 
eyes. he recognize the face of mathieson as the scientist look 
anxious in his direction. 

"good heavens, man, what happened? you were ordered to leave five 
minutes before launch time!" 

the guard's mouth open as he struggle to a sitting position. the 
man's hand reach up and touched the back of his head painfully. 

"sir--gaddon--dr. gaddon attack me ..." 

there was a momentary stun silence as the soldier's words sunk in on 
the gather men. 

"_what?_" mathieson's voice was incredulous. 

and as trent watch the soldier nod his head, the suspicion he had felt 
sudden overwhelm him in a grim realization. even as the soldier 
blurt out pain-filled words, trent knew somehow what he was go to 
say. 

"gaddon--he pull a gun on me ... he forced me to the far side of 
number two--he said he was go up in the rocket--he said he had 
plans--then he hit me with the gun ... i came to when the rocket went 
off--i was away from the blasts, lucky ..." 

then the soldier was standing on his feet again, sway as he fought to 
clear his fog senses. 

but trent was no long aware of the soldier. and he saw that mathieson 
was no long look at the guard. for a brief instant their eyes met, 
and trent saw a stun look in the scientist's, then fred's gaze swept 
up into the night. up into the darken sky where, mile above them, the 
hurtle rocket was even now reach the apex of its flight. 

up where a man rode on a perilous trip into the unknown. 

* * * * * 

gaddon hunch in the dark of the rocket, waiting. he had count 
the remain minutes off, one by one. and he knew that finally the 
moment was at hand. 

it would be too late now to stop him. they had not notice his absence, 
and if they had, they would not delay the launch for him. he had 
taken that fact into consideration. 

and now that the moment was close to completion, he felt a glowing sense 
of triumph within him. he would now show those fools, and especially 
mathieson. he would prove conclusive that cosmic ray were what he had 
said they were--a source of the energy of life, a fountain from which 
youth and vitality would pour, making his body immortal. he would go 
down in history as one of the great of science. a man who had risk 
his life to prove his theory. a man who would be the first to achieve 
the goal of the ages, the dream of the philosophers, eternal life. 

the triumph would be his. _all_ his! 

and the rocket tube exploded into sound. 

gaddon tense in the darkness, gripping the safety strap he had 
attach to himself. beside him he felt the cat let out a frightened 
mew sound as the roar of the explode rocket power grew. he felt the 
furry body rubbing against his side, seek sanctuary against this 
dread sound. 

and then the rocket tremble with sudden movement. 

it was slow at first, but then it grew faster, and gaddon felt a faint 
intensity of fear in his temple at the shudder power of that 
movement. 

and then he felt the blood drain from his head, making him faint with 
dizzy as the rocket accelerate sudden into a terrible burst of 
speed. 

he could feel it moving swift through the atmosphere now, feel the 
torture rush of air that whip against the side of the projectile in 
a moan dirge that mingle with the roar of the explode rocket fuel. 

and as the seconds passed, he became accustomed somewhat to the 
increase velocity of the projectile, and the dizzy pass from his 
head. then he became aware of the tremble body of the cat beside him 
and a soft laughter rose in his throat. 

but it die stillborn as the roar of the rocket grew to a thundering 
hiss now in his ears. 

and he felt the cool sweet of the automatic release oxygen fill 
the chamber about him and he drank it into his lung hungrily. 

with each second now, he knew the projectile was racing higher into the 
rarefied atmosphere, heading steady out to where the air of earth 
would be almost non-existent. 

and a grim smile cross his face in the darkness, for he knew that 
shortly the rocket would enter the outermost layer and the cosmic ray 
would play with all their energy upon the projectile. 

and he tense suddenly. 

there was a glow that sprang into being in the chamber about him. 

it was dim at first. but it grew steady in intensity around him, 
revealing the interior of the chamber in its weird light. 

an exultation swept through him then. he knew they had enter the field 
of the cosmic rays, and that the manifestation of light he saw was a 
result of those forces of nature. 

beside him the cat mew plaintive in fear and huddle close against 
gaddon's body. his eyes watch the tiny creature for a moment and then 
swept around the large chamber at the mass instrument panel that were 
recording every minute fraction of a second of the flight. 

and the glow grew. 

and sudden the hiss of the explode rocket fuel began to diminish 
in volume. the apex of the flight was nearly at hand then. 

and the glow around gaddon began to color. from a weird phosphorescent 
white it change to a dull but intense yellow. and with the change, 
a strange feeling crept through his body. 

* * * * * 

it tug at him with invisible hands. it play upon his every nerve, 
his every fiber, the innermost feelings of his sensibility. it grew 
stronger, this alien probe within him, grew as the glow pulse in the 
chamber around him. 

and suddenly, instead of a fierce feeling of triumph, a sense of dread 
swept through him. he fought at the gripping sensation within him, 
try to dispel them, to no avail. they grew stronger, like invisible 
hand that were change the very essence of life inside him. 

and as the thought pass through his sudden torture mind, he 
realize that was exactly what was taking place. a change. a change 
beyond his comprehension, beyond the understanding of any man. beyond-- 

and the whine fearful mew of the cat beside him changed. it tense 
against his body, and the whine in its animal throat became an irate 
hiss. he look down and saw the hackles rising on the back of the cat, 
saw the creature look up at him now, not with wide frightened eyes of 
appeal, but with a ferocity of wild that brought a chill to his 
inner being. 

and the glow grew around him, brilliant yellow in texture now. and with 
the increase brilliance of the light, the feeling of change grew 
within him. 

it was strong than he now. it held his every heartbeat in its pulse 
grip. it throb in his temples, ache to the end of his toes, set 
his body aflame with it. 

and the cat sudden lunge against him, its sharpen claw biting 
through his garment and into his flesh. 

his hand reach down in a quick movement and grip the body of the 
cat. he tore the rake claw away from his body and held the cat in the 
air beside him. 

the creature writhe in his grasp, fight madly to escape. and as his 
grip tighten on the animal, the eyes of the cat sudden lock with 
his. 

he felt the forces within him reach a crescendo at that moment. and his 
body was frozen immobile, his eyes lock on the cat's eyes, burning 
into the animal, the animal burning into him. burning and burning ... 

it could only have been a matter of seconds, he knew. but they were 
seconds that stretch into the farthermost reach of eternity. seconds 
that live a million years and pass in another fleeting instant. 

and then he could move again. 

and he felt strange as he moved. it was as if he was another person, as 
if the body he move was alien to him, as if it had never belong to 
him, to any man, to any thing. 

and his eyes tore away from the now dull expression in the cat's eyes. 
he did not find it strange that this was so. he knew in some inner sense 
that the mighty life force in him had quell the cat. had still the 
fight in its feline eyes. 

and he saw his hand clutch the body of the cat. 

he stare at them for a long disbelieve moment. for they were not the 
hand he had known. they were not the hand of blair gaddon. they were 
not the hand of any man. they were long and taper and claw-like. 
there was dark fuzzy fur around them, fur that was cat-like. 

deep within him a fear struggle upward through his mind. a cold dread 
that forced his lip to move, to utter a gasp of the terror he felt. 

and the sound left his lips. 

it left his lip and echo terribly in his ears. a harsh sound. a 
mew sound. _a cat sound ..._ 

the creature in his grasp struggle feeble then. it was a small 
movement, a movement without vitality, almost without life. and as the 
creature moved, a sense of rage well up inside him. a rage that he 
could not control, an anger that he want to unleash to its fullest. 
and as it took possession of him, the human part of his mind shriek 
and forced words from his lips. 

"_you fiend! you fiend of hell!_" 

and his finger crept up to the neck of the cat and closed in a mighty 
grip. he felt the animal give a single desperate effort in his grasp, 
but his grip tighten and he saw the mouth of the creature open wide 
and heard a faint hiss gasp as its tongue stuck far out and its eyes 
bulge in a last moment of life. 

then the animal lay limp in his claw-like hand and he drop it to the 
floor of the rocket chamber, a growl of frustration leave his lips. 

he stare at the cat's body for a moment, then his finger stole up and 
touched his face. he felt the hairy coarse of it, the furry tingle 
of his once smooth skin. and he scream into the now fade glow that 
he knew was the energy of the cosmic rays. 

"no! no! it can't be true! i haven't _changed_ like this! 
i--i--_meowrr_ ..." 

around him the thunder of the rocket fuel sudden vanish into 
silence, and then the rocket gave a lurch. 

deep within his mind he knew that the instrument section had been 
release from the main body of the projectile, and even now he knew the 
seal chamber was fall back toward the earth, back toward the 
atmosphere where the parachute would take hold and drift the chamber 
safe down to the arizona soil. 

and a dread closed over him in that moment. back to the men. back to the 
things of men. back he must go, a mew thing that was not a man. a 
thing that he felt was taking hold of him, driving the last vestige of 
human instinct from him. 

he fought it. he fought it mew on the floor of the rocket chamber. 

* * * * * 

"he must have gone mad!" 

fred trent pull his gaze from the sky and look with stun eyes at 
the figure of dr. mathieson standing beside him. the scientist was 
tremble with an inner feeling, and his head was shake in disbelief. 

"gaddon! the man is go to his death! it's insane!" 

again mathieson's voice broke the silence in the huddle group of men. 
then the newspapermen came to life and excited talk became a jabber of 
words around them. trent took the arm of mathieson and turn him. he 
try to lead the scientist away from the newspapermen but one of them 
step forward and grab his arm. 

"but why did he do it, doctor? the man must have had a reason!" 

mathieson shook his head numbly. 

"i--i don't know, unless ..." his voice trail off for a moment and 
then he spoke again. "unless he really believe what he said ..." 

"what did he say, doctor?" the newsman asked. 

there was a puzzle note to mathieson's voice as he answered. 

"he disagree with me on the supposed effects of the cosmic rays. it has 
been my contention that they are of lethal effect, and gaddon 
maintain that i was wrong. he kept insist that they were a source 
of life energy. that was why we decided to experiment with an animal--to 
see what effect the ray would have on a living creature ... 

"but this! i never dream of such a possibility--to prove his point he 
sign his own death warrant!" 

"that's a story, doctor, a real story!" 

trent heard the newsman exclaim excitedly. and then it came to him that 
the real story was as yet untold. the real story that had been unfold 
in his car early that day. 

fred move sudden away from the clamor of the newsmen around the 
scientist. he knew what he had to do. 

he hurried across the ground to his wait coupe outside the 
administration building. then he got behind the wheel and start the 
motor. 

he drove to the gate and wait until the guard pass him through, then 
he turn up the road toward tucson. 

as he drove he felt an odd tense sweep through him. for he was 
thinking of what gaddon had said on the drive up to the prove grounds. 
he was remember the man's words on the cosmic ray and the secret of 
eternal life they held. and fred trent knew that this was the biggest 
story. the story that he alone held. it was the big break that he had 
been wait for. it would be his exclusive. the inside, personal story 
of a man who had die to prove his theory. told as gaddon himself had 
related it. with all the vanity of the man, all the pompous assurance he 
had shown. it would make the headline and feature section all over the 
country. the story of a man who had flown to his death in quest of 
immortality. 

and then trent's thought grew sober suddenly. but was he go to his 
death? could he be sure that mathieson was right? that gaddon was 
suffering from some streak of insanity that had manifest itself in 
this final venture of madness? or could it be that gaddon might be 
right, that ... 

trent set his lip and sighed. no, that couldn't be true. it was beyond 
the comprehension of man. 

what matter now was the story. the story that would put his name in a 
thousand papers all over the country. and he thought in that moment of 
joan drake. a warm smile pull at his lip as he thought of her. this 
would force her to quit her job now and marry him. the one condition she 
had made--he had finally overcome. 

he thought of the date he was supposed to have with her that evening. 
it would have to be postpone until later. the story came first. and 
then ... 

he drove his car swift through the outskirts of the city and into the 
main part of town. then he pull up before the offices of the _tucson 
star_ and left his car at the curb. 

* * * * * 

he enter the building, took the elevator to his floor and walk into 
the city room. the clatter of typewriter met his ear and the sound was 
sweet to him in that moment. 

he cross swift to his desk and sat dawn. then he motion to a copy 
boy. the boy came up to his desk. 

"jerry, tell the chief to hold up the form on page one. i've got a 
special--an accident out at the prove grounds. headline copy." 

the youth hurried away toward the office of the city editor, and fred 
picked up his phone and dial a number. he wait a moment and then the 
voice of joan drake came across the wire. 

"dr. fenwick's office." 

"joan, this is fred." 

the girl's voice laugh across the wire. "don't tell me you're plan 
to break our date? just when i get all dress up." 

a smile cross trent's lips. "you're almost psychic, honey. fact is, i 
was calling to tell you i'll be a little late." 

there was a pause and when the girl spoke again there was an injure 
note in her voice. 

"well, that's a fine thing. i wait here deliberate after hour for you 
to pick me up and now you tell me you'll be late! just what's so more 
important than me right now?" 

"i haven't got time to tell you now, joan, but believe me, i've got the 
break of the year. a story that will rock the front page across the 
country. i'll tell you all about it later. you can wait at fenwick's 
place. he won't mind, will he?" 

he could hear the girl sniff on the other end of the wire. 

"i don't suppose he will, but i don't think i can say the same for 
myself." 

"that's a good girl," trent laughed. "just wait for me. it may be an 
hour or so--" 

"an _hour_ or so! what are you writing, the great america novel?" 

he look up and saw the frown face of the city editor approach 
his desk. he spoke hurriedly. 

"i've got to sign off now. the boss is coming up. i'll see you later. 
give my regards to brutus." 

he replace the phone as the editor reach his desk. 

"what's all this about a remake on the front page, trent?" 

fred nodded. "that's right, chief. the biggest story since the atom 
bomb. listen!" 

he gave a short account of what had happened, and then add the 
personal detail of his talk with gaddon. he saw the eyes of the editor 
widen as he went on, and by the time he had finished, there was a look 
of excitement on the editor's face. 

"get to that story, trent. write it hot, and write it fast. i'll hold 
the first form and tear down the front page. stress the human interest 
angle. play it up big. we'll hit the news wire with it after we go to 
press." 

then a smile cross the editor's face. "and you'll get a by-line on 
this, trent, that ought to put you in for some big money. nice work." 

then he turn on his heel and was hurry across the city room toward 
his glassed-in office, holler for a copy boy as he went. 

trent turn back to his desk and slip a sheet of paper into his 
typewriter. there was a tense around his eyes as he brought his 
finger down on the keys. for a moment the old question rose again in 
his mind. _was gaddon right? could it be possible that ..._ 

then he forgot everything but the story. and his finger click against 
the keys, putt it down on paper. 

* * * * * 

the rocket chamber sway gently through the night air, whistle its 
way slow downward, moving more slow as the great parachute above it 
caught in the rapid thicken density of the cabin's atmosphere. 

inside it, the thing that had been gaddon, the thing that was no long 
a man, sat on the floor of the chamber, idle toy with the dead body 
of the cat. 

strange thought course through the mind inside its head. half of the 
mind that belong to gaddon, and half of the mind that was an alien 
thing, a creature unnamed. 

there was a thought of killing and the thought was good. the claw-like 
hand play with the cat's dead body, fondle it idly, wish it 
were still alive so that it might die again. 

and the other part of its mind, the part that still knew it was gaddon, 
rebel against the thought. try to drive it away. try to move that 
alien intelligence into the rear of his consciousness. 

a growl left his lip as he struggle with it. and then a whimper 
sound. 

for now the alien thought of killing and the joy it had experienced as 
the cat die scant moments before, was replace by another thought. a 
thought of loneliness. 

it was a weird feeling, an utter lonely that came from the great 
void beyond man's planet. it cry out in silent protest for it knew it 
was alone in this world of men. 

and it knew it would remain alone, friendless. for what manner of men 
such as the other part of its mind show would react in a friendly 
fashion? where would be their common meeting ground? there could only be 
one, it knew. and that one was fear. fear and the hate that went with 
it. 

a growl left its lip again, and gaddon's thought try to force their 
way through. try and fail again. 

but was it necessary to want companionship? it thought about that for a 
moment. and then the alien beast thought grew sharper, clearer. it knew 
sudden that it did not want man's compassion. it knew that there was 
only one driving thought in it. hate. hate that would inspire fear. fear 
that would freeze its victim into terror. and terror that would be 
replace by death. and then it would be happy again. happy to sit and 
fondle the thing that had been alive. and it knew something else. it 
knew that a hunger would have to be satisfied. a hunger that call for 
flesh. 

deep, primeval thought race through it then. thought that were 
spawn in the ancient jungle of a new and steam world. a world 
where great cat roamed, where scream of cat-rage split the air as 
tawny body arc in lightning leap to land on the tremble body of 
their victims. it was a satisfying thought. a thought that span the 
age of earth, a sense that was inherent in all cat mind through the 
ages. 

and as the thought race through that portion of its mind, the part that 
was gaddon struggle to fight it back. for it realize with a sickness 
that spread horror through it that the thought was part of the animal 
existence that had been create in him. part of the monster that lay by 
instinct in all feline creatures. and gaddon knew that the dead creature 
at his feet, the limp and twist body of the cat, had die long before 
his hand had crush it in their mighty grip. for the essence of that 
life, that animal existence, had been merge with him, fused by a mighty 
source from outer space. 

* * * * * 

and as he struggle with the thought, fought to regain the balance of 
control of the strange body that was now his, the rocket chamber sway 
in a gust of wind from without. and as he clutch the side of the 
chamber with his strong claw-like hands, the chamber gave a bound 
lurch as it struck the ground a glancing blow. 

there was a grating sound as the metal chamber gouge into the earth, 
sank its weight upon the arizona soil. and the thing was thrown 
violent against the side of the chamber. 

then there was quiet again. 

gaddon's mind fought to the fore, took control of that feline man-shape 
that was his, struggle to its feet and move in a lithe bound to the 
opposite side of the chamber. a claw hand reach up where gaddon 
knew the release mechanism of the door lay, and pressed it. 

the door slid back with a slide sound and the cool night air rush in 
upon it. 

gaddon move his cat-body through the opening and bound to the ground 
in a lithe, powerful movement. he felt new muscle react as he landed on 
the ground, and knew that there was a great strength in them. strength 
that was wait to be used. 

and he felt the other thought start to move forward in his mind 
again and he forced them back. he knew he must keep control of that 
mind. for there was something that he must do. 

he thought desperate about it. and the pattern became clear in his 
mind. 

the cosmic rays. the reaction in his body. he had sought immortality in 
the door to outer space and had found a monster wait for him. a force 
that had change his glands, grown the shaggy fur on his body. gland 
that had warp his mind. open an age-old cunning of feline thought. 

_glands._ 

gaddon's thought whip the word. held it. knew it must be the answer. 
and then it found a prayer of hope. and a name that went with that 
thought. 

"fenwick! i've got to reach fenwick before it's too late. _before it's 
too late!_" 

his voice came hoarsely, strange formed. and he look wildly about 
him. he saw, off in the distance, a glowing of lights in the night. and 
he knew somehow that it was the city of tucson. 

and in that city, at its very edge, was a house he must reach. 

he stumble away into the darkness, feeling his limb move rapid 
then, smoothly, covering the ground in great leap strides. 

and though gaddon's thought kept the balance of control, deep inside 
his mind, the monster growl with a cunning laughter ... 

* * * * * 

fred trent pull the last sheet of paper from his typewriter and lean 
back in his chair exhausted. that was it, the end of the story. he wave 
his hand at a copy boy and the boy ran up to take the final page. each 
sheet had been taken like that, to be immediately set in the compose 
room. now it was finished, the story of the year. 

and as trent slow lit a cigarette and inhale deeply, he knew that he 
had done a good job on the story. and a smile cross his face as he 
thought of it. his future was assured now. there could be no more 
stopgaps, no more delay in his plan to marry joan and settle down. and 
the girl would have to agree. for the first time in many months, fred 
felt that his trouble were over with. and the feeling was nice. it 
spread through him and he was content. 

he glance at his wrist watch and frowned. the story had taken long 
than he had anticipated. it was nearly eleven. some of the enthusiasm 
ran out of him as he thought of joan wait for him at fenwick's. he 
could imagine how angry she must be by now. 

he got up quick from his desk and reach for his hat. as he start 
to walk away, the phone on his desk rang. 

he step back and picked up the receiver. 

"trent speaking." 

"_fred!_" 

trent heard his name utter in terror across the wire and he felt a 
chill run through him as he recognize the voice. it was joan drake. 

"joan, what's wrong?" he ask anxiously. 

"fred! come quickly! bring help before it's too late--he'll kill us!" 

"joan! for god's sake, calm down! now what's the matter?" his voice held 
a tense in it as he spoke. 

"it's gaddon, fred! only it isn't gaddon--it's a monster! he'll kill 
us!" 

"_gaddon?_" trent's voice spoke incredulously. "but that's imposs--" 

"oh, fred, hurry-- i--oh--no--no! keep away--" 

he heard the girl scream over the phone then. and he heard something 
else. a growl sound. a sound of animal noise unlike any other sound 
he had ever heard. and then as he shout into the phone: "joan! joan!" 
the line went dead. 

he stood for a moment, staring stupid at the receiver in his hand. 
then he slam it back on its cradle and turned. he nearly knock over 
the copy boy who holler at him. 

"hey, trent, the boss wants you in his office!" 

but he swept by the boy unheeding. he didn't wait for the elevator. he 
took the stairs in leap bounds, and then he was on the main floor of 
the building and out on the street. 

he slam the door of his car shut and start the motor. his hand 
tremble as he mesh the gear and shot the coupe away from the curb. 
then he was moving swift through the traffic. 

as he turn down the street where fenwick's office was, fred trent's 
mind was a whirl of confuse thought. 

there was fear there. fear and dread. and there was puzzlement too. a 
puzzlement that made his brain spin. joan had spoken with terror in her 
voice. terror that had said somebody was go to kill. and joan was 
not a girl to be easily frightened. and she had mention gaddon's 
name. gaddon, the man who had shot into the heaven in an experimental 
rocket. gaddon, who was supposed to be dead. 

* * * * * 

he felt now that same feeling that had crept through him after the 
launching. the feeling that had whisper in his mind that maybe gaddon 
had been right after all. that maybe he wouldn't die. that maybe ... and 
now the dread swept him. for he thought of the sound he had heard over 
the phone. the last sound before the line went dead. the sound of an 
animal growl in wrath. and he remember the girl's scream about a 
monster. 

a cold sweat was on his forehead as he pull the coupe into the curb in 
front of the fenwick house. he switch off the motor and closed the car 
door after him. 

then he was hurry up the walk to the front door, his eyes taking in 
the house in a swift glance, note that the lights were lit in the 
consultation room. lights that sliver out from the closed venetian 
blinds. 

he stood then on the front porch, his hand close over the knob of the 
door. 

it was locked. 

he pressed the bell then and heard its clarion sound inside the house. 
but other than that there was nothing to be heard. a deep, ominous 
silence that somehow brought a feeling of panic to him. was he too late? 

and then sudden the panel in the front of the door open and a face 
peer out at him. 

fred trent felt the blood drain from his lips. a paralysis seem to 
grip his body at what he saw frame in the opening. 

for it was not the face of a human being. and yet, it was not the face 
of an animal. it was a horrible, twisted, cat-like visage that peer 
out at him, fur and ugly, with bare teeth and glowing, feline eyes. 

and as he looked, a sound came from the twist lips. it was the same 
sound he had heard over the telephone. the sound of a growl rage. 

and as the sound hit his ears, a terrible realization swept over him. 
for his eyes, rivet on that monstrous countenance, had register an 
impossible fact upon his mind. 

_as twist as it was, as horrible change into an animal grimace, it 
was the face of someone he knew--the english scientist, blair gaddon!_ 

and then sudden the face vanish from the opening. and fred trent 
felt his paralysis leave him. he knew now that he should never have come 
alone. that he should have call the police first. that he-- 

the door swung open then and trent found himself facing the thing that 
had been gaddon. 

he took a backward step and start to turn and run for his car and 
help, but he was too slow. 

an arm shot out and a claw-like hand sudden grip his shoulder in a 
swift, steel-like movement. he felt himself being pull forward and 
into the house, as another growl snarl from the lip of the creature. 

trent try to break the grip of that vise-like hand. he try to smash 
his fist into the ugly visage of a face that confront him. but he was 
like a child in that grip. and like a child, he was hurl across the 
hall, and he heard the door slam shut behind him. 

as he got slow to his feet and turn to face the creature, he heard a 
sob sound from the open door of the consultation room. it was the 
voice of joan drake. 

and then the monster had reach him and the claw hand reach out 
and spun him through the doorway, into the consultation room. and he 
heard a growl voice utter harshly: "you will regret this 
interference, trent!" 

and he knew that it was the voice of blair gaddon. and yet he also knew 
that it was not the same voice. it was changed. it had a bestial quality 
to it. 

then trent look around him. he saw joan drake, huddle in a corner of 
the room, beside dr. stanley fenwick. the specialist was sitting in a 
chair, holding his right hand to his mouth. fred could see blood ooze 
from a gash in the surgeon's lips. 

* * * * * 

and then he heard another sound. a sound from without the house, coming 
from the rear. it was the bay of brutus. the big dog must have sense 
the presence of the monster. and it was protest in its animal voice, 
a mournful dirge. 

then his attention was drawn once again to the animal body of blair 
gaddon. and now that the first shock had left him, trent stare at the 
man. he heard the girl sob. 

"fred! i told you to bring help--" 

"be quiet!" the voice of gaddon issue from the twist lips. and the 
girl's sob stifle itself in a look of dread. 

then the face that had been gaddon turn to trent. there was a twist 
leer to it, and fred sense that there was a struggle go on in that 
warp mind. 

"you are gaddon? the blair gaddon who went up with the experimental 
rocket?" trent's voice came incredulously. 

the face of the creature twist in a grimace of acknowledgment. 

"yes, trent. i am blair gaddon. i am not a pretty sight to look at, am 
i?" words left the twist lips, and there was a bestial pain in them. 

"but--you're supposed to be dead! mathieson--" 

a strange sound of irony came from gaddon. 

"mathieson was right about the cosmic rays--i know that now. look at me! 
you see what has happen to me? i sought immortality through the life 
energy of space--and look at me!" 

horror reflect in fred's eyes in that moment. for he felt the pained 
terror in the voice of the animal shape before him. and he saw the 
claw-like hand clench spasmodically. 

"my glands!" the voice screamed. "the cosmic ray react on them--fed 
the essence of the cat into them--changed me into this monstrous being!" 

trent stare at the rage-filled face. felt the emotion that was sweeping 
through the creature. felt a sudden compassion that was erase by the 
bestial look that came into the monster's eyes. 

and then it turn toward the chair where fenwick sat. the doctor was 
look at the creature, his eyes wide and terrified. 

"but what do you expect me to do for you, gaddon? why do you stand here 
threatening--" fenwick's voice came hoarsely. 

"why? you fool! because there is so little time! i am changing! even now 
my human instinct are nearly gone!... you're a gland specialist! there 
is something you can do--stop this change--stop it!" 

fenwick shook his head slowly. "you're raving like a madman, gaddon. i'm 
not a god--do you think i can change something that is beyond human 
understanding? if you'll only let me call in the authority ..." 

a growl of rage left gaddon's animal lips. "authorities! so you can have 
me put in cage like a wild beast? so you and your medical expert can 
stand and watch me as you would a freak? you're a fool! you'll help me 
now! you'll do something--before it's too late! do you hear me?" 

the creature advanced slow upon the doctor, and the girl back away 
to the far wall, fear mirror in her eyes. 

then fred trent step forward, his voice tense. 

"hold on, gaddon--of course the doctor will help you--_won't_ you, 
fenwick?" 

there was an urgent emphasis in trent's last words, and his eyes caught 
those of the surgeon's, and held them in a meaningful look. he couldn't 
say what he want to, but the message in his eyes was impart to 
fenwick, and the doctor sudden nodded. 

"yes--yes, of course ... but you'll have to remain quiet, gaddon, and be 
patient a moment...." 

the creature stop its advance upon fenwick then. and a growl rumble 
in gaddon's animal throat. 

then fred watch as the doctor step swift to a table with 
instrument and hurried began to prepare a hypodermic. 

"i'll give you a special extract injection to start...." fenwick 
explain as he worked. 

and trent knew that the doctor was prepare an injection that would 
subdue the monster. that would enable them to call the police.... 

and the eyes of gaddon watch the finger of the surgeon prepare the 
hypodermic. and for a single moment the human part of gaddon's monster 
mind relax its tenacious hold. 

* * * * * 

there was a rumble of rage thought deep within his twist brain. it 
swept up, grip the human element, and envelop it. a hoarse mew 
sound left the twist lip as the mind became a single, bestial thing. 

and now it thought with a viciousness. it knew now that it was finally 
in control. that the full change had been completed. and it knew 
sudden what it wanted. 

its animal eyes stare at the three humans. and it felt a hatred for the 
men who did not understand it. and it felt a desire for the woman who 
fear it. a desire that crept out of the primeval jungles. that swept 
through it to find one of its kind. and there was the vague instinct 
that was gaddon, who told it how to fulfill that desire. gaddon, who 
knew where the secret lay. 

and then there was the driving urge that swept up from the animal ages. 
the urge to kill, to destroy what was hated. and the eyes of the monster 
fasten on the figure of fenwick as the doctor turn from the table, 
the hypodermic in his hand. 

"all right, gaddon ..." 

the voice of fenwick trail off. and fred trent stare at the face of 
the monster. what he saw there brought a chill to his being. and he 
heard the girl gasp from the far corner of the room, as her eyes too saw 
the change that had spread over the face of the creature. 

for there was no long any vestige of human recognition in that face. 
there was no long any trace of the man who had been gaddon. there was 
only the monster now. the twisted, leer lip of an animal mind. 

a harsh growl left those lip then and the creature move forward toward 
the surgeon. 

trent knew what was happening, and he knew what he must do. there was 
death on that bestial face. death that was reach out ... 

he heard the dim bay of the great dane from the rear of the house as 
he leap forward. 

then his fist lash out and caught the animal face in a lashing blow. 
his knuckle felt numb as he screamed: 

"the hypodermic--doctor--quick!" 

then the creature turn on him and a long arm shot out. trent felt a 
claw rake across his face and felt the burning bite of that claw sink 
into his flesh. then, as he try to dodge away from the beast and bring 
his fist up again, the monster leap at him and trent felt a powerful 
blow crash against his chin. 

he spun back, fall to the floor, his head hit the edge of an 
examine table. his senses reel and he felt the blood running down 
his cheek, a warm, sticky stream that drip to the floor. 

he fought to keep his consciousness as he saw the beast turn away from 
him, satisfy that he was out of the way. then he saw it leap at the 
stun figure of fenwick. 

he heard the girl scream in terror and he saw fenwick's arm come up with 
the hypodermic. he saw the doctor try to bring the needle down in a jab, 
but the monster's arm swept the needle aside and then a claw-like hand 
grip fenwick's throat. 

there was a gasp of terror from fenwick's lip as those finger closed 
around his neck. then the hypodermic fell from his nerveless hand and he 
fought to break away. 

a deep rumbling growl spat from the lip of the monster as it closed 
with the struggle figure of fenwick. then the claw that were its 
hand rake the surgeon's throat in a feline rage. 

trent watch with numb eyes, fight back the wave of black that 
threaten to overcome him, and he saw the figure of fenwick sudden go 
limp in the grip of the monster. 

he saw a spurt of blood burst from the man's torn throat, and then the 
creature drop the limp body. 

it fell to the floor, and a wave of red wash across the floor from the 
mangle throat. the monster stood over the lifeless body, a triumphant 
sound issue from its twist lips. 

then it turn toward the girl. 

trent try to move. he try to push back the weakness that numb his 
body. but he couldn't. his head swam with the pain of the blow he had 
received, and he could only watch through half-closed eyes as the 
monster reach out for the girl. 

joan drake scream once as the long arms reach out for her. then her 
voice end abrupt as she fell to the floor in a faint. 

the monster stood over her for a moment, then it reach down and picked 
up her body in its blood splattered-arms. 

it turn for a moment, holding the girl, and shot a hate-filled glance 
at trent's limp figure. 

then it move swift across the room and out into the hall. 

and the bay of the great dane sound angry in fred trent's ear ... 

* * * * * 

with a superhuman effort fred trent forced the numb from his body 
and move slow to his feet. a horror grip him that brought a new 
strength to his body, flood it. 

he step over the body of fenwick, force his eyes away from the 
grisly sight of it as he dashed to the hallway. 

"joan--_joan_!" 

the girl's name came hoarse from his lip as he ran into the hall and 
stare at the open door of the house. he ran to the door and out into 
the night. 

his eyes stare wildly into the darkness, searching the street. but he 
saw nothing but his park car at the curb. the monster had vanished. 
and with him, the unconscious girl. 

a hopeless despair well up inside trent at that moment. for he knew he 
could never hope to find the creature now. and by the time help came it 
would be too late. they would find joan's mangle body ... 

the bay of the great dane rang in his ear then. the huge dog's howl 
of rage thunder in his ear and he heard the hound crash its great 
body against the closed door at the end of the hall, strive to get 
through. 

and then a cry of hope left trent's lips. he turn and ran back into 
the house. he grab the long leash from its wall hook beside the rear 
door and then he swung the door partway open. 

"brutus! quiet, brutus!" 

the head of the great dane struggle through the partly open door, a 
snarl of rage well from the huge dog's mouth as trent shout at it. 

then he slip the leash into its metal ring around the neck of the dog 
and pull the door open. 

the animal rush into the hall, nearly tear the leash from fred 
trent's hand as it lunge forward. 

the dog pause beside the open door of the consultation room where the 
body of fenwick lay dead and still on the floor. the animal lift its 
muzzle and sniff the air. a howl of anguished rage left it then and 
trent knew that the dog sense its master had been murdered. and then it 
caught the scent of the monster, the thing that had cause its wild rage 
to be unleashed, and it leap forward, down the hall and out the front 
door into the night. 

trent held the leash tight in his hands, running behind the strain 
dog, jump over a low hedge after the animal as it head down the 
shadow street to the edge of the city. 

and then the last house was behind them and trent was racing behind the 
dog out into the desert land beyond. 

* * * * * 

his breath was an ache fire in his throat. his leg were numb beyond 
feeling. they were parts of his body that simply refuse to stop moving, 
though every nerve and muscle in them scream in protest. 

it seem like he had been running for hours, half tripping, stumble 
across the darken ground behind the seemingly tireless body of the 
great dane. 

they ran in near silence now. only the sound of their labor breathing 
mingle with the night wind. the howl of rage no long issue from the 
throat of the huge dog. there was only its pant breath, and the 
strain of its mighty body as it sought to tear loose from the man 
holding it. 

but trent held grim to the leash, running as fast as his numb body 
would go. 

and he knew he could not go much further. that soon he would drop to the 
ground in exhaustion. that his last reserve of energy was nearly spent. 

and then his eyes peer through the dark ahead and he saw a glow of 
lights in the distance. and sudden he knew those lights. and he became 
aware of where they were racing toward. 

it was the rocket prove grounds! 

and the fence of the government project loom close ahead. 

and as they near the fence, trent's eyes pierce the dark and he 
saw a jagged tear in the metal mesh of the fence. a tear that stood as 
high as a man, a hole through which a man could have entered. 

the great dane bound toward that hole and trent follow the dog 
through it. he felt the animal pause momentarily and he nearly stumble 
over a body lie on the ground at his feet just inside the fence. 

his heart stood still for a moment and the girl's name sped to his lips. 
but he never utter the word. for he sudden saw that it was the body 
of a guard. a body whose torn throat lay red and gory in death. 

and then the great dane let a howl of anger out on the night wind, and 
the beast leap forward again, trent running behind it. 

and ahead of them, trent saw a great loom shape in the darkness, and 
as his eyes fell upon it, a despairing terror grip him. 

it was the second rocket! standing in its cradle, silent in the night, a 
shaft of metal that look skyward. 

and a realization of what the monster had in mind struck him. he knew 
now where they were headed. he knew why the monster had torn the fence, 
why a guard had been kill where he stood. 

and as if the thought had been a prelude, he saw the rocket loom before 
them as the great dane bound around its base. 

and he saw the metal stairway leading up to the middle of the giant 
projectile. 

and at the top of those stairs, go into the now open rocket chamber, 
was the monster, holding the unconscious girl in its arms. 

the great dane saw the creature in the same instant. and a terrible howl 
of rage well from its throat. it gave a lunge forward then that broke 
trent's grip from the leash he held. and the dog was free. 

* * * * * 

the monster turn in the same moment and saw them. a roar of feline 
anger left its throat as the huge dog leap up the steps toward the 
platform above. 

the monster drop the girl's body on the narrow platform and back 
toward the opening of the rocket chamber. 

then the great dane reach the platform and poised itself for a leap. 

trent was dashing forward toward the stairs as the dog's body flew 
through the air. he saw the flash jaws of the animal snap at the 
throat of the monster, as its heavy body smashed against it. 

then the arms of the creature were tear at the dog as it was forced 
back into the rocket chamber. 

trent's feet flew up the stairs, his breath a torture gasp in his 
throat. he saw the girl stir on the platform, as consciousness return 
to her. 

"joan!" 

her name sped from his lip as he reach the top step. then his hand 
closed around the girl's shoulders, lift her to her feet. 

the snarl of the great dane reach his ear from the rocket chamber, 
and the answer roar of rage from the monster as they fought. his eyes 
saw the vague, terrible shadow of them, heard the snap jaws of the 
dog, and the rake claws. 

and then he was drag the girl down the steps. 

they reach the ground and trent pull her away from the rocket, felt 
her come to life in his arms, heard the sob on her lips. 

but his head turn away from her and he stare anxious up at the open 
rocket chamber. 

he heard the body of the monster and the dog slam against the inner 
side of the chamber, and then he saw the door of the rocket close. he 
knew that the automatic mechanism must have been touched in the battle. 

and even as the thought ran through his mind he heard a sudden roar of 
flaming sound. the night lit up in a sheet of brilliant light and a wave 
of flame spread out from the base of the rocket. 

trent pull the girl away from that blind sheet of explode energy, 
and his eyes stare in grim fascination as they ran. 

he saw the rocket shudder in its cradle and then lift slowly. it was as 
if time had turn back and he were watch an identical scene that had 
happen early that day. 

only it wasn't the same scene. it was now a scene of horror. for he knew 
that the monster and the dog were in that rocket. the rocket that would 
shoot skyward in moments, even as its companion had done. would reach 
into the outer fringe of the earth's atmosphere where the cosmic ray 
would envelop it, would react upon the animal inside it. 

and a terrible dread spread through trent at the thought. for if the 
first change had been terrible enough, what would happen now? 

and as he thought, he saw the rocket lift slow from its cradle and 
gather speed as it shot upward into the night. 

* * * * * 

the blind light of the explode rocket fuel lit the prove grounds 
like a huge beacon of incandescence, and trent was aware of shout ahead 
of him, and running feet. 

then he was surround by men from the project, and he caught the glint 
of alert weapon and uniforms. 

he felt arms grab him and the girl and heard question pounding at him. 

but then he saw a face he knew. and he tore away from the arms of the 
guard and shouted. 

"dr. mathieson! listen to me!" 

the scientist step up to him and trent grip his arm in the fade 
light of the vanish rocket. 

"what's happen here?" the scientist demanded. "aren't you one of the 
newsmen--" 

trent interrupt him. he pour out a string of words. words that told 
what had happened. and as he talk he saw the eyes of the scientist 
widen in disbelief. and he heard the guard grow silent around him. felt 
every ear listen with awe to his words. 

and when he had finished there was a long moment of silence. and then 
joan drake move trembling up beside trent and she spoke: 

"it's true, doctor! every word fred said is true!" 

and one of the guard broke in: 

"the word just came in from post four. the fence was torn to pieces--and 
gidd has been murdered--just as they said!" 

then the silence again. and the face of mathieson was grim as trent 
broke through the quiet: 

"--doctor--that monster who was gaddon--he's up there now! when the 
cosmic ray change him and the dog and the chamber is release ..." 

the scientist shook his head slowly, a look of awe in his eyes. 

"it won't release, trent," he said. 

fred trent look at him questioningly. 

"gaddon must have forgotten one thing," the scientist continued. "that 
rocket was also an experimental project. but not for the same purpose. 
it was to test a new type of explosive ..." 

mathieson's voice trail off and silence closed over the small group 
then. 

there was no need to say anything further. there was only the tension of 
waiting, the tension that show in every eye. 

and the girl move close to trent, her body tremble against his. 

they waited. the seconds pass like moments in eternity. slow they 
march by, one by one. and then a minute. and the tension grew. 

they heard it then. off in the distance. out in the waste of the open 
desert land. a thundering sound. an explosion that roll in a wave of 
sound. 

and with it a flash of brilliant light. light that sear through the 
night in a terrible wave. and with it the thunder of the explosive 
warhead. 

and then silence. 

after a long moment the voice of mathieson came through the quiet night 
wind. 

"... it's over. gaddon is--dead. poor fool, he fumble with the tool of 
creation, tool that man is not ready to wield ..." 

and trent heard one of the soldier gasp, "what a story! _what_ a 
story!" 

but he knew, as he held the girl against him, felt her body relax beside 
his, that it was a story he didn't want to write. 

he want only to forget ... 




transcriber's note: 

this etext was produce from _amazing stories_ april 1949. extensive 
research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. copyright on 
this publication was renewed. minor spelling and typographic 
error have been correct without note. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the monster, by s. m. tenneshaw 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the monster *** 

***** this file should be name 24913.txt or 24913.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/1/24913/ 

produce by greg weeks, stephen blundell and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
