the project gutenberg ebook of isle of the undead, by lloyd arthur eshbach 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: isle of the undead 

author: lloyd arthur eshbach 

release date: may 21, 2010 [ebook #32470] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook isle of the undead *** 




produce by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 







transcriber's note: 

this etext was produce from weird tale october 1936. extensive 
research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. copyright on 
this publication was renewed. 


[illustration: "one hand closed on his thin neck, and the other, a 
rock-like fist, made a bloody ruin of his mouth."] 


isle of the undead 


by lloyd arthur eshbach 


_a gripping, thrilling, uncanny tale about the frightful 
fate that befell a yachting party on the dreadful island of 
living dead men_ 

* * * * * 




_1. a horror from the past_ 
preface 
a drab gray sheet of cloud slip stealthy from the moon's round 
face, like a shroud slip from the face of one long dead, a cold 
phosphorescent face from which the eyes had been plucked. yellow 
radiance fell toward a calm, oily sea, seek a narrow bank of fog 
lie low on the water, penetrating its somber mass like frozen yellow 
fingers. 

vilma bradley shudder and shrank against clifford darrell's brawny 
form. "it's--it's ghastly, cliff!" she said. 

"ghastly?" darrell lean against the rail, laugh softly. "one 
cocktail too many--that's the answer. it's given you the jitters. 
listen!" faint from the salon came strain of dance music and the 
rhythmic shuffle of feet. "a nifty yacht, a south sea moon, a radio 
dance orchestra, dancers--and little clifford! and you call it 
ghastly!" almost savage his arms tighten about her, and the 
banter note left his voice. "i'm crazy about you, vilma." 

she try to laugh, but it was an unconvinc sound. "it's the moon, 
cliff--i guess. i never saw it like that before. something's go to 
happen--something dreadful. i just _know_ it!" 

"oh--be sensible, vilma!" there was a hint of impatience in cliff's 
deep voice. a gorgeous girl in his arms--dark-haired, dark-eyed, made 
for love--and she talk of dreadful things which were go to happen 
because the moon look screwy. 

she release herself and glance out over the sea. "i know i'm silly, 
but----" her voice froze and her slender body stiffened. 
"cliff--look!" 

darrell spun around, and as he stared, he felt a dry seep into 
his throat, choke him.... 

out of the winding-sheet of fog into the moonlight crept a strange, 
strange craft, her crumble timber blacken and rot with 
incredible age. the corpse of a ship, she seemed, resurrect from the 
grave of the sea. her prow thrust upward like a scimitar bent 
backward, hover over the gaunt ruin of a cabin whose seaward side 
were form by port and starboard bows. from a shallow pit amidships 
jut the broken arm of a mast, its splinter tip point toward 
the blind watch moon. the stern, thick cover with the 
molder encrust of age, curve inward above the strange high 
poop, beneath which lay another cabin. and along either side of her 
worm-eaten freeboard ran a row of aperture like oblong portholes. out 
of these project great oars, long, unwieldy, as somber black as 
the rest of the ancient hulk. 

now a sound drift across the waters, the steady, rhythmic 
_br-rr-oom, br-rr-oom, br-rr-oom_ of a drum beating time for the 
rowers. its hollow thud checked the heart, set it to throb in 
tempo with its own weary pulse. ghostly fingers, dripping dread, 
crawl up darrell's spine. 

stiff-lipped, vilma gasped: "what--what is it?" 

cliff answer in a dry husky voice, the words seeming to trip over an 
awkward tongue. "it's--it's--it _can't_ be, damn it!--but it's a 
galley, a ship from the days of alexander the great! what's it 
doing--here--_now_?" 

close she came through the moon-path, a froth lip of brine curling 
away from her swelling prow. closer--her course crossing that of the 
_ariel_--and the watch saw her crew! they gasped, and the blood 
ebb from their faces. 

men of ancient persia, clad in leather kirtle and rust armor, and 
they were hideous! in the yellow moon-glow cliff could see them 
clearly now--a lookout standing motionless in the stem, the steersman 
on the poop-deck, the drummer squat beside the broken mast, the 
rower in the pit--and all, _all_ were a bloodless white, the skin of 
their face puffed and bloated and horrible wrinkled, like flesh that 
had been under water a long time. 

dead men ... men whose movements were stiff wooden ... as dead as 
their faces. but most horrible was the fact that they were there, that 
they move at all! 

* * * * * 

"a queer mirage, isn't it?" a hollow voice spoke suave behind them. 

vilma gasp at the sudden sound, and they whirled. a foot away stood 
the tall, lean figure of the _ariel's_ captain, leon corio. a queer 
smile twist his thin lips. 

"what's the idea--sneaking up on us?" darrell demand angrily. he 
didn't like this man, hadn't like him from the moment he had 
approach cliff to sell him the yacht. but cliff had bought the craft 
because she was a bargain, and in accordance with their agreement he 
had hire corio as captain. 

the tall man's smile remain fixed, and he bowed gravely. "sorry, 
sir. i always walk softly. a habit, i suppose." he gesture toward 
the galley. "it looks quite life-like, don't you think so?" 

"life-like?" cliff spoke between his teeth as he again face the black 
ship. "it looks _dead_ to me!" 

the galley had almost reach them _now_, _veering sharp to draw up 
beside_ the _ariel_. the drum quieted, and the oar trail in the 
water, motionless except for the sway impart by the waves. a 
musty, age-old odor filter through the air like a breath from a 
grave. the music and dance had stopped. a fear-filled hush shroud 
the yacht. 

vilma drew cliff's arm about her shoulder. he glance back at the 
motionless captain. 

"_do_ something, corio!" he rasped. "don't stand there like a dummy!" 

corio nod with his same queer smile. his hand dart to an inside 
pocket, came out bearing a curious instrument like four twist cone 
of silver bound together with silver thongs. as he raise this to his 
mouth, his eyelid were slit behind which burn the ember of his 
eyes. 

out over the sea crept a single note, deep, hollow, laden with eery 
minor wailings--a sound that summon imperatively, yet a sound that 
repelled. it was a moan, hideous as the moan of a die demon. it 
rake the heart with fear-tipped claws. it rose, and fell, and rose 
again, and as it died, it awaken the crew of the ancient galley to 
motion, sweeping them in a horde to the rail of the yacht. 

cliff swung toward corio in burst fury, fury mingle with dread. 
his fist lash out at that glittering silver instrument and the face 
behind it, but corio avoid him like a wraith, still smile fixedly, 
the horn again at his lips. cliff cursed, and hurl himself through 
the air. one hand caught a bony shoulder; he felt finger like hook 
close on his own throat. he wrench free, landing a stunning blow on 
corio's face--saw him reel and crash to the deck--and then he heard 
vilma scream! 

he whirled. she was struggle between two of the _flabby-faced things 
from_ the galley! in an instant he was upon them, his fist thud 
against icy flesh, bury itself in something horrible soft and 
yielding. startled, cliff swung a second blow; and an arm, tomb-cold 
and strong as the tentacle of an octopus, wrap itself around him--a 
vise of thin-covered bone! a dead, drown face peer over his 
shoulder, staring blankly. other arms seize his legs, and though he 
struggle and writhe with the strength of a mount fear, he was 
borne to the rail. over they went, and drop to the rot deck of 
the galley. 

a numb was creep through him like a contagion, spread from 
those crush hand of ice. his struggle ceased. with eyes that 
turn stiff in their socket he look for vilma, saw her raise 
high above the head of two other pallid creatures, saw them climb 
over the rail. then the black of a dank and musty cabin envelop 
him; and he was drop with jar force. his captor bulk black 
against the moonlit doorway, tread soundlessly, and were gone. 

cliff lay in rigid paralysis, every sense keen alive, his mind 
strive to clutch a single spar of reason in this chaotic whirlpool 
of the incredible. this _couldn't_ be! soon he'd awaken to laugh at 
his absurd nightmare.... yet it seem horrible real.... it _was_ 
real! 

from the _ariel_ boil a fearful bedlam. scream of terror. curses. 
then other shadow loom in the doorway, and vilma, motionless and 
rigid, was drop brutal beside him on the spongy floor. 

furiously cliff struggle against the maddening restraint of 
paralysis. he couldn't lie here helpless! vilma need him! he'd--he'd 
_have_ to do something. with an effort that stud his forehead with 
round drops of sweat and sent the blood throb through the 
distend vein of his neck, he sought to move. and like a cord 
snapping, his invisible bonds fell from him. 

he was crouch over vilma, rubbing her wrists, calling to her, when 
again he heard the silver horn of corio. a low drone utterly unlike 
the note that had awaken the galley's crew, it drift languid 
along a channel of endless sleep. it seep through the ear-drums, 
touching every nerve-tip with resistless lassitude. dogged cliff 
fought against the sound, pressing his hand over his ears, grit 
his teeth, holding his eyelid wide. yet he felt his muscle weaken, 
began to relax, knew dim that his mind, sodden with drowsiness, was 
creep toward the pit of slumber--and the vibrant drone ended! 

* * * * * 

his head clear rapidly, and he bent over vilma. as he touched a limp 
arm, he knew she had pass from paralysis into a deep, quiet sleep. 
he shook her. it was useless. he listened, heard her steady breathing; 
and at that instant realize that the noise from the yacht had 
ceased. 

rising, he strode toward the square of chalky moonlight. a foot away 
he halted, fell back. he had heard a faint footfall, had seen an 
armor-clad figure climb over the rail! with silent haste he flung 
himself down beside vilma. 

and there he lay while the crew of the galley carry his friends from 
the _ariel_, all slump in that unnatural sleep, and stretch them 
out on the floor of the black cabin. unmoving, he watch through 
narrow lid till all save corio had been carry aboard, and the 
drown things had gone back to their place in the rowers' pits. 
again the hollow voice of the drum began throb through the 
silence, and the oar creak a faint accompaniment. he could feel the 
galley cleave the oily sea. 

on his feet, he peer through the doorway. the back of the rower 
rose and fell with stiff, mechanical rhythm. beyond the galley's stern 
came the yacht, slink along like a thief, only one dim light 
showing, her diesel engine purr almost soundlessly. 

he turn and bent over vilma, still in thrall to that strange deep 
slumber. as he trace the delicate outline of her lovely face, now so 
lifeless and pale, bitter wrath flared within him, wrath and hatred 
for leon corio. but as he thought of the ghastly _undead_ things out 
there in the galley pit, thought of this water-soaked anachronism 
which had no right to be afloat, his skin crisp with a sense of 
foreboding, a fear of what was yet to come. he must do something! 

step over the still form of his friends, he move to the forward 
wall where a beam of radiance crept fearful through a gap between 
two boards. his hand touched the hull--and he jerk them away. 
rotten, clammy, like a decay corpse, partly frozen. crouching, he 
peer through. 

far ahead, a blotch of evil black squat on the horizon, an 
island crouch low like a black beast ready to spring. around it the 
moonlight seem to dim, as though it were strive to hide some 
nameless horror. interminable cliff watch while the shadow mass 
drew close ... closer.... 

they were head for a towering wall of black basalt; and as the 
galley near it, cliff saw that it bore striking resemblance to a 
gigantic human skull, its round surface broken by cave that the 
sea had carve into hollow eye-sockets and an empty nasal cavity. the 
rock wall end high above the water; beneath it lay a gape chasm of 
pitchy darkness. and the galley, drum silenced, oar at rest, slid 
under the ledge, into the mouth of the skull! 

just before total black fell, cliff sprang to vilma's side and 
raise her in his arms. if he hope to do anything, he must do it now! 
he grope his way to the starboard bow and move one hand along the 
dank timbers, searching. he found what he sought, a wide gap at the 
edge of a board. gently lower vilma to the floor, he grip the 
slimy wood with both hand and thrust outward mightily. a wide strip 
of decay timber burst free. he drop it into the sea and attack 
the next board. in moments a wide irregular opening yawn in the 
galley's hull. 

leaning out, cliff look down. he could see nothing. then sudden a 
faint light appeared, and he heard the hum of the _ariel's_ motor as 
she enter the cave. the hum cease instantly, but the faint 
light persisted. 

now he could see the black of waters, a rock wall beyond. he drew 
back--and a he did so, he heard movements on deck! at any moment the 
rower might enter! he'd have to risk a drop into the water with 
vilma--there was nothing else to do. if only she were conscious! 

he stoop and raise her, holding her firm with one arm. gripping 
the hull with the other, he climb through the opening, inhale 
deeply, and dropped! a heart-stopping plunge--and cold water closed 
over them. down, down--then they shot upward, reach the surface; and 
even as cliff gulp a single gasp breath, something struck his 
skull a blinding, stunning blow! the oars! 

with rapid numb arms and leg cliff kick and flail the water, 
strive for land. dim he knew he no long held vilma; dim he 
vision her as were those ghastly undead; then his body scrape on 
something hard, and a black that was not physical blot out 
consciousness. 


_2. the dreadful isle_ 

red-hot hammer pounding against his temple waken cliff darrell. he 
open his eyes to stare into total dark crawl with mental 
monster spawn by his pain-stabbed brain. he lay half immerse in 
shallow brine, his head rest on a jagged stone just above the 
surface. struggle to his hand and knees, he shook his head from 
side to side, dumbly, like an animal in pain. something had hit 
him--and now he was in water--and there was no light. what had 
happened? where was vilma? 

vilma! he groaned. he remember now. they had dropped--and his head 
had struck something--and--and--maybe she was floating out there even 
now, dead eyes staring upward. 

"vilma!" he cried, his voice pleading. "vilma!" 

only a mock echo answer him. there was no other sound, not even 
the whisper of wave swish among the rocks. 

cliff pressed his hand fierce against his throb head. the pain 
had become a madness, match only by the agony of his own 
helplessness. he felt his reason reeling; he fought an insane desire 
to fling himself shriek into that silent expanse of water to search 
for vilma; then with a tremendous physical effort he jar himself 
back to sanity. 

he stagger to his feet, grope stumbling over the rocks away from 
the water. his hand touched a rock wall broken and pit by the 
action of the sea; and he crept slow inland, feeling his way like a 
blind man. as he plod on his thought blend into one fixed idea: 
he must get to light, must get light to search for vilma. 

gradual the insensate pounding in his head abated, and strength 
return to his body. when at last he saw light beyond a narrow 
fissure around an angle in the cavern, he had almost recovered. in 
moments he was gaze out over a plain bath in the glow of a leprous 
moon. as he stared, he shivered; and it was not because of the cold 
draft drawing through the fissure, fan his brine-drenched body. 

grim and stark forbidding the plain lay before him, dead as the 
frozen landscape of the moon. once there had been life there, but now 
only the skeleton of tree remained, lift their waste limb in 
rigid pleading to an unresponsive sky. some, there were, that had 
fallen, uproot by the fury of passing hurricanes; these lay like the 
scattered bone of a dismember giant, age-blackened, and paint 
with hoarfrost by the brush of moonlight. feeble the dead forest 
stir under the touch of a moan wind, and the gaunt shadow cast 
by the tree seem to be multi-armed monster slither over the 
rocky earth. 

he look beyond the trees, and he saw light. little square of pale 
radiance cut high in the wall of an ancient black castle. castle? 
cliff frowned. he could liken it to nothing else, though he could not 
recall ever have seen a castle which thrust curving, needle-thin 
spire into the sky like a devil's horns. 

impatient cliff step from the wall of rock and glance along a 
path that writhe through the forest; glanced--and crouch swiftly, a 
low cry escape him. a single spot of water on a smooth, flat stone! 
a spot shaped like a woman's shoe! vilma had pass this way! 

but--might it not have been some other woman from the _ariel_? no! 
they had been carried--and even if they had walked, their feet were 
dry! 

like a hound on the scent, cliff darrell sped along the serpentine 
path. the wind moan above him, and the sough branch seem to 
whisper croak warnings, but he ran on, his eyes constant seek 
sign of vilma's course. here a drop of water shaken from her drench 
skirt, there another; and cliff blessed the full moon whose light made 
possible his trail of the almost invisible spoor. 

now he had pass beyond the dead forest and was moving toward the 
castle. the trail had been grow steady fainter, but he manage to 
follow it. it led him toward a narrow stone stairway climb 
crooked to a misshapen opening in the wall. light glow faint 
lurid somewhere deep within; and now cliff heard a blasphemous sound 
belch from the depths of the castle--a wheezing, sardonic croak 
like the moan of a demoniac organ, rumbling an obscene dirge. his hair 
bristled, and he stop short. 

he look at the steps, searching for the fade trail--and he 
stiffened. there on the second step was an irregular blotch of 
moisture! what did it mean? had vilma crouch there? had she ascend 
those steps? entered? 

* * * * * 

with drawn face he began to skirt the base of the black building, 
searching every nook and cranny, scan the bare walls. his heart 
lay like ballast in his breast. if--if something had lure vilma into 
that demon-infested vault ... he checked the thought. 

sudden he cursed. mechanical he had begun to measure his stride in 
time with the doleful dirge from the castle. he stalk on with 
alter pace. as he round the corner at the rear of the structure, 
he saw a shadow outline against the sky, crouch on a ledge below 
one of the little windows. he look again--cried: 

"vilma!" 

the figure above him stirred, look down, then climb hasty 
earthward. it was vilma ... vilma, with black hair hanging stringy 
about her head, face pale, eyes fixed in the wide of fear ... 
vilma, with her wet clothing clinging to the lovely contour of her 
symmetrical body. 

"oh, cliff!" she gasped, a dry sob choke her. "thank god--thank 
god!" 

she clung to him, her face hidden against his shoulder, quiver 
uncontrollably. then tear came, saving tears, relieve her pent-up 
emotions. 

cliff said nothing, only held her close, strong protective. and 
gradual he felt the tempest of terror subside. at last she look 
up. some of the dread had gone from her face, and she try to smile. 

"i guess--i can't take it," she said. 

cliff shook his head solemnly. "you're a game girl, vilma! you've 
nerve enough for two men. if you can, tell me what happened. or if 
you'd rather let it wait, just say so." 

"i'll feel better if i get it off my chest," she said. "you probably 
saw those--things--carry me from the yacht." cliff nodded. "well, i 
was just about paralyze when they drop me in their terrible boat. 
i remember, you try to arouse me; then that horn blew, and i just 
seem to float away in an ocean of sleep. 

"after that i can remember nothing till i awoke with water filling my 
eyes and nose and mouth, choke me. someone's arms were around me--it 
must have been you, cliff--and then they weren't there any more, and i 
struggle wildly, out of my wits. i don't know how i got to shore, but 
i did, and i lay there in the shadow of the galley, choke and 
gagging, but afraid to cough. it wasn't altogether dark, and i could 
see those dreadful things with people hanging over their shoulders, 
carry them along a narrow ledge close to the water's edge, heading 
inland. i thought maybe you were one of those limp bodies; and i--i 
almost die of fright. after a while the last one had gone, and the 
light went out. then i heard another pair of feet moving over the 
rocks. corio, i suppose. the sound died--and i was alone. 

"that place was awful, cliff. the black almost drove me mad. i 
want to scream, but i was afraid to. some terrible weight seem to 
be crush my lungs. if i follow those undead things, they might 
capture me, but it seem worse to stay there in that dreadful dark. 

"i got out of there somehow, though it seem to take hours. then i 
didn't know what to do. i stood at the edge of the dead forest try 
to decide; trying, too, to keep myself from shriek and 
running--anywhere. then corio's horn blew again--a sound, cliff, worse 
than anything i've ever heard. it--it was a wicked sound, promising to 
fulfill every foul desire that ever taint a human mind. it repelled, 
yet it lure irresistibly. and--i answered!" 

she stopped, and bury her face in her hands. after a moment she went 
on. "the sound stop just as i found myself crawl on hand and 
knee up the stone stairway on the other side. another started--that 
awful groaning--music--but it didn't draw me. i ran down the steps and 
scurry away like a rabbit try to find a place to hide. 

"after a while i came back--i thought you must be in there--and i 
climb up to the window. and--and--cliff, it's hellish!" 

her eyes, bore into his, widen in the same rigid terror he had 
seen in them when he join her. 

"we could go back to the cove and get away on the _ariel_, vilma," 
cliff said stonily. "and if you think we should, we will. but--i 
brought our friends here, and--well, i want to get them out if i can." 

with an effort vilma nodded. "of course. we can't do anything else." 

he release her and step up to the wall. 

"i'm go to see what's go on in there," he said. "you wait here 
till i come down." 

in sudden dread vilma seize his arm. "no, cliff. i couldn't stand 
wait here alone. i'll go with you." 

he nod understandingly. and together they began climb the 
precipitous wall, fitting hand and feet in step-like crevice that 
made progress fairly rapid. soon they were crouch on a wide stone 
ledge, clinging to thin, rust bars, staring into the black castle. 


_3. the steps of torture_ 

a gigantic hall lay before them, a single chamber whose wall were the 
wall of the castle, whose arch ceiling rose far above them. 
directly below their window a stone platform jut from the wall, 
spread entire across the chamber. a stone altar squat in the 
center of the platform, a strange phosphorescent fire smolder on 
its top. and from the altar descended a wide, wide stairway ending in 
the middle of the hall. all this cliff saw in a single sweeping 
glance; afterward he had eyes for nothing save the lethal horror of a 
mad, mad scene, reveal by the dim radiance of the altar fire. 

behind the altar stood five huge figures clad in long, hooded cloak 
of scarlet. the central figure had arms raise wide, his cloak spread 
like the wings of some bloody bird of prey; and from his lip came a 
guttural incantation, a blasphemous chant in archaic latin, in time 
with the wheeze of the bury organ. now his arms dropped, and he was 
silent. 

from the room below came a concerted whine of ceremonial devotion, a 
hollow, hungry wail. it rose from the bloodless lip of strange 
assorted human figures range down the center of the long stairway in 
two facing columns. a hundred or more there must have been, 
represent half as many periods and countries, according to their 
strange and ancient costumes. men in the armor of medieval persia--the 
crew of the black galley; yellow-haired vikings; hawk-faced egypt 
with leather-brown skins; half-naked islanders; red-sashed pirate 
from the spain main; men of today! and about all, like the damp 
that cling to a tombstone, hover a cloud of--death! the undead! 

cliff's gaze rove over the tense wait columns, then leap to 
the foot of the stairs. there, cower dumb like sheep in a 
slaughter-pen, were his friends from the _ariel_. all clothing had 
been strip from them, and they stood wait in waxen, statuesque 
stiffness. he saw then that three other lay prone before the stone 
altar, naked and ominous still. 

and far down at the very end of the hall stood leon corio, drape in a 
hooded cape of unbroken black, a glint of silver in his hand--his horn 
of drug sounds. 

now, as though at a silent command, a girl left the group and began to 
mount the stairs, as those motionless three must have mounted! 
vivacious ann--she had been the life of cliff's yacht party; but now 
she was--changed. her blanch face was rigid with inexpressible 
terror despite the semi-stupor which numb her senses. her nude body 
glow like marble in the dim light. horribly, her feet began their 
climb with a little catch step suggest by the moan chant of that 
cracked organ note. 

she reach the first of the undead, and cliff saw light glint on a 
knife-blade. a crimson gash appear in the flesh of her thigh; and 
dead lip touched that wound, drank thirstily. the girl strode on, 
blood gleam dark on the white skin. a second drank of the crimson 
flow--a third--and the blood cease gushing forth. 

another knife flashed--and lip closed again and again on a red 
dripping wound. and the girl with the unchang pace of a robot 
climb the stairway to its very top--climbed while fiendish corpse 
drank her life's blood--climbed, to sink down on the altar. 

one of the red-clad figures stoop over her, lift her, bury long 
teeth in her throat--and cliff saw his face.... his own face paled, 
and talon of fear rake his brain. those other on the stairs--they 
were abhorrent, zombie free from the grave. but this monster! a 
vampire vest with the lust and cruelty and power of hell! 

he lower her, finally, and she sank down, lay still, beside the 
other three. 

another began the hellish climb, a giant of a man with a thick 
muscled torso. cliff knew him instantly; and his heart seem to stop. 
leslie starke! they'd play football together. a brave man--a 
fighter. he mount the stairway with the same little catch step, the 
same plod stiffness. no resistance, no struggle--only a hell of 
fear on his face. 

the marrow melt from cliff darrell's bones. what--what could he do 
against a power that did _that_ to le starke? he try to swallow, 
but the saliva had dry on his tongue. he want to turn to vilma, 
but he could not wrench his eyes from the frightful spectacle. 

up the stone steps starke strode. and no blade leap toward him; no 
thirsty lip closed on his flesh! in an unwavere line he mount 
toward the cowl monster in the center of the dais, like a puppet on 
the end of a string; mount to pause before the stone altar, to lie 
on it, head bent back, throat bared.... merciful cliff regain 
enough control to close his eyes. 

he open them at a gasp from vilma; saw the vampire raise the flaccid 
body of le starke and hurl it far from him, to crash to the stone 
steps, to roll and thud and tumble, down and down, sickeningly, to lie 
awkward twist on the floor before his companions! 

and another began to climb the long stone steps.... 

all through the interminable night cliff and vilma crouch on the 
ledge, staring through the barred window. a hundred times they would 
have flee to escape the maddening scene, but they could not move. 
senses reel before the awful monotony of the ceaseless climbing, 
their eyes smart with fixed staring, their tongue and throat were 
parch to desert dryness; yet only after hour of endless watching, 
only after the last victim had climb the steps, did the edge of 
terror dull, and a modicum of control return to their bodies. 

stiff cliff look over his shoulder. a faint tinge of gray rim 
the sea on the eastern horizon. 

"almost daylight," he whisper hoarsely. 

vilma nodded, her gaze still held by that chamber of horror. cliff 
follow the direction of her eyes; and saw corio standing like a 
great bat in his hooded cape close to the far wall. he raise his 
four-piped horn to his lips. and the instrument's fourth note crept 
through the room. 

* * * * * 

it was a doleful sound, a cry like the cry death itself might possess; 
yet oddly--and horribly--it was soothing, promising the peace of 
endless sleep. and touched by its power, the column of undead 
stiffened, thin to wraiths, flow as water flow down the stone 
steps, vanished! 

the dead-alive--those five vampire in crimson cowls--looked upward 
uneasily. the shadow under the roof were gray with the light of 
dawn. cliff could sense their thought. before sunrise they must be in 
their tomb under the castle, to sleep until another night. with one 
accord they strode down the stairs, past corio who had prostrate 
himself, and enter a black opening in the wall. with their departure 
the altar fire dim to a sullen ember. 

corio arose. he was alone in the chamber save for that dead, broken 
body lie in a twist heap at the foot of the stairs, and those 
other half-alive wretch stretch out before the altar. now, cliff 
told himself, was the time for him to get in there at corio; now was 
the time to rescue his friends--but he continue to crouch, unmoving. 

again corio blew on his silver horn, and a faint cry leap from 
vilma's tense lips. the lure note that had drawn her, cliff thought 
hazily; then he thought of nothing save the sound, the sound that 
promise him all he could desire. earth and its dominion, his for the 
taking--if he answer that call!... then even the sound elude his 
senses, and he heard only the promise.... he must answer, must claim 
what was rightful his! 

but those half-dead creatures--sight of their stirring steady his 
staggering sanity. here and there head lift and bloodless husk of 
body try to rise. in the pallid light they seem like corpses, 
free from newly open graves. some could only reach their knees; 
other rose to uncertain limbs. and all move down the stairway toward 
corio, answer his summons; follow as he made his slow way toward 
the opening in the wall, still blow the single note--the note that 
promise earth and all it held.... 

cliff glance toward vilma--and she was not there. he look down, saw 
her far below, drop from crack to crevice with amazing speed and 
daring, hasten toward--corio! 

the thought jar any lingering taint of allurement from cliff's 
mind. he must stop her. he swung around, ignore the cramped 
stiff of his legs, and start down the steep wall. down, down, 
recklessly, with corio's horn-note only a faint heard sound fade 
behind him. 

now he saw vilma reach the rocks below and dash around the corner of 
the castle, and he cursed, redouble his speed. down--down--and 
sudden the ancient rock crumble underfoot. for an instant he hung 
from strain fingertips--then dropped. 

a smashing impact--a stone that slid beneath him--and his head crash 
against the castle wall. through a fiery mist of pain he picture 
vilma in the grasp of corio. the mist thickened--grew black--engulfed 
him. 


_4. in corio's hands_ 

cliff awoke with the sun glaring down on his face. he open his eyes, 
and stabbing lance of light pierce his eyeballs. momentarily 
blinded, he pressed his hand across his face and struggle erect. 
there was a sick feeling in his stomach, and the back of his head 
throb incessantly. he touched the ache area, and winced. a lump 
like an egg thrust out his scalp; it was sticky with blood. he stood 
there, weave from side to side, try to recall something.... 

as memory came, he groaned. vilma! he had last seen her racing madly 
toward corio, lure by his damn horn. it was daylight now; the sun 
had risen at least an hour ago. an hour--with vilma gone! 

shake his head to clear it, and grit his teeth at the pain, he 
stalk along the wall. turning the corner he strode on toward the 
crooked steps. the lifeless terrain reel dizzily, but he went on 
resolutely. the pain in his head was fade to a dull ache; and as he 
mount the steps, strength seem to flow back into his legs. with 
every sense taut he pass into the gloom of the castle. 

a quick glance he cast about--saw the body of starke lie where it 
had fallen. no use to examine it; there was no life there. his gaze 
swept up the slope of the stairway to the altar at its head, linger 
on the phosphorescent eye of light still glowing there. then he 
shrug grim and move on to the doorway in the wall. warily he 
peer in. 

as his eyes adjust themselves to the greater darkness, he saw a 
narrow stairway leading downward into a shadowy corridor. somewhere in 
the tunnel's depths a faint light shone. he could see nothing more. he 
move stealthy down the damp, dank stairs. 

at the bottom he paused, listening. he could hear nothing. a hundred 
feet ahead, the corridor divide in two; a burning torch was thrust in 
the wall at the junction. cliff nod with satisfaction. corio _must_ 
be somewhere near by; for only a human need light. 

silent cliff strode along the corridor. at the fork he hesitated, 
then chose the right branch, for light glow faint along that 
passageway. the other led downward, black as the pit of hell. 

a doorway appear in the wall ahead, and he move warily, with fist 
clenched. flicker torchlight filter into the corridor. there was 
no audible sound. now cliff peer into a small chamber, and gasp in 
sudden horror, his eyes staring unwinking at a spectacle incredible 
pitiful. 

here were the passenger of the _ariel_, white naked, and lie in 
little group on the cold stone floor, huddle together for warmth. 
their face turn toward darrell as he stood in the doorway, but 
there was no recognition in the vacuous eyes, no thought, no 
intelligence, and little life in the wide-mouthed stares. it seem as 
though their soul had been drain from their body with their 
blood. 

sickened, cliff turn away, curse his own helpless to aid them, 
curse leon corio who was responsible for their plight. black wrath 
grip him as he move on. 

again the corridor branched, and again he kept to the right. sudden 
he halted, ear straining. he heard the sound of a voice--the hollow 
voice of corio! it came faint but clearly from a room at the end of 
the passageway. cliff went forward slowly. 

"and so, my dear," corio was saying, "we enter into a pact with 
the--master, a pact seal with blood. in exchange for our lives we 
three were to bring other human to this island for the feast of 
the dead-alive. every third month each of us must return with our 
cargo when the moon is full; and since we come back on alternate 
months, they have a constant supply of fresh blood. usually some of 
our captive live from full moon to full moon before they become like 
those of the galley--the undead. some of these we waken when it suit 
our fancy; they are not like the masters; they awaken only when we 
call them--we three or the masters. 

"more than life they give us for what we do. century ago pirate 
use this island for refuge. they--died--and they left their treasure 
in this castle. it lie in the room where the master lie; and we 
three receive payment in gold and gems. tonight i receive my pay, and 
tomorrow i leave on the _ariel_--and you go with me!" 

cliff heard vilma answer, and even while his heart leap with relief, 
he marvel at the cool scorn in her voice. 

"so i go with you, do i? i'd rather climb the stairs with the rest of 
your victim than have anything to do with you--you monster! when 
cliff darrell find you----" 

"darrell!" corio's voice was a frozen sneer. "he'll do nothing! i'll 
find _him_--and he'll wish he could climb the stairs of blood! as for 
you, you'll go with me, and like it! a drop of my blood in your veins, 
and you will belong to the master, as i do. we shall attend to that; 
but first there is something else--more pleasant." his words fell to 
an indistinguishable purr. 

still moving stealthily, cliff hasten forward. sudden vilma 
screamed; and he launch himself madly across the remain distance, 
stood crouch at the threshold. 

vilma lay on an ancient bed, her wrist and ankle bound with leather 
thong drawn about the four tall bed-posts. only the torn remnant of 
her under-garments cover the round contour of her body, and corio 
crouch over her, caress the pink flesh. vilma writhe beneath his 
touch. 

* * * * * 

cliff growl deep in his throat as he sprang. corio spun around and 
leap aside, but he was too slow to escape cliff's powerful lunge. 
one hand closed on his thin neck, and the other, a rock-like fist, 
made a bloody ruin of his mouth. howling with pain, corio try to 
sink his teeth in cliff's arm. 

cliff flung him aside, following with the easy glide of a boxer. corio 
crawl to his feet, cringing, dodge before the nemesis that stalk 
him. again cliff leaped, and corio, yellow with fear, dart around 
the bed and ran wildly into the hallway. at the door cliff checked 
himself, reason holding him. corio could elude him with ease in this 
labyrinth of passages; and his first concern was vilma's safety. 

he return to the bed. vilma look up at him with such relief and 
thankful on her face that cliff, with a little choke cry, flung 
himself to his knee beside the bed and kiss her hungrily. for 
moments their lip clung; then cliff straighten shakily, try to 
laugh. 

"we've got to get out of here, sweetheart," he said. "i'm not afraid 
of corio, but he know things about this place that we don't know. 
after you're safe on the yacht, i'll come back and get him." 

he look around for something with which to cut her bonds. on the 
wall above the bed were cross a pair of murderous-looking cutlasses. 
seize one of these, cliff wrench it from its fastening and drew 
it through the cords.... she stood beside him, free. 

"your clothing----" cliff began, his eyes on her almost-nude body. 

she blush and pointed mute to a heap of rag on the floor. her 
eyes flame wrathfully. "he--he rip them from me!" 

the muscle of cliff's jaws knotted, and he scowl as he survey the 
room for a drape or hanging to cover her. for the first time he really 
saw the place. all the lavish splendor of royalty had been expend 
on this chamber. it might have been the bedroom of a king, except that 
the ancient furnishings belong to no particular period; were, in 
fact, the loot of raid extend over centuries. yet despite its 
splendor, everything was repulsive, cloak with the same air of 
unearthly gloom that hover about the galley. 

he move toward an intricate woven tapestry; but vilma checked him, 
shudder with revulsion. 

"no, cliff--it's too much like grave clothes. everything about this 
place make my flesh crawl. i'd rather stay as i am than touch any of 
it!" 

cliff nod slowly. "let's go then." 

they hurried through the corridor toward the stairway, with cliff 
holding the cutla in readiness. as they pass the room in which lay 
the _ariel's_ passengers, he try to divert vilma's attention, but 
she look in as though hypnotized. 

"i saw them before," she whispered. "it's awful." 

as they start up the stairway to the great hall, cliff took the 
lead. he move with utmost caution. 

"it doesn't seem right," he said uneasily. "we should hear from 
corio." 

at that moment they did hear from him--literally. from somewhere in 
the maze of tunnel came the sound of his accursed horn--the note of 
sleep! it swirl insidious about their heads, numb their senses. 
cliff felt his stride falter, saw vilma stumble, and he hurl himself 
forward furiously, gripping her arm. 

"hurry!" he shouted, strive to pierce the fog of sleep. "we've _got_ 
to get out! damn him!" 

vilma rally for an instant, and they reach the top of the stairs. 
on--across that wide, wide room, each step a struggle.... on while the 
drone sound float languid through every nerve cell.... on--till 
their muscle could no long move, and they sag to the hard stone, 
asleep. 

* * * * * 

moments later cliff open his eyes to meet the hellish glare of leon 
corio. corio smile thinly. 

"so--you awaken. good! i would have you know the fate i have plan 
for you. you see this?" he held the cutla high above darrell's throat 
like the blade of a guillotine. "with this i could end your life quite 
painless and quickly. it really would prove entertaining for miss 
bradley, i'm sure." he chuckle faint behind bruise and swollen 
lips. 

cliff squirmed, strive to rise, then subside instantly. he was 
bound hand and foot. 

"i _could_ kill you," corio repeated musingly, "but that would lack 
finesse." his teeth bare in a feline smile. "and it would be such a 
waste--of blood! instead, i'll take you out to the galley and let you 
lie there till her crew awaken tonight. they have taste blood, and 
after tonight will taste none again for another month. i imagine 
they'll--drain you dry!" the last phrase was a vicious snarl. 

cliff heard vilma utter a suppress sob, and he turn his head. she 
lay close by, bound like him with strip of leather. furiously cliff 
strained at his fetters, but they held. 

"and while you wait for those gentle persian to awaken," corio 
continue in tone caressing soft, "you can think of your sweetheart 
in my arms! it may teach you not to strike your betters--though you 
can never profit by your lesson." 

stooping, he raise cliff's powerful form and manage to fling him 
over one shoulder. then he move from the great hall, down the stone 
steps, and across the dead plain with its sigh skeleton trees. he 
was pant jerky by the time he came to the fissure leading to the 
cove, but he reach it, despite cliff's two hundred pounds. without 
pausing, he went on into the cavern, along the rock ledge, to step at 
last upon the deck of the black galley. 

"pleasant thoughts," he said gently as he drop cliff to the spongy 
boards. "you have only to wait till dark!" 

cliff listen to his rapid footfall till they die in distance; then 
there was no sound save his own breathing. 

gradual his eyes became accustomed to the heavy gloom, and he saw 
that corio had drop him just at the edge of the rowers' pit. there 
were white things down there--bones, pale as marble, scattered about 
aimlessly. could--could those bone join to make the rower who would 
arise with the night? it seem absurd--_was_ absurd--yet he knew it 
was so! he had seen too much to doubt it. 

he roll over on his back and stare upward into the shadows. he must 
lie here helpless while corio return to vilma--did with her as he 
pleased! perhaps he might even transform her into a blood-tainted 
monster like himself! he saw her again in that room of ancient 
splendor, spread-eagled to the bed; and the muscle cord in his 
arms, and his lip strained white in a futile effort to break free. 

interminable he lay there waiting. the galley was damp with the 
chill damp of a sepulcher, and the damp penetrate deep 
and deeper. clamp his jaws together to prevent their quivering, he 
struggle against a rising tide of madness which gnaw at his reason. 
his mind began to crunch and jangle like a machine out of gear, 
threaten to destroy itself. 

on and on in plod indifference the stolid moments passed, till at 
last cliff realize that it was grow darker. he roll over on his 
side and stare into the galley pit, eyes fixed on the inert masses of 
white. soon they would move! soon the undead would rise! his thoughts, 
touched by the whip of dread, sped about like slave seek escape 
from a torture pit. and abrupt out of the welter of chaotic idea 
came one straw of sanity; he seize it, his heart hammer with hope. 

those persian sailor were armed! their sword and knives were real, 
for they cut flesh! somewhere among their bone must lie sharp-edged 
blades! 

he struggle to the edge of the pit, let his feet drop over. as they 
touched, he balanced precarious for an instant, then fell to his 
knees. he peer feverishly about among white bones, molder 
garments, and rust armor--and saw a faint glimmer of light on 
pointed steel. he sank forward on his face in the direction of the 
gleam, turn over, squirm and writhe till he felt the cold blade 
against his hands. he caught it between his finger and began saw 
back and forth. 

it was heart-breaking work. age had dull the weapon, and long 
sliver of rust flake off, but the leather which bound him was also 
ancient. though progress was slow, and the effort laborious, cliff 
knew his bonds were weakening. 

but it was grow darker. even now he could see only a suggestion of 
gray among the shadows. if those undead things materialize while he 
lay among them!... sweat stood out on his forehead and he redouble 
his efforts, strain at the leather as he sawed. 

with a snap the cords part and his hand were free. a single slash 
sever the thong about his ankles, and he stood up, leap to the 
deck. not an instant too soon! there was movement in the pit--a 
hideous crawl of bone assemble themselves into skeletal form.... 

cliff wait to see no more. there were limit to what one could see 
and remain sane. with a bound he cross the rot deck, and sprang 
ashore. despite the dark, he almost ran from the madness of that cave, 
ran till he pass through the wall of rock, till he saw the rim of 
the moon gleam behind the castle. 


_5. the end of the island_ 

out on the plain he sprint through the ghostly forest. he knew he 
had no time to spare--knew that soon the march of torture would 
begin--knew that if vilma were within the castle, she must answer the 
summons of corio's horn. even now light glow faint in the high, 
square windows. 

that horn! at the foot of the steps he stop short. if _he_ heard 
the horn, he too must answer! he dare not risk it. with impatient 
finger he tore a strip of cloth from his shirt, roll it into a 
cylinder, and thrust it into his ear. another for the other ear--and 
he dart up into the castle. 

a sweeping glance reveal no one, only the murky glow of the altar 
fire, and the wraith of smoke plume upward toward the shadow 
roof. wish now that he had brought a weapon from the galley, cliff 
cross to the opening in the wall. he stood at the top of the steps, 
listening, then cursed silent as he remember that he could hear 
none but very loud sounds. he saw nothing; so he hasten down into 
the corridor. his steps were swift stealthy as he move toward 
corio's room. 

he was past the first branch passage, when a sixth sense warn him 
of someone's approach. he ran swift to the next fork, then pause 
within its shelter and glance back, saw five red-cowled figures glide 
along the tunnel and vanish up the stairway. cliff frowned. with the 
vampire in the great hall, corio must soon follow, leading his 
victim to the blood-feast. he drew back deep into the shadows. 

his grope hand touched something in the dark--round and hard--like 
a keg. curious he investigated. it _was_ a keg, and there were 
others. a sandy powder trail to the floor from a crack in one of 
them. thoughtful cliff let it run through his fingers. gunpowder! of 
course--he had heard corio mention pirate and their treasure, and 
this had been their cache of explosive. an idea was forming.... 

he look up to see a shadow pass the mouth of the tunnel; he crept 
forward and peer out. he saw the black-hooded figure of leon corio 
stride along, saw him enter the room where the passenger of the 
_ariel_ lay. in a breath cliff was down the corridor to corio's room. 
a tarnish silver candelabrum shed faint light through the chamber, 
and by its flicker glow he search for vilma, thoroughly, 
painstakingly--futilely. 

he stood in the center of the room in indecision, his forehead crease 
with anxiety. if only he could find her, he'd know how to plan! he ran 
his hand through his hair helplessly, then heard very faint the 
lure note of corio's horn. she must answer that summons, unless 
corio had her tie somewhere. his best chance of finding her lay in 
the hall above. 

on the wall still hung the mate of the cutla he had use to free 
vilma; he wrench it down and ran out into the corridor. the last of 
the naked march was disappear up the stairway. now the 
horn-note died, and he could feel more than hear the rumbling bass of 
the dirge from the depths below him. 

he ran the rest of the distance along the passageway and mount the 
steps two at a stride. he look into the torture hall. as on the 
previous night, corio stood far back, close to the wall in which cliff 
crouched. the arms of the master were raise high; raised, cliff knew 
though he could not hear it, in a blasphemous incantation. and then he 
saw something that sent a crimson lance of fury crashing through his 
brain. 

vilma, strip like the rest, stood with the other victim at the 
foot of the long steps! her body gleam pinkly, in contrast to the 
pallid drab of the half-dead automatons, and she held her head 
proud erect. but from where he stood cliff could see the side of her 
face, and it bore a look of terror. 

he could see corio's face, too, and he was look at the girl, 
baffle fury glaring from his eyes--as though she were there against 
his will. 

cliff's first impulse was to fling himself out there with his cutla 
and hack a way to freedom for vilma and himself, but cold reason 
checked this folly. such a course could end only in death. motionless 
he watch the scene before him, his brain frantic seek a plan 
with even a ghost of a chance of succeeding. 

the gunpowder! there was enough of the stuff below to blast this 
entire castle into the hell where it belonged! hasty he retrace his 
steps to the tunnel in which he had found the kegs, pluck the torch 
from its niche in the wall as he pass it. he held it high above his 
head as he examine the contents of the broken keg. unmistakable 
gunpowder! 

thrust the cutla beneath his belt, he clutch a handful of the 
black dust. then, crouch close to the floor, he drew an irregular 
thread through the passageway toward the stairs. once he return for 
more powder, but in a few minutes the job was done. at the foot of the 
steps where the trail ended, he touched his torch to the black line 
and watch a hiss spark snake its white-smoked way back toward the 
powder kegs. an instant he watch it, then sprang up the stairs. he'd 
have to move fast! 

with a hideous howl he dart into the hall, his cutla above his 
head. corio spun about--and it was his last living act. a single sweep 
of the great blade shear his head from his neck, sent it rolling 
grotesque along the floor. for three heart-beats the body stood with 
a fountain of blood spurt from sever arteries; then it crashed. 

cool cliff lean over the twitch cadaver, ignore the bedlam on 
the stairs, the horde sweeping down toward him, hurling aside the 
wait humans. he pry open clutch fingers, seize a twist 
silver instrument, and raise it to his lips. 

* * * * * 

the mass of undead were almost upon him, the murky light glint on 
menace blades, when cliff blew the first note. the note of sleep! he 
try again, hastily. and it was the right one! 

at the doleful, soothe sound the undead halt in their tracks; 
halted--and melt into nothingness before his eyes! 

but now those other five in their robe of bloody red--they were 
charging, and even though they were unarmed, cliff felt a stab of 
fear. they possessed powers beyond the human, powers a mortal could 
not combat. he brace himself and waited. 

at the bottom of the steps they stopped, range in a wide 
half-circle. the central monster--the master--flung up his arms in a 
strange terrify gesture, and cliff saw his carmine lip move in 
a chant which he could not hear. something, a chill presence, 
hover about him, seem to settle upon him, cloak him with the 
might of the devil himself. that unheard incantation continued, and 
cliff felt a cold rigidity creep through every fiber, slow 
freezing his limb into column of ice. 

with a mighty effort of will he flung himself toward that accursed 
drinker of blood--and at that instant a terrific detonation rock the 
ancient building, and a cloud of smoke and flame burst from the 
opening in the wall. cliff was hurl from his feet, roll over and 
over, and crash against the wall by the awful concussion, the cutla 
and silver horn sent whirl through the air. 

dizzy he stagger to his feet, crouch defensively. sound came 
to him clearly now; the explosion must have jar the plug from his 
ears. he scan the room; saw the unclad human scattered everywhere, 
most of them lie still and unconscious. he saw vilma rising slowly; 
then he look for the monster in red. startled, he saw them rush 
toward the opening in the wall, to vanish in its smoke-filled 
interior. why did they----? then he knew. down there somewhere were 
their graves--graves rent and broken by the explosion--graves 
threaten by the flames--and panic had seize the vampires, fear of 
the death which would result with exile from their tombs! 

unsteadi cliff cross to vilma. she saw him coming and flung 
herself sob into his arms. he crush her lithe form close--and 
another explosion, more violent than the first, sent a section of the 
stone floor leap upward as though with life of its own. clinging to 
vilma, cliff manage to maintain his footing, though the floor bucked 
and heaved. a snapping, boom roar--and a great chasm open in the 
floor. a breathless instant--and a segment of the stone stairs, 
rumbling thunderously, drop out of sight into a newly form pit! 
with it went the blasphemous altar and its phosphorescent fire. 

deafened, stunned, momentarily powerless to move, cliff's mind grope 
for an explanation. it seem incredible that gunpowder could cause 
such havoc. and the sway of the floor continued; the thick stone 
wall shook alarmingly. sudden he understood. an earthquake! the 
explosion had jar the none-too-stable understrata of rock into 
spasmodic motion that must grind everything to bits! the island was 
doomed! and earth would be better without it. 

if only they could reach the _ariel_ first! 

new strength flow through him, and hug vilma close, he stagger 
toward the spot where he knew the door must be. somehow he reach it, 
and reel down the broken stone steps. 

the plain of dead tree sway like the deck of a ship in a storm as 
cliff start across it. a gale had arisen and swept in from the sea, 
rip dry branch from the skeleton growth and whirl them about 
like straws. yet somehow cliff reach the crevice in the rock wall 
with his burden, reach the deck of the galley, cross it, and won 
to the safety of the _ariel_. minutes later, with diesel engine 
purring, they crept out through the narrow channel into the open sea. 

* * * * * 

ten minutes later the isle of the undead lay safe behind them. vilma 
had dressed; and now they sat together in the pilot house. cliff had 
one arm about her, and one hand on the wheel. 

"and so," the girl was saying, "while corio carry you to that 
terrible old boat, i got loose. he hadn't tie me very tightly, and i 
slip my hand free. i had to hide, and i could think of only one 
place that might be safe, where he wouldn't think to look for me. i 
ran down to the room where those--those other lay; i undressed, and 
bury myself among them. it was horrible--the way they suck each 
other's wounds...." 

cliff pressed a hand across her lips. "forget that!" he said almost 
fiercely. "forget all of it--d'you hear?" 

she look up at him and said simply: "i'll try." 

they glance back toward the black blotch on the horizon. the seismic 
disturbance continue unabated. at that moment they saw the barrier 
of rock like a skull split and sink into the sea. beyond, cleanse 
tongue of flame lick the sky. they saw a single jagged wall of the 
castle still standing, one window glowing in its black expanse like a 
square, bloody moon against a bloody sky. it crumbled. 

they turn away, and cliff's arm circle the girl he loved. their 
lip met and clung.... and the _ariel_ plow on through the froth 
brine, bearing them toward safety and forgetfulness.... together. 

* * * * * 






end of project gutenberg's isle of the undead, by lloyd arthur eshbach 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook isle of the undead *** 

***** this file should be name 32470.txt or 32470.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/7/32470/ 

produce by sankar viswanathan, greg weeks, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
