the project gutenberg ebook of tiger cat, by david h. keller 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: tiger cat 

author: david h. keller 

release date: may 31, 2010 [ebook #32630] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook tiger cat *** 




produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 









tiger cat 

by david h. keller 

[transcriber note: this etext was produce from weird tale october 
1937. extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s. 
copyright on this publication was renewed.] 


[sidenote: _a grim tale of torture, and the blind men who were chain 
to pillar in an underground cave_] 

preface 
the man try his best to sell me the house. he was confident that i 
would like it. repeatedly he call my attention to the view. 

there was something in what he said about the view. the villa on the top 
of a mountain command a vision of the valley, vine-clad and 
cottage-studded. it was an irregular bowl of green, dot with stone 
house which were whitewash to almost painful brilliancy. 

the valley was three and a third mile at its greatest width. standing 
at the front door of the house, an expert marksman with telescopic sight 
could have placed a rifle bullet in each of the white mark of cottages. 
they nestle like little pearl amid a sea of green grape-vines. 

"a wonderful view, _signor_," the real-estate agent repeated. "that 
scene, at any time of the year, is worth twice what i am ask for the 
villa." 

"but i can see all this without buying," i argued. 

"not without trespassing." 

"but the place is old. it has no running water." 

"wrong!" and he smile expansively, showing a row of gold-filled teeth. 
"listen." 

we were silent. 

there came to us the sound of bubble water. turning, i trace the 
sound. i found a marble cupid spurt water in a most peculiar way into 
a wall basin. i smile and commented. 

"there is one like that in brussels and another in madrid. but this is 
very fine. however, i refer to running water in a modern bathroom." 

"but why bathe when you can sit here and enjoy the view?" 

he was impossible. so, i wrote a check, took his bill of sale and became 
the owner of a mountain, top by a stone house that seem to be half 
ruin. but he did not know, and i did not tell him that i considered the 
fountain alone worth the price that i had paid. in fact, i had come to 
italy to buy that fountain if i could; buy it and take it back to 
america with me. i knew all about that curious piece of marble. george 
seabrook had written to me about it. just one letter, and then he had 
gone on, goodness know where. george was like that, always on the move. 
now i own the fountain and was already plan where i should place 
it in my new york home. certainly not in the rose garden. 

i sat down on a marble bench and look down on the valley. the 
real-estate man was right. it was a delicate, delicious piece of 
scenery. the surrounding mountain were high enough to throw a constant 
shadow on some part of the valley except at high noon. there was no sign 
of life, but i was sure that the vineyard were alive with husband-men 
and their families. an eagle float serene on the upper air currents, 
automatic adjust himself to their constant changing. 

stretch myself, i gave one look at my car and then walk into the 
house. 

* * * * * 

in the kitchen two peasant sat, an old man and an old woman. they rose 
as i entered. 

"who are you?" i ask in english. 

they simply smile and wave their hands. i repeated my question in 
italian. 

"we serve," the man replied. 

"serve whom?" 

"whoever is the master." 

"have you been here long?" 

"we have always been here. it is our home." 

his statement amuse me, and i commented, "the master come and go, but 
you remain?" 

"it seem so." 

"many masters?" 

"alas! yes. they come and go. nice young men, like you, but they do not 
stay. they buy and look at the view, and eat with us a few days and then 
they are gone." 

"and then the villa is sold again?" 

the man shrugged. "how should we know? we simply serve." 

"then prepare me my dinner. and serve it outside, under the grapevine, 
where i can see the view." 

the woman start to obey. the man came nearer. 

"shall i carry your bags to the bedroom?" 

"yes. and i will go with you and unpack." 

he took me to a room on the second floor. there was a bed there and a 
very old chest of drawers. the floor, everything about the room was 
spotless clean. the wall had been freshly whitewashed. their smooth 
white suggest wonderful possibility for despoliation, the 
drawing of a picture, the writing of a poem, the careless writhe 
autograph that cause my relative so much despair. 

"have all the master slept here?" i ask carelessly. 

"all." 

"was there one by the name of george seabrook?" 

"i think so. but they come and go. i am old and forget." 

"and all these masters, none of them ever wrote on the walls?" 

"of a certainty. all wrote with pencil what they desire to write. who 
should say they should not? for did not the villa belong to them while 
they were here? but always we prepared for the new master, and made the 
wall clean and beautiful again." 

"you were always sure that there would be a new master?" 

"certainly. someone must pay us our wages." 

i grave placed a gold piece in his itch palm, asking, "what did 
they write on the walls?" 

he look at me with old, unblink eyes. owl eyes! that is what they 
were, and he slow said, 

"each wrote or drew as his fancy led him, for they were the master and 
could do as they wished." 

"but what were the words?" 

"i cannot speak english, or read it." 

evidently, the man was not go to talk. to me the entire situation was 
most interesting. same servants, same villa, many masters. they came and 
bought and wrote on the wall and left, and then my real-estate friend 
sold the house again. a fine racket! 

downstairs, outdoors, under the grapevine, eat a good italy meal, 
look at the wonderful view, i came to laugh at my suspicions. i ate 
spaghetti, olives, dark bread and wine. silence hung heavy over the 
sullen sleepy afternoon. the sky became copper-colored. it was about to 
rain. the old man came and show me a place to put my car, a recess in 
the wall of the house, open at one end, but sheltered from the weather. 
the stone floor was black with grease; more than one automobile had been 
kept there. 

"other car have been here," i ventured. 

"all the master had cars," the old man replied. 

* * * * * 

back on the stone gallery i wait for the storm to break. at last it 
came in a solid wall of gray wet across the valley. near and 
near it came till it deluge my villa and drove me inside. 

the woman was lighting candles. i took one from her hand. 

"i want to look through the house," i explained. 

she made no protest; so i start explore the first floor. one room 
was evidently the sleeping-quarters for the servants; another was the 
kitchen, and the remain two might have serve in the old days for 
dining-room and drawing-room. there was little furniture, and the wall 
were gray with time and mold. one flight of stone stairs led upward to 
the bedroom, another to the cellar. i decided to go downstairs. 

they were steps, not made of masonry, but apparently carve out of the 
living rock. the cellar was simply a cubical hole in the mountain. it 
all look very old. i had the uneasy feeling that originally that 
cellar had been a tomb and that later the house had been built over it. 
but, once at the bottom, there was nothing to indicate a sepulcher. a 
few small cask of wine, some junk, odds of rope and rusty iron, those 
were in the corners; otherwise, the room was empty, and dusty. 

"it is an odd room," i comment to myself. it seem in some way out of 
place and out of shape and size for the villa above it. i had expect 
something more, something larger, gloomier. walking around, i examine 
the walls, and then something came to my alert senses. 

three side of the room were carve out of rock, but the remain side 
was of masonry, and in that side there was a door. a door! and why 
should a door be there except to lead to another room? there was a door, 
and that presuppose something on the other side. and what a door it 
was! more of a barricade than a partition. the iron hinge were built to 
support weight and give complete defense and support. there was a 
keyhole, and if the key correspond with the size of the hole, it was 
the largest that i had ever heard of. 

naturally, i want to open the door. as master of the villa, i had a 
right to. upstairs the old woman seem unable to understand me and 
end by telling me to see her husband. he, in turn, seem incapable of 
following my stream of talk. at last, i took him to the door and pointed 
to the keyhole. in english, italy and sign language i told him rather 
emphatically that i want the key to that door. at last he was willing 
to admit that he understood my questions. he shook his head. he had 
never had the key to that door. yes, he knew that there was such a door, 
but he had never been on the other side. it was very old. perhaps his 
ancestor understood about it, but they were all dead. he made me tired, 
so much so that i rest by place a hand on the butt of the upper 
hinge. i knew that he was deceive me. live there all his life and 
never saw the door open! 

"and you have no key to that door?" i repeated. 

"no. i have no key." 

"who has the key?" 

"the owner of the house." 

"but i own it." 

"yes, you are the master; but i mean the one who own it all the time." 

"so, the various master do not really buy the place?" 

"they buy it, but they come and go." 

"but the owner keeps on sell it and own it?" 

"yes." 

"must be a profitable business. and who own it?" 

"donna marchesi." 

"i think i met her yesterday in sorona." 

"yes, that is where she lives." 

the storm had passed. sorona was only two mile away, on the other side 
of the mountain. the cellar, the door, the mysterious uncertainty on the 
other side intrigue me. i told the man that i would be back by supper, 
and i went to my bedroom to change, preparatory to making an afternoon 
call. 

in the room i found my hand black with oil. 

and that told me a good many things, as it was the hand that had rest 
against the upper hinge of the door. i wash the hand, change my 
clothes and drove my car to sorona. 

* * * * * 

fortunately, the donna marchesi was at home. i might have met her 
before, but i now saw her ethereal beauty for the first time. at least, 
it seem ethereal at the first moment. in some ways she was the most 
beautiful woman that i had ever seen: skin white as milk, hair a tawny 
red, pile in great masses on her head, and eyes of a peculiar green, 
with pupil that were slot instead of circles. she wore her nail long, 
and they were tint red to match the titian of her hair. she seem 
surprize to have me call on her, and more surprize to hear of my 
errand. 

"you bought the villa?" she asked. 

"yes. though, when i bought it, i did not know that you were the owner. 
the agent never state whom he was acting for." 

"i know," she said with a smile. "franco is peculiar that way. he always 
pretend that he own the place." 

"no doubt he has use it more than once." 

"i fear so. the place seem to be unfortunate. i sell it with a reserve 
clause. the owner must live there. and no one seem to want to stay; so 
the place revert back to me." 

"it seem to be an old place." 

"very old. it has been in my family for generations. i have try to get 
rid of it, but what can i do when the young men will not stay?" 

she shrug her shoulder expressively. i counter with, 

"perhaps if they knew, as i do, that you own the property, they would 
be content to stay, for ever, in sorona." 

"prettily said," she answered. then the room became silent, and i heard 
her heavy breathing, like the deep purr of a cat. 

"they come and go," she said at last. 

"and, when they go, you sell to another?" i asked. 

"naturally, and with the hope that one will stay." 

"i have come for the key," i said bluntly, "the key to the cellar door." 

"are you sure you want it?" 

"absolutely! it is my villa and my cellar and my door. i want the key. i 
want to see what is on the other side of the door." 

and then it was that i saw the pupil of her eyes narrow to livid slits. 
she look at me for a second, for five, and then opening a drawer in a 
cabinet near her chair, she took out the key and hand it to me. it was 
a tool worthy of the door that it was supposed to open, being fully 
eight inch long and a pound in weight. 

taking it, i thank her and said good-bye. fifteen minutes later i was 
back, profuse in my apologies: i was temperamental, i explained, and i 
frequent change my mind. whatever was on the other side of the door 
could stay there, as far as i was concerned. then again i kiss her 
hand farewell. 

on the side street i pass through the door of a locksmith and wait 
while he complete a key. he was following a wax impression of the 
original key. an hour later i was on the way back to the villa, with the 
key in my pocket, a key that i was sure would unlock the door, and i was 
confident that the lady with the cat eyes felt sure that i had lost all 
interest in that door and what was beyond it. 

the full moon was just appear over the mountain when i drove my car 
up to the villa. i was tired, but happy. taking the candlestick in my 
hand, which candlestick was hand to me with a deep bow by the old 
woman, i ascend the stairs to my bedroom. and soon i was fast asleep. 

* * * * * 

i awoke with a start. the moon was still shining. it was midnight. i 
heard, or thought i heard, a deep moaning. it sound a little like 
wave beating on a rockbound coast. then it cease and was replace by a 
musical element that came in certain stately measures. those sound were 
in the room, but they came from far away; only by strain my sense of 
sound to the utmost could i hear anything. 

slipper on my feet, flashlight in my hand and the key in the pocket of 
my dressing-gown, i slow descended the stairs. loud snore from the 
servants' room told, or seem to tell, of their deep slumbers. down 
into the cellar i went and put the key into the hole of the lock. the 
key turn easily--no rust there--the spring and the tumbler had been 
well oiled, like the hinges. it was evident that the door had been use 
often. turning the light on the hinges, i saw what had made my hand 
black with oil. earnest i damn the servants. they knew about the 
door. they knew what was on the other side! 

just as i was about to open the door i heard a woman's voice singing in 
italian; it sound like a selection from an opera. it was follow by 
applause, and then a moaning, and one shrill cry, as though someone had 
been hurt. there was no doubt now as to where the sound that i heard in 
my room had come from; they had come from the other side of the door. 
there was a mystery there for me to solve. but i was not ready to solve 
it; so i turn the key noiselessly, and with the door locked, tiptoe 
back to my bed. 

there i try to put two and two together. they made five, seven, a 
million vague admixture of impossible results, all fill with weird 
forebodings. but never did they make four, and till they did, i knew the 
answer to be wrong, for two and two had to make four. 

many change of masters! one after another they came and bought and 
disappeared. a whitewash wall. what secret were cover with that 
whitewash? a door in a cellar. and what deviltry went on behind it? a 
key and a well-oiled lock, and servant that knew everything. in vain 
the question came to me. _what is back of the door?_ there was no ready 
answer. but, donna marchesi knew! was it her voice that i had heard? she 
knew almost everything about it, but there was one thing that i knew and 
she did not. she did not know that i could pass through the door and 
find out what was on the other side. she did not know that i had a key. 

the next day i plead indisposition and spent most of the hour idle 
and drowse in my chamber. not till nearly midnight did i venture down. 
the servant were certainly asleep that time. a dose of chloral in their 
wine had attend to the certainty of their slumbers. fully dressed, 
with an automatic in my pocket, i reach the cellar and open the 
door. it swung noiseless on its well-greased hinges. the dark on 
the other side was the black of hell. an indescribable odor came to 
me, a prison smell and with it the soft half sob, half laugh of sleep 
children, dream in their sleep, and not happy. 

i flash the light around the room. it was not a room but a cavern, a 
cave that extend far into the distance, the roof support by stone 
pillars, set at regular intervals. as far as my light would carry i saw 
the long row of white columns. 

and to each pillar was bound a man, by chains. they were rest on the 
stone floor, twenty or more of them, and all asleep. snores, grunt and 
weary sigh came from them, but not a single eyelid opened. even when i 
flash the light in their face their eyes were shut. 

and those face sicken me; white and drawn and fill with the lines 
of deep suffering. all were cover with scars; long, narrow, deep 
scars, some fresh and red, other old and dead-white. at last, the 
sunken eyelid and the inability to see my flashlight and respond told 
me the nauseate truth. those men were all blind. 

[illustration: "looking eternal into the black of his life and 
chain to a pillar of stone."] 

a pleasant sight! one blind man, look eternal into the black of 
his life, and chain to a pillar of stone--that was bad enough; but 
multiply that by twenty! was it worse? could it be worse? could twenty 
men suffer more than one man? and then a thought came to me, a terrible, 
impossible thought, so horrible that i doubt my logic. but now two and 
two were beginning to make four. could those men be the _masters_? they 
came and bought and left--to go to the cellar and stay there! 

"oh! donna marchesi!" i whispered. "how about those cat-eyes? if you had 
a hand in this, you are not a woman. you are a tiger." 

* * * * * 

i thought that i understood part of it. the latest master came to her 
for the key to the cellar, and then, when he once pass through the 
door he never left. she and her servant were not there to welcome me 
that night, because she did not know that i had a key. 

the thought came to me that perhaps one of those sleep men was george 
seabrook. he and i use to play tennis together and we knew each other 
like brothers. he had a large scar on the back of his right hand; a 
livid star-shaped scar. with that in mind, i walk careful from 
sleep man to sleep man, look at their right hands. and i found 
a right hand with a scar that was shaped like the one i knew so well. 
but that blind man, only a skin-covered skeleton, chain to a bed of 
stone! that could not be my gay young tennis player, george! 

the discovery nauseate me. what did it mean? what _could_ it mean? if 
the donna marchesi was back of all that misery, what was her motive? 

down the long cave-like room i went. there seem to be no end to it, 
though many of the column were surround with empty chains. only those 
near the door had their human flies in the trap. in the opposite 
direction the row of pillar stretch into a far oblivion. i thought 
that at the end there was the black mouth of a tunnel, but i could not 
be sure and dare not go that far to explore the truth. then, out of 
that tunnel, i heard a voice come, a singing voice. slip my shoe 
off, i ran back near the door and hid as best i could in a dark recess, 
back of a far piece of stone. i stood there in the darkness, my torch 
out, the handle of the revolver in my hand. 

the singing grew loud and louder, and then the singe came into view. 
it was none other than donna marchesi! she carry a lantern in one hand 
and a basket in the other. hanging the lantern on a nail, she took the 
basket and went from one sleep man to another. with each her 
performance was the same; she awaken them with a kick in the face, and 
then, when they sat up crying with pain, she placed a hard roll of bread 
in their blind, trembling, outstretched hand. with all fed, there was 
silence save for gnawing teeth break through the hard crusts. the 
poor devil were hungry, starve slow to death, and how they wolf 
the bread! she laugh with animal delight as they cry for more. 
standing under the lamp, a lovely devil in her decolleté dress, she 
laugh at them. i swear i saw her yellow eyes, dilate in the 
semi-darkness! 

sudden she gave the command, 

"up! you dogs, _up_!" 

* * * * * 

like well-trained animal they rose to their feet, clumsily, but as fast 
as they could under the handicap of tremble limb and heavy chains. 
two were slow in obeying, and those she struck across the face with a 
small whip, till they whine with pain. 

they stood there in silence, twenty odd blind men, chain against as 
many pillar of stone; and then the woman, standing in the middle of 
them, start to sing. it was a well-trained voice, but metallic, and 
her high note had in them the cry of a wild animal. no feminine 
soft there. she sang from an italy opera, and i knew that i had 
heard that song before. while she sang, her audience wait silently. at 
last she finished, and they start to applaud. shrunken hand beat 
noisy against shrunken hands. 

she seem to watch them carefully, as though she were measure the 
degree of their appreciation. one man did not satisfy her. she went over 
and dug into his face with long stroke of those long red nail until 
his face was red and her finger bloody. and when she finished her 
second song that man clap loud than any of them. he had learned his 
lesson. 

she end by give them each another roll and a dipper of water. then, 
lantern and basket in her hands, she walk away and disappear down 
the tunnel. the blind men, crying and curse in their impotent rage, 
sank down on their stone beds. 

i went to my friend, and took his hand. 

"george! george seabrook!" i whispered. 

he sat up and cried, "who call me? who is there?" 

i told him, and he start to cry. at last he became quiet enough to 
talk to me. what he told me, with slight variants, was the story of all 
the men there and all the men who had been there but who had died. each 
man had been master for a day or a week. each had found the cellar door 
and had come to the donna marchesi for the key. some had been suspicious 
and had written their thought on the wall of their bedroom. but one and 
all had, in the end, found their curiosity more than they could resist 
and had open the door. on the other side they had been overpower and 
chain to a pillar, and there they had remain till they died. some of 
them live long than the rest. smith of boston had been there over two 
years, though he was cough badly and did not think that he could last 
much longer. seabrook told me their names. they were the best blood of 
america, with three englishmen and one frenchman. 

"and are you all blind?" i whispered, dread the answer. 

"yes. that happen the first night we are here. she do it with her 
nails." 

"and she come every night?" 

"every night. she feed us and sing to us and we applaud. when one of 
us dies, she unchain the body, and throw it down a hole somewhere. she 
talks to us about that hole sometimes and brag that she is go to 
fill it up before she stops." 

"but who is helping her?" 

"i think it is the real-estate man. of course, the old devil upstairs 
help. i think that they must drug us. some of the men say that they went 
to sleep in their bed and woke, chain to their posts." 

my voice tremble as i bent over and whisper in his ear, "what would 
you do, george, if she came and sang, and you found that you were not 
chained? you and the other men not chained? what would you men do, 
george?" 

"ask them," he snarled. "ask them, one at a time. but i know what i 
would do. i know!" 

and he start to cry, because he could not do it the next second; cry 
from rage and helpless till the tear ran from his empty sockets. 

"does she always come at the same time?" 

"as far as i know. but time is nothing to us. we just wait for death." 

"are the chain locked?" 

"yes. and she must have the key. but we could file the links if only we 
had files. if only each of us had a file, we could get free. perhaps the 
man upstairs has a key, but i hardly think so." 

"did you write on that pretty wall upstairs, the whitewash wall?" 

"i did; i think we all did. one man wrote a sonnet to the woman, verse 
in her honor, telling about her beautiful eyes. he rave about that poem 
for hour while he was dying. did you ever see it on the wall?" 

"i did not see it. the old people whitewash the wall before each new 
master comes." 

"i thought so." 

"are you sure you would know what to do, george, if she sang to you and 
you were loose?" 

"yes, we would know." 

so i left him, promising an end to the matter as soon as i could arrange 
it. 

* * * * * 

the next day saw me calling on the donna marchesi. i took her flower 
that time, a corsage of vivid purple and scarlet orchids. she 
entertain me in her music room and i, taking the hint, ask her to 
sing. shyly, almost with reluctance, she did as i asked. she sang the 
selection from the italy opera that i knew so well. i was generous in 
my applause. 

she smiled. 

"you like to hear me sing?" 

"indeed! i want to hear you again. i could hear you daily without 
grow tired." 

"you're nice," she purred. "perhaps it could be arranged." 

"you are too modest. you have a wonderful voice. why not give it to the 
world?" 

"i sang once in public," she sighed. "it was in new york, at a private 
musical. there were many men there. perhaps it was stage fright; my 
voice broke badly, and the audience, especially the men, were not kind. 
i am not sure, but i thought that i heard some of them hiss me." 

"surely not!" i protested. 

"indeed, so. but no man has hiss my singing since then." 

"i hope not!" i reply indignantly. "you have a wonderful voice, and, 
when i applaud you, i was sincere. by the way, may i change my mind 
and ask for the key to the door in the cellar?" 

"do you want it, really want it, my friend?" 

"i am sure i do. i may never use it, but it will please me to have it. 
little things in life make me happy, and this key is a little thing." 

"then you shall have it. will you do me a favor? wait till sunday to use 
it. today is friday, and you will not have to wait many hours." 

"it will be a pleasure to do as you desire," i replied, kiss her 
hand. "and shall i hear you sing again? may i come often to hear you 
sing?" 

"i promise you that," she sighed. "i am sure that you will hear me sing 
often in the future. i feel that in some way our fates approach the same 
star." 

i look into her eyes, her yellow cat-eyes, and i was sure that she 
spoke the truth. destiny had certainly brought me to find her in sorona. 

* * * * * 

i bought two dozen rat-tailed files, and dashed across the mountain to 
milan. there i was closet with the consul of three nations: england, 
france and my own. they did not want to believe my story. i gave them 
names, and they had to admit that there had been inquiries, but they 
felt that the main detail were nightmares, result from an over-use 
of italy wines. but i insist that i was not drunk with new wine. at 
last, they call in the chief of the detective bureau. he knew franco, 
the real-estate agent; also the lady in question. and he had heard 
something of the villa; not much, but vague whisperings. 

"we will be there saturday night," he promised. "that leaves you 
tonight. the lady will not try to trap you till sunday. can you attend 
to the old people?" 

"they will be harmless. see that franco do not have a chance to 
escape. here is the extra key to the door. i will go through before 
twelve. when i am ready, i will open the door. if i am not out by one in 
the morning, you come through with your police. do we all understand?" 

"i understand," said the america consul. "but i still think you are 
dreaming." 

back at the villa, i again drug the old people, not much, but enough 
to insure their sleep that night. they like me. i was liberal with my 
gold, and i careless show them where i kept my reserve. 

then i went through the door. again i heard the donna marchesi sing to 
an audience that would never hiss her. she left, and i start to 
distribute the files. from one blind wretch to the next i went, 
whisper words of cheer and instruction for the next night. they were 
to cut through a link in the chain, but in such a way that the tiger cat 
would not suspect that they had gain their liberty. were they pleased 
to have a hope of freedom? i am not sure, but they were delight at 
another prospect. 

the next night i double the tip to the old servants. with tear of 
gratitude in their eyes, they thank me as they call me their dear 
master. i put them to sleep as though they were babies. in fact, i 
wonder at the time if they would ever recover from the dose of chloral 
i gave them. i did not even bother to tie them, but just toss them on 
their beds. 

at half past ten, automobile began to arrive with darken lights. we 
had a lengthy conference, and soon after eleven i went through the door. 
i lost no time in making sure that each of the blind mice was a free 
man, but i insist that they act as though bound till the proper time. 
they were trembling, but it was not from fear, not that time. 

back in my hiding-place i waited, and soon i heard the singing voice. 
ten minutes later the donna marchesi had her lantern hung on the nail. 
ah! she was more beautiful that night than i had ever seen her. dress 
in filmy white, her beautiful body, lovely hair, long lithe limb would 
have bound any man to her through eternity. she seem to sense that 
beauty, for, after give out the first supply of rolls, she varied her 
program. she told her audience how she had dress that evening for 
their special pleasure. she describe her jewel and her costume. she 
almost became grandiose as she told of her beauty, and, driving in the 
dagger, she twist it as she remind them that never would they be 
able to see her, never touch her or kiss her hand. all they could do was 
to hear her sing, applaud and at last die. 

of all the terrible things in her life that little talk to those blind 
men was the climax. 

and then she sang. i watch her closely, and i saw what i suspected. 
she sang with her eyes closed. was she in fancy seeming that she was in 
an opera-house before thousand of spellbound admirers? who knows? but 
ever as she sang that night her eyes were closed, and even as she came 
to a close, wait for the usual applause, her eyes were closed. 

* * * * * 

she wait in the silence for the clap of hands. it did not come. with 
terrific anger, she whirl to her basket and reach for her whip. 

"dogs!" she cried. "have you so soon forgot your lesson?" 

and then she realize that the twenty blind men were close in on her. 
they were silent, but their outstretched hand were feeling for 
something that they want very much. even when her whip start to cut, 
they were silent. then one man touched her. to her credit, there was no 
sign of fear. she knew what had happened. she must have known, but she 
was not afraid. her single scream was nothing but the battle-cry of the 
tiger cat go into action. 

there was a single cry, and that was all. the men reach for what they 
want in silence. for a while they were all in a struggle group on 
their feet, but soon they were all on the ground. it was simply a mass, 
and under that mass was a biting, scratching, fighting, die animal. 

i couldn't stand it. i had plan it all, i want it all to happen, 
but when it came, i just couldn't stand it. cover with the sweat of 
fear, i ran to the door and unlock it. i swung it open, went through 
the doorway, closed it and lock it again. the men, wait for me in 
the cellar, look on with doubt. it seem that they were right in 
thinking that my tale was an alcoholic one. 

"give me whisky!" i gasped, as i drop on the floor. 

in a few minutes i had recovered. 

"open the door," i ordered. "and bring the blind men out." 

one at a time they were brought to the kitchen, and identified. some 
were terribly mutilate in the face, long deep scratches, and even 
pieces bitten out, and one had the corner of his mouth torn. most of 
them were sob hysterically, but, in some way, though none said so, i 
judge that they were all happy. 

we went back to the cellar and through the door. on the stone floor was 
a clot mass of red and white. 

"what's that?" ask the america consul. 

"i think that is the donna marchesi," i replied. "she must have met with 
an accident." 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of tiger cat, by david h. keller 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook tiger cat *** 

***** this file should be name 32630-8.txt or 32630-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/3/32630/ 

produce by greg weeks, mary meehan and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
