the project gutenberg ebook of the collected works of ambrose bierce, vol. 
ii: in the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilians, by ambrose bierce 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 


title: the collected works of ambrose bierce, vol. ii: in the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilian 

author: ambrose bierce 

release date: august 30, 2004 [ebook #13334] 
[last updated: january 26, 2014] 

language: english 


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook ambrose bierce, vol. ii *** 




produce by jonathan ingram, carol david and pg distribute proofread 




the collected 
works of 
ambrose bierce 

volume ii 


in the midst of life 

tale of soldier and civilian 



originally publish 1909 


preface 
to the first edition 


deny existence by the chief publishing house of the country, this 
book owe itself to mr. e.l.g. steele, merchant, of this city. in 
attest mr. steele's faith in his judgment and his friend, it will 
serve its author's main and best ambition. 

a.b. 

san francisco, sept. 4, 1891. 




contents 


a horseman in the sky 15 
an occurrence at owl creek bridge 27 
chickamauga 46 
a son of the gods 58 
one of the missing 71 
kill at resaca 93 
the affair at coulter's notch 105 
the coup de grÂce 122 
parker adderson, philosopher 133 
an affair of outpost 146 
the story of a conscience 165 
one kind of officer 178 
one officer, one man 197 
george thurston 209 
the mocking-bird 218 

civilian 

the man out of the nose 233 
an adventure at brownville 247 
the famous gilson bequest 266 
the applicant 281 
a watch by the dead 290 
the man and the snake 311 
a holy terror 324 
the suitable surroundings 350 
the board window 364 
a lady from red horse 373 
the eyes of the panther 385 





soldier 




a horseman in the sky 

i 

one sunny afternoon in the autumn of the year 1861 a soldier lay in a 
clump of laurel by the side of a road in western virginia. he lay at 
full length upon his stomach, his feet rest upon the toes, his head 
upon the left forearm. his extend right hand loose grasp his 
rifle. but for the somewhat methodical disposition of his limb and a 
slight rhythmic movement of the cartridge-box at the back of his belt he 
might have been thought to be dead. he was asleep at his post of duty. 
but if detect he would be dead shortly afterward, death being the just 
and legal penalty of his crime. 

the clump of laurel in which the criminal lay was in the angle of a road 
which after ascend southward a steep acclivity to that point turn 
sharp to the west, running along the summit for perhaps one hundred 
yards. there it turn southward again and went zigzag downward 
through the forest. at the salient of that second angle was a large flat 
rock, jut out northward, overlook the deep valley from which the 
road ascended. the rock cap a high cliff; a stone drop from its 
outer edge would have fallen sheer downward one thousand feet to the 
tops of the pines. the angle where the soldier lay was on another spur 
of the same cliff. had he been awake he would have command a view, not 
only of the short arm of the road and the jut rock, but of the 
entire profile of the cliff below it. it might well have made him giddy 
to look. 

the country was wooded everywhere except at the bottom of the valley to 
the northward, where there was a small natural meadow, through which 
flow a stream scarcely visible from the valley's rim. this open ground 
look hardly large than an ordinary door-yard, but was really several 
acre in extent. its green was more vivid than that of the inclose 
forest. away beyond it rose a line of giant cliff similar to those upon 
which we are supposed to stand in our survey of the savage scene, and 
through which the road had somehow made its climb to the summit. the 
configuration of the valley, indeed, was such that from this point of 
observation it seem entire shut in, and one could but have wonder 
how the road which found a way out of it had found a way into it, and 
whence came and whither went the waters of the stream that part the 
meadow more than a thousand feet below. 

no country is so wild and difficult but men will make it a theatre of 
war; conceal in the forest at the bottom of that military rat-trap, in 
which half a hundred men in possession of the exit might have starve 
an army to submission, lay five regiment of federal infantry. they had 
march all the previous day and night and were resting. at nightfall 
they would take to the road again, climb to the place where their 
unfaithful sentinel now slept, and descend the other slope of the 
ridge fall upon a camp of the enemy at about midnight. their hope was to 
surprise it, for the road led to the rear of it. in case of failure, 
their position would be perilous in the extreme; and fail they surely 
would should accident or vigilance apprise the enemy of the movement. 

ii 

the sleep sentinel in the clump of laurel was a young virginia name 
carter druse. he was the son of wealthy parents, an only child, and had 
known such ease and cultivation and high living as wealth and taste were 
able to command in the mountain country of western virginia. his home 
was but a few mile from where he now lay. one morning he had risen from 
the breakfast-table and said, quiet but gravely: "father, a union 
regiment has arrive at grafton. i am go to join it." 

the father lift his leonine head, look at the son a moment in 
silence, and replied: "well, go, sir, and whatever may occur do what you 
conceive to be your duty. virginia, to which you are a traitor, must get 
on without you. should we both live to the end of the war, we will speak 
further of the matter. your mother, as the physician has informed you, 
is in a most critical condition; at the best she cannot be with us 
long than a few weeks, but that time is precious. it would be better 
not to disturb her." 

so carter druse, bowing reverent to his father, who return the 
salute with a stately courtesy that masked a break heart, left the 
home of his childhood to go soldiering. by conscience and courage, by 
deed of devotion and daring, he soon commend himself to his fellow 
and his officers; and it was to these quality and to some knowledge of 
the country that he owe his selection for his present perilous duty at 
the extreme outpost. nevertheless, fatigue had been strong than 
resolution and he had fallen asleep. what good or bad angel came in a 
dream to rouse him from his state of crime, who shall say? without a 
movement, without a sound, in the profound silence and the languor of 
the late afternoon, some invisible messenger of fate touched with 
unseale finger the eyes of his consciousness--whispered into the ear 
of his spirit the mysterious awakening word which no human lip ever 
have spoken, no human memory ever has recalled. he quiet raise his 
forehead from his arm and look between the mask stem of the 
laurels, instinctive close his right hand about the stock of his 
rifle. 

his first feeling was a keen artistic delight. on a colossal pedestal, 
the cliff,--motionless at the extreme edge of the cap rock and 
sharp outline against the sky,--was an equestrian statue of 
impressive dignity. the figure of the man sat the figure of the horse, 
straight and soldierly, but with the repose of a grecian god carve in 
the marble which limit the suggestion of activity. the gray costume 
harmonize with its aërial background; the metal of accoutrement and 
caparison was soften and subdued by the shadow; the animal's skin had 
no points of high light. a carbine striking foreshorten lay across 
the pommel of the saddle, kept in place by the right hand grasping it at 
the "grip"; the left hand, holding the bridle rein, was invisible. in 
silhouette against the sky the profile of the horse was cut with the 
sharp of a cameo; it look across the heights of air to the 
confront cliff beyond. the face of the rider, turn slightly away, 
show only an outline of temple and beard; he was look downward to 
the bottom of the valley. magnify by its lift against the sky and by 
the soldier's testify sense of the formidable of a near enemy the 
group appear of heroic, almost colossal, size. 

for an instant druse had a strange, half-defined feeling that he had 
slept to the end of the war and was look upon a noble work of art 
rear upon that eminence to commemorate the deed of an heroic past of 
which he had been an inglorious part. the feeling was dispel by a 
slight movement of the group: the horse, without moving its feet, had 
drawn its body slightly backward from the verge; the man remain 
immobile as before. broad awake and keen alive to the significance of 
the situation, druse now brought the butt of his rifle against his cheek 
by cautious push the barrel forward through the bushes, cock the 
piece, and glancing through the sight cover a vital spot of the 
horseman's breast. a touch upon the trigger and all would have been well 
with carter druse. at that instant the horseman turn his head and 
look in the direction of his conceal foeman--seemed to look into his 
very face, into his eyes, into his brave, compassionate heart. 

is it then so terrible to kill an enemy in war--an enemy who has 
surprise a secret vital to the safety of one's self and comrades--an 
enemy more formidable for his knowledge than all his army for its 
numbers? carter druse grew pale; he shook in every limb, turn faint, 
and saw the statuesque group before him as black figures, rising, 
falling, moving unsteadi in arc of circle in a fiery sky. his hand 
fell away from his weapon, his head slow drop until his face rest 
on the leaves in which he lay. this courageous gentleman and hardy 
soldier was near swoon from intensity of emotion. 

it was not for long; in another moment his face was raise from earth, 
his hand resume their place on the rifle, his forefinger sought the 
trigger; mind, heart, and eyes were clear, conscience and reason sound. 
he could not hope to capture that enemy; to alarm him would but send him 
dashing to his camp with his fatal news. the duty of the soldier was 
plain: the man must be shot dead from ambush--without warning, without a 
moment's spiritual preparation, with never so much as an unspoken 
prayer, he must be sent to his account. but no--there is a hope; he may 
have discover nothing--perhaps he is but admire the sublime of the 
landscape. if permitted, he may turn and ride careless away in the 
direction whence he came. surely it will be possible to judge at the 
instant of his withdraw whether he knows. it may well be that his 
fixity of attention--druse turn his head and look through the deep 
of air downward, as from the surface to the bottom of a translucent sea. 
he saw creep across the green meadow a sinuous line of figures of men 
and horses--some foolish commander was permit the soldier of his 
escort to water their beast in the open, in plain view from a dozen 
summits! 

druse withdrew his eyes from the valley and fixed them again upon the 
group of man and horse in the sky, and again it was through the sight 
of his rifle. but this time his aim was at the horse. in his memory, as 
if they were a divine mandate, rang the words of his father at their 
parting: "whatever may occur, do what you conceive to be your duty." he 
was calm now. his teeth were firm but not rigid closed; his nerves 
were as tranquil as a sleep babe's--not a tremor affected any muscle 
of his body; his breathing, until suspend in the act of taking aim, 
was regular and slow. duty had conquered; the spirit had said to the 
body: "peace, be still." he fired. 

iii 

an officer of the federal force, who in a spirit of adventure or in 
quest of knowledge had left the hidden _bivouac_ in the valley, and with 
aimless feet had made his way to the lower edge of a small open space 
near the foot of the cliff, was considering what he had to gain by 
push his exploration further. at a distance of a quarter-mile before 
him, but apparently at a stone's throw, rose from its fringe of pine 
the gigantic face of rock, towering to so great a height above him that 
it made him giddy to look up to where its edge cut a sharp, rugged line 
against the sky. it present a clean, vertical profile against a 
background of blue sky to a point half the way down, and of distant 
hills, hardly less blue, thence to the tops of the tree at its base. 
lift his eyes to the dizzy altitude of its summit the officer saw an 
astonish sight--a man on horseback riding down into the valley 
through the air! 

straight upright sat the rider, in military fashion, with a firm seat in 
the saddle, a strong clutch upon the rein to hold his charger from too 
impetuous a plunge. from his bare head his long hair stream upward, 
wave like a plume. his hand were conceal in the cloud of the 
horse's lift mane. the animal's body was as level as if every 
hoof-stroke encounter the resistant earth. its motions were those of a 
wild gallop, but even as the officer look they ceased, with all the 
leg thrown sharp forward as in the act of alight from a leap. but 
this was a flight! 

fill with amaze and terror by this apparition of a horseman in the 
sky--half believe himself the chosen scribe of some new apocalypse, 
the officer was overcome by the intensity of his emotions; his leg 
fail him and he fell. almost at the same instant he heard a crashing 
sound in the trees--a sound that die without an echo--and all was 
still. 

the officer rose to his feet, trembling. the familiar sensation of an 
abrade shin recall his daze faculties. pull himself together he 
ran rapid oblique away from the cliff to a point distant from its 
foot; thereabout he expect to find his man; and thereabout he 
naturally failed. in the fleeting instant of his vision his imagination 
had been so wrought upon by the apparent grace and ease and intention of 
the marvelous performance that it did not occur to him that the line of 
march of aërial cavalry is directly downward, and that he could find the 
object of his search at the very foot of the cliff. a half-hour later 
he return to camp. 

this officer was a wise man; he knew better than to tell an incredible 
truth. he said nothing of what he had seen. but when the commander ask 
him if in his scout he had learned anything of advantage to the 
expedition he answered: 

"yes, sir; there is no road leading down into this valley from the 
southward." 

the commander, knowing better, smiled. 

iv 

after fire his shot, private carter druse reload his rifle and 
resume his watch. ten minutes had hardly pass when a federal sergeant 
crept cautious to him on hand and knees. druse neither turn his 
head nor look at him, but lay without motion or sign of recognition. 

"did you fire?" the sergeant whispered. 

"yes." 

"at what?" 

"a horse. it was standing on yonder rock--pretty far out. you see it is 
no long there. it went over the cliff." 

the man's face was white, but he show no other sign of emotion. have 
answered, he turn away his eyes and said no more. the sergeant did not 
understand. 

"see here, druse," he said, after a moment's silence, "it's no use 
making a mystery. i order you to report. was there anybody on the 
horse?" 

"yes." 

"well?" 

"my father." 

the sergeant rose to his feet and walk away. "good god!" he said. 




an occurrence at owl creek bridge 

i 

a man stood upon a railroad bridge in northern alabama, look down 
into the swift water twenty feet below. the man's hand were behind his 
back, the wrist bound with a cord. a rope close encircle his neck. 
it was attach to a stout cross-timber above his head and the slack 
fell to the level of his knees. some loose boards laid upon the sleeper 
support the metal of the railway supply a footing for him and his 
executioners--two private soldier of the federal army, direct by a 
sergeant who in civil life may have been a deputy sheriff. at a short 
remove upon the same temporary platform was an officer in the uniform of 
his rank, armed. he was a captain. a sentinel at each end of the bridge 
stood with his rifle in the position known as "support," that is to say, 
vertical in front of the left shoulder, the hammer rest on the 
forearm thrown straight across the chest--a formal and unnatural 
position, enforce an erect carriage of the body. it did not appear to 
be the duty of these two men to know what was occur at the centre of 
the bridge; they merely blockade the two end of the foot planking that 
traverse it. 

beyond one of the sentinel nobody was in sight; the railroad ran 
straight away into a forest for a hundred yards, then, curving, was lost 
to view. doubtless there was an outpost farther along. the other bank of 
the stream was open ground--a gentle acclivity top with a stockade of 
vertical tree trunks, loop-holed for rifles, with a single embrasure 
through which protrude the muzzle of a brass cannon commanding the 
bridge. mid-way of the slope between bridge and fort were the 
spectators--a single company of infantry in line, at "parade rest," the 
butt of the rifles on the ground, the barrel incline slightly 
backward against the right shoulder, the hand cross upon the stock. a 
lieutenant stood at the right of the line, the point of his sword upon 
the ground, his left hand rest upon his right. excepting the group of 
four at the centre of the bridge, not a man moved. the company face the 
bridge, staring stonily, motionless. the sentinels, facing the bank of 
the stream, might have been statue to adorn the bridge. the captain 
stood with fold arms, silent, observing the work of his subordinates, 
but making no sign. death is a dignitary who when he come announce is 
to be received with formal manifestation of respect, even by those most 
familiar with him. in the code of military etiquette silence and fixity 
are form of deference. 

the man who was engaged in being hang was apparently about thirty-five 
years of age. he was a civilian, if one might judge from his habit, 
which was that of a planter. his features were good--a straight nose, 
firm mouth, broad forehead, from which his long, dark hair was comb 
straight back, fall behind his ear to the collar of his well-fitting 
frock-coat. he wore a mustache and pointed beard, but no whiskers; his 
eyes were large and dark gray, and had a kindly expression which one 
would hardly have expect in one whose neck was in the hemp. evidently 
this was no vulgar assassin. the liberal military code make provision 
for hanging many kind of persons, and gentlemen are not excluded. 

the preparation being complete, the two private soldier step aside 
and each drew away the plank upon which he had been standing. the 
sergeant turn to the captain, salute and placed himself immediately 
behind that officer, who in turn move apart one pace. these movements 
left the condemn man and the sergeant standing on the two end of the 
same plank, which span three of the cross-ties of the bridge. the end 
upon which the civilian stood almost, but not quite, reach a fourth. 
this plank had been held in place by the weight of the captain; it was 
now held by that of the sergeant. at a signal from the former the latter 
would step aside, the plank would tilt and the condemn man go down 
between two ties. the arrangement commend itself to his judgment as 
simple and effective. his face had not been cover nor his eyes 
bandaged. he look a moment at his "unsteadfast footing," then let his 
gaze wander to the swirl water of the stream racing madly beneath his 
feet. a piece of dance driftwood caught his attention and his eyes 
follow it down the current. how slow it appear to move! what a 
sluggish stream! 

he closed his eyes in order to fix his last thought upon his wife and 
children. the water, touched to gold by the early sun, the brood 
mists under the bank at some distance down the stream, the fort, the 
soldiers, the piece of drift--all had distracted him. and now he became 
conscious of a new disturbance. striking through the thought of his dear 
one was a sound which he could neither ignore nor understand, a sharp, 
distinct, metallic percussion like the stroke of a blacksmith's hammer 
upon the anvil; it had the same ring quality. he wonder what it 
was, and whether immeasurable distant or near by--it seem both. its 
recurrence was regular, but as slow as the toll of a death knell. he 
await each stroke with impatience and--he knew not why--apprehension. 
the interval of silence grew progressive longer; the delay became 
maddening. with their greater infrequent the sound increase in 
strength and sharpness. they hurt his ear like the thrust of a knife; he 
fear he would shriek. what he heard was the ticking of his watch. 

he unclosed his eyes and saw again the water below him. "if i could free 
my hands," he thought, "i might throw off the noose and spring into the 
stream. by dive i could evade the bullet and, swimming vigorously, 
reach the bank, take to the wood and get away home. my home, thank god, 
is as yet outside their lines; my wife and little one are still beyond 
the invader's farthest advance." 

as these thoughts, which have here to be set down in words, were flash 
into the doom man's brain rather than evolve from it the captain 
nod to the sergeant. the sergeant step aside. 

ii 

peyton farquhar was a well-to-do planter, of an old and highly respect 
alabama family. being a slave owner and like other slave owner a 
politician he was naturally an original secessionist and ardent 
devoted to the southern cause. circumstances of an imperious nature, 
which it is unnecessary to relate here, had prevent him from taking 
service with the gallant army that had fought the disastrous campaign 
ending with the fall of corinth, and he chafe under the inglorious 
restraint, longing for the release of his energies, the large life of 
the soldier, the opportunity for distinction. that opportunity, he felt, 
would come, as it come to all in war time. meanwhile he did what he 
could. no service was too humble for him to perform in aid of the south, 
no adventure too perilous for him to undertake if consistent with the 
character of a civilian who was at heart a soldier, and who in good 
faith and without too much qualification assent to at least a part of 
the frankly villainous dictum that all is fair in love and war. 

one evening while farquhar and his wife were sitting on a rustic bench 
near the entrance to his grounds, a gray-clad soldier rode up to the 
gate and ask for a drink of water. mrs. farquhar was only too happy to 
serve him with her own white hands. while she was fetching the water her 
husband approach the dusty horseman and inquire eager for news from 
the front. 

"the yank are repair the railroads," said the man, "and are get 
ready for another advance. they have reach the owl creek bridge, put 
it in order and built a stockade on the north bank. the commandant has 
issue an order, which is post everywhere, declare that any civilian 
caught interfere with the railroad, its bridges, tunnel or train 
will be summary hanged. i saw the order." 

"how far is it to the owl creek bridge?" farquhar asked. 

"about thirty miles." 

"is there no force on this side the creek?" 

"only a picket post half a mile out, on the railroad, and a single 
sentinel at this end of the bridge." 

"suppose a man--a civilian and student of hanging--should elude the 
picket post and perhaps get the better of the sentinel," said farquhar, 
smiling, "what could he accomplish?" 

the soldier reflected. "i was there a month ago," he replied. "i 
observe that the flood of last winter had lodge a great quantity of 
driftwood against the wooden pier at this end of the bridge. it is now 
dry and would burn like tow." 

the lady had now brought the water, which the soldier drank. he thank 
her ceremoniously, bowed to her husband and rode away. an hour later, 
after nightfall, he repass the plantation, go northward in the 
direction from which he had come. he was a federal scout. 

iii 

as peyton farquhar fell straight downward through the bridge he lost 
consciousness and was as one already dead. from this state he was 
awakened--ages later, it seem to him--by the pain of a sharp pressure 
upon his throat, follow by a sense of suffocation. keen, poignant 
agony seem to shoot from his neck downward through every fibre of 
his body and limbs. these pains appear to flash along well-defined 
lines of ramification and to beat with an inconceivable rapid 
periodicity. they seem like stream of pulsate fire heating him to 
an intolerable temperature. as to his head, he was conscious of nothing 
but a feeling of fulness--of congestion. these sensation were 
unaccompanied by thought. the intellectual part of his nature was 
already effaced; he had power only to feel, and feeling was torment. he 
was conscious of motion. encompass in a luminous cloud, of which he 
was now merely the fiery heart, without material substance, he swung 
through unthinkable arc of oscillation, like a vast pendulum. then all 
at once, with terrible suddenness, the light about him shot upward with 
the noise of a loud plash; a frightful roaring was in his ears, and all 
was cold and dark. the power of thought was restored; he knew that the 
rope had broken and he had fallen into the stream. there was no 
additional strangulation; the noose about his neck was already 
suffocate him and kept the water from his lungs. to die of hanging at 
the bottom of a river!--the idea seem to him ludicrous. he open his 
eyes in the dark and saw above him a gleam of light, but how 
distant, how inaccessible! he was still sinking, for the light became 
faint and faint until it was a mere glimmer. then it began to grow 
and brighten, and he knew that he was rising toward the surface--knew it 
with reluctance, for he was now very comfortable. "to be hang and 
drowned," he thought, "that is not so bad; but i do not wish to be shot. 
no; i will not be shot; that is not fair." 

he was not conscious of an effort, but a sharp pain in his wrist 
apprise him that he was try to free his hands. he gave the struggle 
his attention, as an idle might observe the feat of a juggler, without 
interest in the outcome. what splendid effort!--what magnificent, what 
superhuman strength! ah, that was a fine endeavor! bravo! the cord fell 
away; his arms part and float upward, the hand dim seen on each 
side in the grow light. he watch them with a new interest as first 
one and then the other pounce upon the noose at his neck. they tore it 
away and thrust it fierce aside, its undulation resemble those of a 
water-snake. "put it back, put it back!" he thought he shout these 
words to his hands, for the undoing of the noose had been succeed by 
the direst pang that he had yet experienced. his neck ache horribly; 
his brain was on fire; his heart, which had been flutter faintly, 
gave a great leap, try to force itself out at his mouth. his whole 
body was rack and wrench with an insupportable anguish! but his 
disobedient hand gave no heed to the command. they beat the water 
vigorous with quick, downward strokes, force him to the surface. he 
felt his head emerge; his eyes were blind by the sunlight; his chest 
expand convulsively, and with a supreme and crown agony his lung 
engulf a great draught of air, which instantly he expel in a 
shriek! 

he was now in full possession of his physical senses. they were, indeed, 
preternatural keen and alert. something in the awful disturbance of 
his organic system had so exalted and refined them that they made record 
of things never before perceived. he felt the ripple upon his face and 
heard their separate sound as they struck. he look at the forest on 
the bank of the stream, saw the individual trees, the leaves and the 
veining of each leaf--saw the very insect upon them: the locusts, the 
brilliant-bodied flies, the gray spider stretch their web from twig 
to twig. he noted the prismatic colors in all the dewdrop upon a 
million blade of grass. the hum of the gnat that dance above the 
eddy of the stream, the beating of the dragon-flies' wings, the 
stroke of the water-spiders' legs, like oar which had lift their 
boat--all these made audible music. a fish slid along beneath his eyes 
and he heard the rush of its body parting the water. 

he had come to the surface facing down the stream; in a moment the 
visible world seem to wheel slow round, himself the pivotal point, 
and he saw the bridge, the fort, the soldier upon the bridge, the 
captain, the sergeant, the two privates, his executioners. they were in 
silhouette against the blue sky. they shout and gesticulated, point 
at him. the captain had drawn his pistol, but did not fire; the other 
were unarmed. their movements were grotesque and horrible, their form 
gigantic. 

sudden he heard a sharp report and something struck the water smart 
within a few inch of his head, spatter his face with spray. he 
heard a second report, and saw one of the sentinel with his rifle at 
his shoulder, a light cloud of blue smoke rising from the muzzle. the 
man in the water saw the eye of the man on the bridge gaze into his 
own through the sight of the rifle. he observe that it was a gray eye 
and remember have read that gray eyes were keenest, and that all 
famous markmen had them. nevertheless, this one had missed. 

a counter-swirl had caught farquhar and turn him half round; he was 
again look into the forest on the bank opposite the fort. the sound 
of a clear, high voice in a monotonous singsong now rang out behind him 
and came across the water with a distinct that pierce and subdued 
all other sounds, even the beating of the ripple in his ears. although 
no soldier, he had frequent camp enough to know the dread 
significance of that deliberate, drawling, aspirate chant; the 
lieutenant on shore was taking a part in the morning's work. how cold 
and pitilessly--with what an even, calm intonation, presaging, and 
enforce tranquill in the men--with what accurate measured 
interval fell those cruel words: 

"attention, company!... shoulder arms!... ready!... aim!... fire!" 

farquhar dived--dived as deep as he could. the water roar in his 
ear like the voice of niagara, yet he heard the dull thunder of the 
volley and, rising again toward the surface, met shining bit of metal, 
singularly flattened, oscillate slow downward. some of them touched 
him on the face and hands, then fell away, continue their descent. one 
lodge between his collar and neck; it was uncomfortable warm and he 
snatch it out. 

as he rose to the surface, gasp for breath, he saw that he had been a 
long time under water; he was perceptible farther down stream--nearer to 
safety. the soldier had almost finished reloading; the metal ramrod 
flash all at once in the sunshine as they were drawn from the barrels, 
turn in the air, and thrust into their sockets. the two sentinel 
fire again, independent and ineffectually. 

the hunt man saw all this over his shoulder; he was now swimming 
vigorous with the current. his brain was as energetic as his arms and 
legs; he thought with the rapid of lightning. 

"the officer," he reasoned, "will not make that martinet's error a 
second time. it is as easy to dodge a volley as a single shot. he has 
probably already given the command to fire at will. god help me, i 
cannot dodge them all!" 

an appalling plash within two yard of him was follow by a loud, 
rush sound, _diminuendo_, which seem to travel back through the air 
to the fort and die in an explosion which stir the very river to its 
deeps! a rising sheet of water curve over him, fell down upon him, 
blind him, strangle him! the cannon had taken a hand in the game. as 
he shook his head free from the commotion of the smitten water he heard 
the deflect shot hum through the air ahead, and in an instant it 
was crack and smashing the branch in the forest beyond. 

"they will not do that again," he thought; "the next time they will use 
a charge of grape. i must keep my eye upon the gun; the smoke will 
apprise me--the report arrive too late; it lag behind the missile. 
that is a good gun." 

sudden he felt himself whirl round and round--spinning like a top. 
the water, the banks, the forests, the now distant bridge, fort and men 
--all were commingle and blurred. object were represent by their 
colors only; circular horizontal streak of color--that was all he saw. 
he had been caught in a vortex and was being whirl on with a velocity 
of advance and gyration that made him giddy and sick. in a few moments 
he was flung upon the gravel at the foot of the left bank of the stream 
--the southern bank--and behind a project point which conceal him 
from his enemies. the sudden arrest of his motion, the abrasion of one 
of his hand on the gravel, restore him, and he wept with delight. he 
dug his finger into the sand, threw it over himself in handful and 
audible blessed it. it look like diamonds, rubies, emeralds; he could 
think of nothing beautiful which it did not resemble. the tree upon the 
bank were giant garden plants; he noted a definite order in their 
arrangement, inhale the fragrance of their blooms. a strange, roseate 
light shone through the space among their trunks and the wind made in 
their branch the music of æolian harps. he had no wish to perfect his 
escape--was content to remain in that enchanting spot until retaken. 

a whiz and rattle of grapeshot among the branch high above his head 
rouse him from his dream. the baffle cannon had fire him a random 
farewell. he sprang to his feet, rush up the slope bank, and plunge 
into the forest. 

all that day he traveled, lay his course by the round sun. the 
forest seem interminable; nowhere did he discover a break in it, not 
even a woodman's road. he had not known that he live in so wild a 
region. there was something uncanny in the revelation. 

by nightfall he was fatigued, footsore, famishing. the thought of his 
wife and children urge him on. at last he found a road which led him in 
what he knew to be the right direction. it was as wide and straight as a 
city street, yet it seem untraveled. no field border it, no 
dwelling anywhere. not so much as the bark of a dog suggest human 
habitation. the black body of the tree form a straight wall on both 
sides, terminate on the horizon in a point, like a diagram in a lesson 
in perspective. over-head, as he look up through this rift in the 
wood, shone great golden stars look unfamiliar and group in strange 
constellations. he was sure they were arrange in some order which had a 
secret and malign significance. the wood on either side was full of 
singular noises, among which--once, twice, and again--he distinct 
heard whisper in an unknown tongue. 

his neck was in pain and lift his hand to it he found it horrible 
swollen. he knew that it had a circle of black where the rope had 
bruise it. his eyes felt congested; he could no long close them. his 
tongue was swollen with thirst; he relieved its fever by thrust it 
forward from between his teeth into the cold air. how soft the turf 
had carpet the untraveled avenue--he could no long feel the roadway 
beneath his feet! 

doubtless, despite his suffering, he had fallen asleep while walking, 
for now he see another scene--perhaps he has merely recover from a 
delirium. he stand at the gate of his own home. all is as he left it, 
and all bright and beautiful in the morning sunshine. he must have 
traveled the entire night. as he push open the gate and pass up the 
wide white walk, he see a flutter of female garments; his wife, look 
fresh and cool and sweet, steps down from the veranda to meet him. at 
the bottom of the steps she stand waiting, with a smile of ineffable 
joy, an attitude of matchless grace and dignity. ah, how beautiful she 
is! he spring forward with extend arms. as he is about to clasp her 
he feel a stunning blow upon the back of the neck; a blind white 
light blazes all about him with a sound like the shock of a cannon--then 
all is dark and silence! 

peyton farquhar was dead; his body, with a broken neck, swung gently 
from side to side beneath the timber of the owl creek bridge. 




chickamauga 

one sunny autumn afternoon a child stray away from its rude home in a 
small field and enter a forest unobserved. it was happy in a new sense 
of freedom from control, happy in the opportunity of exploration and 
adventure; for this child's spirit, in body of its ancestors, had for 
thousand of years been train to memorable feat of discovery and 
conquest--victories in battle whose critical moments were centuries, 
whose victors' camp were city of hewn stone. from the cradle of its 
race it had conquer its way through two continent and passing a great 
sea had penetrate a third, there to be born to war and dominion as a 
heritage. 

the child was a boy age about six years, the son of a poor planter. in 
his younger manhood the father had been a soldier, had fought against 
naked savage and follow the flag of his country into the capital of a 
civilize race to the far south. in the peaceful life of a planter the 
warrior-fire survived; once kindled, it is never extinguished. the man 
love military books and pictures and the boy had understood enough to 
make himself a wooden sword, though even the eye of his father would 
hardly have known it for what it was. this weapon he now bore bravely, 
as became the son of an heroic race, and pause now and again in the 
sunny space of the forest assumed, with some exaggeration, the posture 
of aggression and defense that he had been taught by the engraver's art. 
made reckless by the ease with which he overcame invisible foe 
attempt to stay his advance, he committed the common enough military 
error of push the pursuit to a dangerous extreme, until he found 
himself upon the margin of a wide but shallow brook, whose rapid waters 
barred his direct advance against the flying foe that had cross with 
illogical ease. but the intrepid victor was not to be baffled; the 
spirit of the race which had pass the great sea burn unconquerable 
in that small breast and would not be denied. finding a place where some 
bowlder in the bed of the stream lay but a step or a leap apart, he 
made his way across and fell again upon the rear-guard of his imaginary 
foe, putt all to the sword. 

now that the battle had been won, prudence require that he withdraw to 
his base of operations. alas; like many a mighty conqueror, and like 
one, the mightiest, he could not 

curb the lust for war, 
nor learn that tempt fate will leave the loftiest star. 

advance from the bank of the creek he sudden found himself 
confront with a new and more formidable enemy: in the path that he was 
following, sat, bolt upright, with ear erect and paw suspend before 
it, a rabbit! with a startle cry the child turn and fled, he knew not 
in what direction, calling with inarticulate cries for his mother, 
weeping, stumbling, his tender skin cruel torn by brambles, his little 
heart beating hard with terror--breathless, blind with tears--lost in 
the forest! then, for more than an hour, he wander with err feet 
through the tangle undergrowth, till at last, overcome by fatigue, he 
lay down in a narrow space between two rocks, within a few yard of the 
stream and still grasping his toy sword, no long a weapon but a 
companion, sob himself to sleep. the wood bird sang merry above 
his head; the squirrels, whisk their bravery of tail, ran bark 
from tree to tree, unconscious of the pity of it, and somewhere far away 
was a strange, muffle thunder, as if the partridge were drum in 
celebration of nature's victory over the son of her immemorial 
enslavers. and back at the little plantation, where white men and black 
were hasty searching the field and hedge in alarm, a mother's heart 
was break for her missing child. 

hour passed, and then the little sleeper rose to his feet. the chill of 
the evening was in his limbs, the fear of the gloom in his heart. but he 
had rested, and he no long wept. with some blind instinct which 
impel to action he struggle through the undergrowth about him and 
came to a more open ground--on his right the brook, to the left a 
gentle acclivity stud with infrequent trees; over all, the gathering 
gloom of twilight. a thin, ghostly mist rose along the water. it 
frightened and repel him; instead of recrossing, in the direction 
whence he had come, he turn his back upon it, and went forward toward 
the dark inclose wood. sudden he saw before him a strange moving 
object which he took to be some large animal--a dog, a pig--he could not 
name it; perhaps it was a bear. he had seen pictures of bears, but knew 
of nothing to their discredit and had vague wish to meet one. but 
something in form or movement of this object--something in the 
awkward of its approach--told him that it was not a bear, and 
curiosity was stay by fear. he stood still and as it came slow on 
gain courage every moment, for he saw that at least it had not the 
long, menace ear of the rabbit. possibly his impressionable mind was 
half conscious of something familiar in its shambling, awkward gait. 
before it had approach near enough to resolve his doubt he saw that 
it was follow by another and another. to right and to left were many 
more; the whole open space about him was alive with them--all moving 
toward the brook. 

they were men. they crept upon their hand and knees. they use their 
hand only, drag their legs. they use their knee only, their arms 
hanging idle at their sides. they strove to rise to their feet, but fell 
prone in the attempt. they did nothing naturally, and nothing alike, 
save only to advance foot by foot in the same direction. singly, in 
pair and in little groups, they came on through the gloom, some halting 
now and again while other crept slow past them, then resume their 
movement. they came by dozen and by hundreds; as far on either hand as 
one could see in the deepen gloom they extend and the black wood 
behind them appear to be inexhaustible. the very ground seem in 
motion toward the creek. occasional one who had pause did not again 
go on, but lay motionless. he was dead. some, pausing, made strange 
gesture with their hands, erect their arms and lower them again, 
clasp their heads; spread their palm upward, as men are sometimes 
seen to do in public prayer. 

not all of this did the child note; it is what would have been noted by 
an elder observer; he saw little but that these were men, yet crept like 
babes. being men, they were not terrible, though unfamiliar clad. he 
move among them freely, go from one to another and peer into 
their face with childish curiosity. all their face were singularly 
white and many were streak and gout with red. something in this-- 
something too, perhaps, in their grotesque attitude and movements-- 
remind him of the paint clown whom he had seen last summer in the 
circus, and he laugh as he watch them. but on and ever on they 
crept, these maim and bleeding men, as heedless as he of the dramatic 
contrast between his laughter and their own ghastly gravity. to him it 
was a merry spectacle. he had seen his father's negro creep upon their 
hand and knee for his amusement--had ridden them so, "making believe" 
they were his horses. he now approach one of these crawl figures 
from behind and with an agile movement mount it astride. the man sank 
upon his breast, recovered, flung the small boy fierce to the ground 
as an unbroken colt might have done, then turn upon him a face that 
lack a lower jaw--from the upper teeth to the throat was a great red 
gap fringe with hanging shred of flesh and splinter of bone. the 
unnatural prominence of nose, the absence of chin, the fierce eyes, gave 
this man the appearance of a great bird of prey crimson in throat and 
breast by the blood of its quarry. the man rose to his knees, the child 
to his feet. the man shook his fist at the child; the child, terrify 
at last, ran to a tree near by, got upon the farther side of it and took 
a more serious view of the situation. and so the clumsy multitude 
drag itself slow and painful along in hideous pantomime--moved 
forward down the slope like a swarm of great black beetles, with never a 
sound of going--in silence profound, absolute. 

instead of darkening, the haunt landscape began to brighten. through 
the belt of tree beyond the brook shone a strange red light, the trunks 
and branch of the tree making a black lacework against it. it struck 
the creep figures and gave them monstrous shadows, which caricature 
their movements on the lit grass. it fell upon their faces, touching 
their white with a ruddy tinge, accentuate the stain with which 
so many of them were freak and maculated. it sparkle on buttons and 
bit of metal in their clothing. instinctive the child turn toward 
the grow splendor and move down the slope with his horrible 
companions; in a few moments had pass the foremost of the throng--not 
much of a feat, considering his advantages. he placed himself in the 
lead, his wooden sword still in hand, and solemn direct the march, 
conform his pace to theirs and occasional turning as if to see that 
his forces did not straggle. surely such a leader never before had such 
a following. 

scattered about upon the ground now slow narrow by the encroachment 
of this awful march to water, were certain articles to which, in the 
leader's mind, were couple no significant associations: an occasional 
blanket, tight roll lengthwise, double and the end bound together 
with a string; a heavy knapsack here, and there a broken rifle--such 
things, in short, as are found in the rear of retreat troops, the 
"spoor" of men flying from their hunters. everywhere near the creek, 
which here had a margin of lowland, the earth was trodden into mud by 
the feet of men and horses. an observer of better experience in the use 
of his eyes would have notice that these footprint pointed in both 
directions; the ground had been twice pass over--in advance and in 
retreat. a few hour before, these desperate, stricken men, with their 
more fortunate and now distant comrades, had penetrate the forest in 
thousands. their successive battalions, break into swarm and 
re-forming in lines, had pass the child on every side--had almost 
trodden on him as he slept. the rustle and murmur of their march had not 
awaken him. almost within a stone's throw of where he lay they had 
fought a battle; but all unheard by him were the roar of the musketry, 
the shock of the cannon, "the thunder of the captain and the shouting." 
he had slept through it all, grasping his little wooden sword with 
perhaps a tight clutch in unconscious sympathy with his martial 
environment, but as heedless of the grandeur of the struggle as the dead 
who had die to make the glory. 

the fire beyond the belt of wood on the farther side of the creek, 
reflect to earth from the canopy of its own smoke, was now suffuse 
the whole landscape. it transform the sinuous line of mist to the 
vapor of gold. the water gleam with dash of red, and red, too, were 
many of the stone protrude above the surface. but that was blood; the 
less desperate wound had stain them in crossing. on them, too, the 
child now cross with eager steps; he was go to the fire. as he 
stood upon the farther bank he turn about to look at the companion of 
his march. the advance was arrive at the creek. the strong had 
already drawn themselves to the brink and plunge their face into the 
flood. three or four who lay without motion appear to have no heads. 
at this the child's eyes expand with wonder; even his hospitable 
understanding could not accept a phenomenon imply such vitality as 
that. after slake their thirst these men had not had the strength to 
back away from the water, nor to keep their head above it. they were 
drowned. in rear of these, the open space of the forest show the 
leader as many formless figures of his grim command as at first; but not 
nearly so many were in motion. he wave his cap for their encouragement 
and smiling pointed with his weapon in the direction of the guide 
light--a pillar of fire to this strange exodus. 

confident of the fidelity of his forces, he now enter the belt of 
woods, pass through it easily in the red illumination, climb a 
fence, ran across a field, turning now and again to coquet with his 
responsive shadow, and so approach the blazing ruin of a dwelling. 
desolate everywhere! in all the wide glare not a living thing was 
visible. he care nothing for that; the spectacle pleased, and he dance 
with glee in imitation of the waver flames. he ran about, collect 
fuel, but every object that he found was too heavy for him to cast in 
from the distance to which the heat limited his approach. in despair he 
flung in his sword--a surrender to the superior forces of nature. his 
military career was at an end. 

shift his position, his eyes fell upon some outbuilding which had an 
oddly familiar appearance, as if he had dream of them. he stood 
considering them with wonder, when sudden the entire plantation, with 
its inclose forest, seem to turn as if upon a pivot. his little 
world swung half around; the points of the compass were reversed. he 
recognize the blazing building as his own home! 

for a moment he stood stupefy by the power of the revelation, then ran 
with stumble feet, making a half-circuit of the ruin. there, 
conspicuous in the light of the conflagration, lay the dead body of a 
woman--the white face turn upward, the hand thrown out and clutch 
full of grass, the clothing deranged, the long dark hair in tangle and 
full of clot blood. the greater part of the forehead was torn away, 
and from the jagged hole the brain protruded, overflow the temple, a 
frothy mass of gray, crown with cluster of crimson bubbles--the work 
of a shell. 

the child move his little hands, making wild, uncertain gestures. he 
utter a series of inarticulate and indescribable cries--something 
between the chatter of an ape and the gobble of a turkey--a 
startling, soulless, unholy sound, the language of a devil. the child 
was a deaf mute. 

then he stood motionless, with quiver lips, look down upon the 
wreck. 




a son of the gods 

a study in the present tense 

a breezy day and a sunny landscape. an open country to right and left 
and forward; behind, a wood. in the edge of this wood, facing the open 
but not venture into it, long lines of troops, halted. the wood is 
alive with them, and full of confuse noises--the occasional rattle of 
wheels as a battery of artillery go into position to cover the 
advance; the hum and murmur of the soldier talking; a sound of 
innumerable feet in the dry leaves that strew the interspace among the 
trees; hoarse command of officers. detached group of horsemen are well 
in front--not altogether exposed--many of them intent regarding the 
crest of a hill a mile away in the direction of the interrupt advance. 
for this powerful army, moving in battle order through a forest, has met 
with a formidable obstacle--the open country. the crest of that gentle 
hill a mile away has a sinister look; it says, beware! along it runs a 
stone wall extend to left and right a great distance. behind the wall 
is a hedge; behind the hedge are seen the tops of tree in rather 
straggle order. among the trees--what? it is necessary to know. 

yesterday, and for many days and nights previously, we were fight 
somewhere; always there was cannonading, with occasional keen rattling 
of musketry, mingle with cheers, our own or the enemy's, we seldom 
knew, attest some temporary advantage. this morning at daybreak the 
enemy was gone. we have move forward across his earthworks, across 
which we have so often vain attempt to move before, through the 
debris of his abandoned camps, among the grave of his fallen, into the 
wood beyond. 

how curious we had regard everything! how odd it all had seemed! 
nothing had appear quite familiar; the most commonplace objects--an 
old saddle, a splinter wheel, a forgotten canteen--everything had 
related something of the mysterious personality of those strange men who 
had been killing us. the soldier never become wholly familiar with the 
conception of his foe as men like himself; he cannot divest himself of 
the feeling that they are another order of beings, different 
conditioned, in an environment not altogether of the earth. the smallest 
vestige of them rivet his attention and engage his interest. he think 
of them as inaccessible; and, catching an unexpected glimpse of them, 
they appear farther away, and therefore larger, than they really are-- 
like object in a fog. he is somewhat in awe of them. 

from the edge of the wood leading up the acclivity are the track of 
horse and wheels--the wheels of cannon. the yellow grass is beaten down 
by the feet of infantry. clearly they have pass this way in thousands; 
they have not withdrawn by the country roads. this is significant--it is 
the difference between retiring and retreating. 

that group of horsemen is our commander, his staff and escort. he is 
facing the distant crest, holding his field-glass against his eyes with 
both hands, his elbow needlessly elevated. it is a fashion; it seem to 
dignify the act; we are all addict to it. sudden he lower the glass 
and say a few words to those about him. two or three aide detach 
themselves from the group and canter away into the woods, along the 
lines in each direction. we did not hear his words, but we know them: 
"tell general x. to send forward the skirmish line." those of us who 
have been out of place resume our positions; the men rest at ease 
straighten themselves and the ranks are re-formed without a command. 
some of us staff officer dismount and look at our saddle girths; those 
already on the ground remount. 

galloping rapid along in the edge of the open ground come a young 
officer on a snow-white horse. his saddle blanket is scarlet. what a 
fool! no one who has ever been in action but remember how naturally 
every rifle turn toward the man on a white horse; no one but has 
observe how a bit of red enrage the bull of battle. that such colors 
are fashionable in military life must be accept as the most 
astonish of all the phenomena of human vanity. they would seem to 
have been devise to increase the death-rate. 

this young officer is in full uniform, as if on parade. he is all agleam 
with bullion--a blue-and-gold edition of the poetry of war. a wave of 
derisive laughter runs abreast of him all along the line. but how 
handsome he is!--with what careless grace he sit his horse! 

he reins up within a respectful distance of the corps commander and 
salutes. the old soldier nod familiarly; he evidently know him. a 
brief colloquy between them is go on; the young man seem to be 
prefer some request which the elder one is indisposed to grant. let 
us ride a little nearer. ah! too late--it is ended. the young officer 
salute again, wheels his horse, and ride straight toward the crest of 
the hill! 

a thin line of skirmishers, the men deploy at six pace or so apart, 
now push from the wood into the open. the commander speak to his 
bugler, who clap his instrument to his lips. _tra-la-la! tra-la-la!_ 
the skirmish halt in their tracks. 

meantime the young horseman has advanced a hundred yards. he is riding 
at a walk, straight up the long slope, with never a turn of the head. 
how glorious! gods! what would we not give to be in his place--with his 
soul! he do not draw his sabre; his right hand hang easily at his 
side. the breeze catch the plume in his hat and flutter it smartly. 
the sunshine rest upon his shoulder-straps, lovingly, like a visible 
benediction. straight on he rides. ten thousand pair of eyes are fixed 
upon him with an intensity that he can hardly fail to feel; ten thousand 
heart keep quick time to the inaudible hoof-beats of his snowy steed. 
he is not alone--he draw all soul after him. but we remember that we 
laughed! on and on, straight for the hedge-lined wall, he rides. not a 
look backward. o, if he would but turn--if he could but see the love, 
the adoration, the atonement! 

not a word is spoken; the populous depths of the forest still murmur 
with their unseen and unseeing swarm, but all along the fringe is 
silence. the burly commander is an equestrian statue of himself. the 
mount staff officers, their field glasses up, are motionless all. the 
line of battle in the edge of the wood stand at a new kind of 
"attention," each man in the attitude in which he was caught by the 
consciousness of what is go on. all these harden and impenitent 
man-killers, to whom death in its awfulest form is a fact familiar to 
their every-day observation; who sleep on hill tremble with the 
thunder of great guns, dine in the midst of stream missiles, and play 
at cards among the dead face of their dearest friends--all are watch 
with suspend breath and beating heart the outcome of an act involve 
the life of one man. such is the magnetism of courage and devotion. 

if now you should turn your head you would see a simultaneous movement 
among the spectators--a start, as if they had received an electric 
shock--and look forward again to the now distant horseman you would 
see that he has in that instant alter his direction and is riding at 
an angle to his former course. the spectator suppose the sudden 
deflection to be cause by a shot, perhaps a wound; but take this 
field-glass and you will observe that he is riding toward a break in the 
wall and hedge. he means, if not killed, to ride through and overlook 
the country beyond. 

you are not to forget the nature of this man's act; it is not permit 
to you to think of it as an instance of bravado, nor, on the other hand, 
a needless sacrifice of self. if the enemy has not retreat he is in 
force on that ridge. the investigate will encounter nothing less than a 
line-of-battle; there is no need of pickets, videttes, skirmishers, to 
give warning of our approach; our attack lines will be visible, 
conspicuous, expose to an artillery fire that will shave the ground the 
moment they break from cover, and for half the distance to a sheet of 
rifle bullet in which nothing can live. in short, if the enemy is 
there, it would be madness to attack him in front; he must be manoeuvre 
out by the immemorial plan of threaten his line of communication, as 
necessary to his existence as to the diver at the bottom of the sea his 
air tube. but how ascertain if the enemy is there? there is but one 
way,--somebody must go and see. the natural and customary thing to do is 
to send forward a line of skirmishers. but in this case they will answer 
in the affirmative with all their lives; the enemy, crouch in double 
ranks behind the stone wall and in cover of the hedge, will wait until 
it is possible to count each assailant's teeth. at the first volley a 
half of the questioning line will fall, the other half before it can 
accomplish the predestine retreat. what a price to pay for gratify 
curiosity! at what a dear rate an army must sometimes purchase 
knowledge! "let me pay all," say this gallant man--this military 
christ! 

there is no hope except the hope against hope that the crest is clear. 
true, he might prefer capture to death. so long as he advances, the line 
will not fire--why should it? he can safe ride into the hostile ranks 
and become a prisoner of war. but this would defeat his object. it would 
not answer our question; it is necessary either that he return unharmed 
or be shot to death before our eyes. only so shall we know how to act. 
if captured--why, that might have been done by a half-dozen stragglers. 

now begin an extraordinary contest of intellect between a man and an 
army. our horseman, now within a quarter of a mile of the crest, 
sudden wheels to the left and gallop in a direction parallel to it. 
he has caught sight of his antagonist; he know all. some slight 
advantage of ground has enable him to overlook a part of the line. if 
he were here he could tell us in words. but that is now hopeless; he 
must make the best use of the few minutes of life remain to him, by 
compel the enemy himself to tell us as much and as plainly as 
possible--which, naturally, that discreet power is reluctant to do. not 
a rifleman in those crouch ranks, not a cannon at those masked and 
shot guns, but know the needs of the situation, the imperative duty 
of forbearance. besides, there has been time enough to forbid them all 
to fire. true, a single rifle-shot might drop him and be no great 
disclosure. but fire is infectious--and see how rapid he moves, with 
never a pause except as he whirl his horse about to take a new 
direction, never directly backward toward us, never directly forward 
toward his executioners. all this is visible through the glass; it seem 
occur within pistol-shot; we see all but the enemy, whose presence, 
whose thoughts, whose motive we infer. to the unaided eye there is 
nothing but a black figure on a white horse, tracing slow zigzag 
against the slope of a distant hill--so slow they seem almost to 
creep. 

now--the glass again--he has tired of his failure, or see his error, or 
has gone mad; he is dashing directly forward at the wall, as if to take 
it at a leap, hedge and all! one moment only and he wheels right about 
and is speeding like the wind straight down the slope--toward his 
friends, toward his death! instantly the wall is top with a fierce 
roll of smoke for a distance of hundred of yard to right and left. 
this is as instantly dissipated by the wind, and before the rattle of 
the rifles reach us he is down. no, he recover his seat; he has but 
pull his horse upon its haunches. they are up and away! a tremendous 
cheer burst from our ranks, relieve the insupportable tension of our 
feelings. and the horse and its rider? yes, they are up and away. away, 
indeed--they are making directly to our left, parallel to the now 
steady blazing and smoking wall. the rattle of the musketry is 
continuous, and every bullet's target is that courageous heart. 

sudden a great bank of white smoke push upward from behind the wall. 
another and another--a dozen roll up before the thunder of the 
explosion and the hum of the missile reach our ear and the 
missile themselves come bound through cloud of dust into our 
covert, knock over here and there a man and cause a temporary 
distraction, a passing thought of self. 

the dust drift away. incredible!--that enchant horse and rider have 
pass a ravine and are climb another slope to unveil another 
conspiracy of silence, to thwart the will of another armed host. another 
moment and that crest too is in eruption. the horse rear and strike 
the air with its forefeet. they are down at last. but look again--the 
man has detached himself from the dead animal. he stand erect, 
motionless, holding his sabre in his right hand straight above his head. 
his face is toward us. now he lower his hand to a level with his face 
and move it outward, the blade of the sabre describe a downward 
curve. it is a sign to us, to the world, to posterity. it is a hero's 
salute to death and history. 

again the spell is broken; our men attempt to cheer; they are choke 
with emotion; they utter hoarse, discordant cries; they clutch their 
weapon and press tumultuous forward into the open. the skirmishers, 
without orders, against orders, are go forward at a keen run, like 
hound unleashed. our cannon speak and the enemy's now open in full 
chorus; to right and left as far as we can see, the distant crest, 
seeming now so near, erect its tower of cloud and the great shot pitch 
roaring down among our moving masses. flag after flag of ours emerge 
from the wood, line after line sweep forth, catching the sunlight on 
its burnish arms. the rear battalion alone are in obedience; they 
preserve their proper distance from the insurgent front. 

the commander has not moved. he now remove his field-glass from his 
eyes and glance to the right and left. he see the human current 
flowing on either side of him and his huddle escort, like tide wave 
part by a rock. not a sign of feeling in his face; he is thinking. 
again he direct his eyes forward; they slow traverse that malign and 
awful crest. he address a calm word to his bugler. _tra-la-la! 
tra-la-la!_ the injunction has an imperious which enforce it. it is 
repeated by all the bugle of all the sub-ordinate commanders; the sharp 
metallic note assert themselves above the hum of the advance and 
penetrate the sound of the cannon. to halt is to withdraw. the colors 
move slow back; the lines face about and sullen follow, bearing 
their wounded; the skirmish return, gathering up the dead. 

ah, those many, many needless dead! that great soul whose beautiful body 
is lie over yonder, so conspicuous against the sere hillside--could it 
not have been spare the bitter consciousness of a vain devotion? would 
one exception have mar too much the pitiless perfection of the 
divine, eternal plan? 




one of the missing 

jerome searing, a private soldier of general sherman's army, then 
confront the enemy at and about kennesaw mountain, georgia, turn 
his back upon a small group of officer with whom he had been talk in 
low tones, step across a light line of earthworks, and disappear in 
a forest. none of the men in line behind the works had said a word to 
him, nor had he so much as nod to them in passing, but all who saw 
understood that this brave man had been intrust with some perilous 
duty. jerome searing, though a private, did not serve in the ranks; he 
was detailed for service at division headquarters, being borne upon the 
rolls as an orderly. "orderly" is a word covering a multitude of duties. 
an orderly may be a messenger, a clerk, an officer's servant--anything. 
he may perform service for which no provision is made in orders and 
army regulations. their nature may depend upon his aptitude, upon favor, 
upon accident. private searing, an incomparable marksman, young, hardy, 
intelligent and insensible to fear, was a scout. the general commanding 
his division was not content to obey orders blind without knowing what 
was in his front, even when his command was not on detached service, but 
form a fraction of the line of the army; nor was he satisfy to 
receive his knowledge of his _vis-à-vis_ through the customary channels; 
he want to know more than he was apprise of by the corps commander 
and the collision of picket and skirmishers. hence jerome searing, 
with his extraordinary daring, his woodcraft, his sharp eyes, and 
truthful tongue. on this occasion his instruction were simple: to get 
as near the enemy's lines as possible and learn all that he could. 

in a few moments he had arrive at the picket-line, the men on duty 
there lie in group of two and four behind little bank of earth 
scoop out of the slight depression in which they lay, their rifles 
protrude from the green bough with which they had masked their small 
defenses. the forest extend without a break toward the front, so 
solemn and silent that only by an effort of the imagination could it be 
conceive as populous with armed men, alert and vigilant--a forest 
formidable with possibility of battle. pause a moment in one of 
these rifle-pits to apprise the men of his intention searing crept 
stealthy forward on his hand and knee and was soon lost to view in a 
dense thicket of underbrush. 

"that is the last of him," said one of the men; "i wish i had his rifle; 
those fellow will hurt some of us with it." 

searing crept on, taking advantage of every accident of ground and 
growth to give himself better cover. his eyes penetrate everywhere, his 
ear took note of every sound. he still his breathing, and at the 
crack of a twig beneath his knee stop his progress and hug the 
earth. it was slow work, but not tedious; the danger made it exciting, 
but by no physical sign was the excitement manifest. his pulse was as 
regular, his nerves were as steady as if he were try to trap a 
sparrow. 

"it seem a long time," he thought, "but i cannot have come very far; i 
am still alive." 

he smile at his own method of estimate distance, and crept forward. a 
moment later he sudden flatten himself upon the earth and lay 
motionless, minute after minute. through a narrow opening in the bush 
he had caught sight of a small mound of yellow clay--one of the enemy's 
rifle-pits. after some little time he cautious raise his head, inch 
by inch, then his body upon his hands, spread out on each side of him, 
all the while intent regarding the hillock of clay. in another moment 
he was upon his feet, rifle in hand, stride rapid forward with 
little attempt at concealment. he had rightly interpret the signs, 
whatever they were; the enemy was gone. 

to assure himself beyond a doubt before go back to report upon so 
important a matter, searing pushed forward across the line of abandoned 
pits, running from cover to cover in the more open forest, his eyes 
vigilant to discover possible stragglers. he came to the edge of a 
plantation--one of those forlorn, desert homestead of the last years 
of the war, upgrown with brambles, ugly with broken fence and desolate 
with vacant building have blank aperture in place of door and 
windows. after a keen reconnoissance from the safe seclusion of a clump 
of young pine searing ran lightly across a field and through an orchard 
to a small structure which stood apart from the other farm buildings, on 
a slight elevation. this he thought would enable him to overlook a large 
scope of country in the direction that he supposed the enemy to have 
taken in withdrawing. this building, which had originally consist of a 
single room elevated upon four post about ten feet high, was now little 
more than a roof; the floor had fallen away, the joist and plank 
loose pile on the ground below or rest on end at various angles, 
not wholly torn from their fastening above. the support post were 
themselves no long vertical. it look as if the whole edifice would 
go down at the touch of a finger. 

conceal himself in the debris of joist and flooring searing look 
across the open ground between his point of view and a spur of kennesaw 
mountain, a half-mile away. a road leading up and across this spur was 
crowded with troops--the rear-guard of the retiring enemy, their 
gun-barrels gleam in the morning sunlight. 

searing had now learned all that he could hope to know. it was his duty 
to return to his own command with all possible speed and report his 
discovery. but the gray column of confederate toil up the mountain 
road was singularly tempting. his rifle--an ordinary "springfield," but 
fitted with a globe sight and hair-trigger--would easily send its ounce 
and a quarter of lead hiss into their midst. that would probably not 
affect the duration and result of the war, but it is the business of a 
soldier to kill. it is also his habit if he is a good soldier. searing 
cock his rifle and "set" the trigger. 

but it was decree from the beginning of time that private searing was 
not to murder anybody that bright summer morning, nor was the 
confederate retreat to be announce by him. for countless age event 
had been so matching themselves together in that wondrous mosaic to some 
parts of which, dim discernible, we give the name of history, that the 
acts which he had in will would have mar the harmony of the pattern. 
some twenty-five years previous the power charged with the execution 
of the work according to the design had provided against that mischance 
by cause the birth of a certain male child in a little village at the 
foot of the carpathian mountains, had careful rear it, supervise 
its education, direct its desire into a military channel, and in due 
time made it an officer of artillery. by the concurrence of an infinite 
number of favor influence and their preponderance over an infinite 
number of oppose ones, this officer of artillery had been made to 
commit a breach of discipline and flee from his native country to avoid 
punishment. he had been direct to new orleans (instead of new york), 
where a recruit officer await him on the wharf. he was enlist and 
promoted, and things were so ordered that he now command a confederate 
battery some two mile along the line from where jerome searing, the 
federal scout, stood cock his rifle. nothing had been neglected--at 
every step in the progress of both these men's lives, and in the lives 
of their contemporary and ancestors, and in the lives of the 
contemporary of their ancestors, the right thing had been done to 
bring about the desire result. had anything in all this vast 
concatenation been overlook private searing might have fire on the 
retreat confederate that morning, and would perhaps have missed. as 
it fell out, a confederate captain of artillery, have nothing better 
to do while await his turn to pull out and be off, amuse himself by 
sight a field-piece oblique to his right at what he mistook for 
some federal officer on the crest of a hill, and discharge it. the 
shot flew high of its mark. 

as jerome searing drew back the hammer of his rifle and with his eyes 
upon the distant confederate considered where he could plant his shot 
with the best hope of making a widow or an orphan or a childless 
mother,--perhaps all three, for private searing, although he had 
repeatedly refuse promotion, was not without a certain kind of 
ambition,--he heard a rush sound in the air, like that made by the 
wings of a great bird swoop down upon its prey. more quick than he 
could apprehend the gradation, it increase to a hoarse and horrible 
roar, as the missile that made it sprang at him out of the sky, striking 
with a deafen impact one of the post support the confusion of 
timber above him, smashing it into matchwood, and bring down the 
crazy edifice with a loud clatter, in cloud of blind dust! 

when jerome searing recover consciousness he did not at once 
understand what had occurred. it was, indeed, some time before he open 
his eyes. for a while he believe that he had die and been buried, and 
he try to recall some portion of the burial service. he thought that 
his wife was kneel upon his grave, add her weight to that of the 
earth upon his breast. the two of them, widow and earth, had crush his 
coffin. unless the children should persuade her to go home he would not 
much long be able to breathe. he felt a sense of wrong. "i cannot 
speak to her," he thought; "the dead have no voice; and if i open my 
eyes i shall get them full of earth." 

he open his eyes. a great expanse of blue sky, rising from a fringe of 
the tops of trees. in the foreground, shut out some of the trees, a 
high, dun mound, angular in outline and cross by an intricate, 
patternless system of straight lines; the whole an immeasurable distance 
away--a distance so inconceivable great that it fatigue him, and he 
closed his eyes. the moment that he did so he was conscious of an 
insufferable light. a sound was in his ear like the low, rhythmic 
thunder of a distant sea break in successive wave upon the beach, 
and out of this noise, seeming a part of it, or possibly coming from 
beyond it, and intermingle with its ceaseless undertone, came the 
articulate words: "jerome searing, you are caught like a rat in a trap-- 
in a trap, trap, trap." 

sudden there fell a great silence, a black darkness, an infinite 
tranquillity, and jerome searing, perfectly conscious of his rathood, 
and well assured of the trap that he was in, remember all and nowise 
alarmed, again open his eyes to reconnoitre, to note the strength of 
his enemy, to plan his defense. 

he was caught in a recline posture, his back firm support by a 
solid beam. another lay across his breast, but he had been able to 
shrink a little away from it so that it no long oppress him, though 
it was immovable. a brace join it at an angle had wedged him against 
a pile of boards on his left, fastening the arm on that side. his legs, 
slightly part and straight along the ground, were cover upward to 
the knee with a mass of debris which tower above his narrow horizon. 
his head was as rigid fixed as in a vise; he could move his eyes, his 
chin--no more. only his right arm was partly free. "you must help us out 
of this," he said to it. but he could not get it from under the heavy 
timber athwart his chest, nor move it outward more than six inch at 
the elbow. 

searing was not seriously injured, nor did he suffer pain. a smart rap 
on the head from a flying fragment of the splinter post, incur 
simultaneous with the frightfully sudden shock to the nervous system, 
had momentarily daze him. his term of unconsciousness, including the 
period of recovery, during which he had had the strange fancies, had 
probably not exceed a few seconds, for the dust of the wreck had not 
wholly clear away as he began an intelligent survey of the situation. 

with his partly free right hand he now try to get hold of the beam 
that lay across, but not quite against, his breast. in no way could he 
do so. he was unable to depress the shoulder so as to push the elbow 
beyond that edge of the timber which was nearest his knees; failing in 
that, he could not raise the forearm and hand to grasp the beam. the 
brace that made an angle with it downward and backward prevent him 
from do anything in that direction, and between it and his body the 
space was not half so wide as the length of his forearm. obviously he 
could not get his hand under the beam nor over it; the hand could not, 
in fact, touch it at all. have demonstrate his inability, he 
desisted, and began to think whether he could reach any of the débris 
pile upon his legs. 

in survey the mass with a view to determine that point, his 
attention was arrest by what seem to be a ring of shining metal 
immediately in front of his eyes. it appear to him at first to 
surround some perfectly black substance, and it was somewhat more than a 
half-inch in diameter. it sudden occur to his mind that the 
black was simply shadow and that the ring was in fact the muzzle of 
his rifle protrude from the pile of débris. he was not long in 
satisfying himself that this was so--if it was a satisfaction. by 
close either eye he could look a little way along the barrel--to the 
point where it was hidden by the rubbish that held it. he could see the 
one side, with the corresponding eye, at apparently the same angle as 
the other side with the other eye. look with the right eye, the 
weapon seem to be direct at a point to the left of his head, and 
_vice-versa._ he was unable to see the upper surface of the barrel, but 
could see the under surface of the stock at a slight angle. the piece 
was, in fact, aim at the exact centre of his forehead. 

in the perception of this circumstance, in the recollection that just 
previous to the mischance of which this uncomfortable situation was 
the result he had cock the rifle and set the trigger so that a touch 
would discharge it, private searing was affected with a feeling of 
uneasiness. but that was as far as possible from fear; he was a brave 
man, somewhat familiar with the aspect of rifles from that point of 
view, and of cannon too. and now he recalled, with something like 
amusement, an incident of his experience at the storm of missionary 
ridge, where, walking up to one of the enemy's embrasure from which he 
had seen a heavy gun throw charge after charge of grape among the 
assailant he had thought for a moment that the piece had been 
withdrawn; he could see nothing in the opening but a brazen circle. what 
that was he had understood just in time to step aside as it pitch 
another peck of iron down that swarm slope. to face firearm is one 
of the commonest incident in a soldier's life--firearms, too, with 
malevolent eyes blazing behind them. that is what a soldier is for. 
still, private searing did not altogether relish the situation, and 
turn away his eyes. 

after groping, aimless, with his right hand for a time he made an 
ineffectual attempt to release his left. then he try to disengage his 
head, the fixity of which was the more annoy from his ignorance of 
what held it. next he try to free his feet, but while exert the 
powerful muscle of his leg for that purpose it occur to him that a 
disturbance of the rubbish which held them might discharge the rifle; 
how it could have endure what had already befallen it he could not 
understand, although memory assist him with several instance in 
point. one in particular he recalled, in which in a moment of mental 
abstraction he had club his rifle and beaten out another gentleman's 
brains, observing afterward that the weapon which he had been diligent 
swinging by the muzzle was loaded, capped, and at full cock--knowledge 
of which circumstance would doubtless have cheer his antagonist to 
long endurance. he had always smile in recall that blunder of his 
"green and salad days" as a soldier, but now he did not smile. he turn 
his eyes again to the muzzle of the rifle and for a moment fancy that 
it had moved; it seem somewhat nearer. 

again he look away. the tops of the distant tree beyond the bounds of 
the plantation interested him: he had not before observe how light and 
feathery they were, nor how dark blue the sky was, even among their 
branches, where they somewhat pale it with their green; above him it 
appear almost black. "it will be uncomfortable hot here," he thought, 
"as the day advances. i wonder which way i am looking." 

judge by such shadow as he could see, he decided that his face was 
due north; he would at least not have the sun in his eyes, and north-- 
well, that was toward his wife and children. 

"bah!" he exclaim aloud, "what have they to do with it?" 

he closed his eyes. "as i can't get out i may as well go to sleep. the 
rebel are gone and some of our fellow are sure to stray out here 
foraging. they'll find me." 

but he did not sleep. gradual he became sensible of a pain in his 
forehead--a dull ache, hardly perceptible at first, but grow more and 
more uncomfortable. he open his eyes and it was gone--closed them and 
it returned. "the devil!" he said, irrelevantly, and stare again at the 
sky. he heard the singing of birds, the strange metallic note of the 
meadow lark, suggest the clash of vibrant blades. he fell into 
pleasant memory of his childhood, play again with his brother and 
sister, race across the fields, shouting to alarm the sedentary larks, 
enter the sombre forest beyond and with timid steps follow the faint 
path to ghost rock, standing at last with audible heart-throbs before 
the dead man's cave and seek to penetrate its awful mystery. for the 
first time he observe that the opening of the haunt cavern was 
encircle by a ring of metal. then all else vanish and left him gaze 
into the barrel of his rifle as before. but whereas before it had seem 
nearer, it now seem an inconceivable distance away, and all the more 
sinister for that. he cry out and, startle by something in his own 
voice--the note of fear--lied to himself in denial: "if i don't sing out 
i may stay here till i die." 

he now made no further attempt to evade the menace stare of the gun 
barrel. if he turn away his eyes an instant it was to look for 
assistance (although he could not see the ground on either side the 
ruin), and he permit them to return, obedient to the imperative 
fascination. if he closed them it was from weariness, and instantly the 
poignant pain in his forehead--the prophecy and menace of the bullet-- 
forced him to reopen them. 

the tension of nerve and brain was too severe; nature came to his relief 
with interval of unconsciousness. revive from one of these he became 
sensible of a sharp, smart pain in his right hand, and when he work 
his finger together, or rub his palm with them, he could feel that 
they were wet and slippery. he could not see the hand, but he knew the 
sensation; it was running blood. in his delirium he had beaten it 
against the jagged fragment of the wreck, had clutch it full of 
splinters. he resolve that he would meet his fate more manly. he was a 
plain, common soldier, had no religion and not much philosophy; he could 
not die like a hero, with great and wise last words, even if there had 
been some one to hear them, but he could die "game," and he would. but 
if he could only know when to expect the shot! 

some rats which had probably inhabit the shed came sneaking and 
scamper about. one of them mount the pile of débris that held the 
rifle; another follow and another. searing regard them at first with 
indifference, then with friendly interest; then, as the thought flash 
into his bewilder mind that they might touch the trigger of his rifle, 
he cursed them and ordered them to go away. "it is no business of 
yours," he cried. 

the creature went away; they would return later, attack his face, gnaw 
away his nose, cut his throat--he knew that, but he hope by that time 
to be dead. 

nothing could now unfix his gaze from the little ring of metal with its 
black interior. the pain in his forehead was fierce and incessant. he 
felt it gradual penetrating the brain more and more deeply, until at 
last its progress was arrest by the wood at the back of his head. it 
grew momentarily more insufferable: he began wanton beating his 
lacerate hand against the splinter again to counteract that horrible 
ache. it seem to throb with a slow, regular recurrence, each pulsation 
sharper than the preceding, and sometimes he cry out, thinking he felt 
the fatal bullet. no thought of home, of wife and children, of country, 
of glory. the whole record of memory was effaced. the world had pass 
away--not a vestige remained. here in this confusion of timber and 
boards is the sole universe. here is immortality in time--each pain an 
everlasting life. the throb tick off eternities. 

jerome searing, the man of courage, the formidable enemy, the strong, 
resolute warrior, was as pale as a ghost. his jaw was fallen; his eyes 
protruded; he tremble in every fibre; a cold sweat bath his entire 
body; he scream with fear. he was not insane--he was terrified. 

in grope about with his torn and bleeding hand he seize at last a 
strip of board, and, pulling, felt it give way. it lay parallel with his 
body, and by bend his elbow as much as the contract space would 
permit, he could draw it a few inch at a time. finally it was 
altogether loosen from the wreckage covering his legs; he could lift 
it clear of the ground its whole length. a great hope came into his 
mind: perhaps he could work it upward, that is to say backward, far 
enough to lift the end and push aside the rifle; or, if that were too 
tight wedged, so place the strip of board as to deflect the bullet. 
with this object he pass it backward inch by inch, hardly daring to 
breathe lest that act somehow defeat his intent, and more than ever 
unable to remove his eyes from the rifle, which might perhaps now hasten 
to improve its wane opportunity. something at least had been gained: 
in the occupation of his mind in this attempt at self-defense he was 
less sensible of the pain in his head and had cease to wince. but he 
was still dreadfully frightened and his teeth rattle like castanets. 

the strip of board cease to move to the suasion of his hand. he tug 
at it with all his strength, change the direction of its length all he 
could, but it had met some extend obstruction behind him and the end 
in front was still too far away to clear the pile of débris and reach 
the muzzle of the gun. it extended, indeed, nearly as far as the trigger 
guard, which, uncover by the rubbish, he could imperfect see with 
his right eye. he try to break the strip with his hand, but had no 
leverage. in his defeat, all his terror returned, augment tenfold. the 
black aperture of the rifle appear to threaten a sharper and more 
imminent death in punishment of his rebellion. the track of the bullet 
through his head ache with an intense anguish. he began to tremble 
again. 

sudden he became composed. his tremor subsided. he clench his teeth 
and drew down his eyebrows. he had not exhaust his means of defense; a 
new design had shaped itself in his mind--another plan of battle. 
raise the front end of the strip of board, he careful pushed it 
forward through the wreckage at the side of the rifle until it pressed 
against the trigger guard. then he move the end slow outward until he 
could feel that it had clear it, then, close his eyes, thrust it 
against the trigger with all his strength! there was no explosion; the 
rifle had been discharge as it drop from his hand when the building 
fell. but it did its work. 

* * * * * 

lieutenant adrian searing, in command of the picket-guard on that part 
of the line through which his brother jerome had pass on his mission, 
sat with attentive ear in his breastwork behind the line. not the 
faintest sound escape him; the cry of a bird, the bark of a 
squirrel, the noise of the wind among the pines--all were anxious 
noted by his overstraine sense. suddenly, directly in front of his 
line, he heard a faint, confuse rumble, like the clatter of a fall 
building translate by distance. the lieutenant mechanical look at 
his watch. six o'clock and eighteen minutes. at the same moment an 
officer approach him on foot from the rear and saluted. 

"lieutenant," said the officer, "the colonel direct you to move forward 
your line and feel the enemy if you find him. if not, continue the 
advance until direct to halt. there is reason to think that the enemy 
has retreated." 

the lieutenant nod and said nothing; the other officer retired. in a 
moment the men, apprise of their duty by the non-commissioned officer 
in low tones, had deploy from their rifle-pits and were moving forward 
in skirmish order, with set teeth and beating hearts. 

this line of skirmish sweep across the plantation toward the 
mountain. they pass on both side of the wreck building, observing 
nothing. at a short distance in their rear their commander comes. he 
cast his eyes curious upon the ruin and see a dead body half bury 
in boards and timbers. it is so cover with dust that its clothing is 
confederate gray. its face is yellowish white; the cheek are fallen in, 
the temple sunken, too, with sharp ridge about them, making the 
forehead forbidding narrow; the upper lip, slightly lifted, show the 
white teeth, rigid clenched. the hair is heavy with moisture, the face 
as wet as the dewy grass all about. from his point of view the officer 
do not observe the rifle; the man was apparently kill by the fall of 
the building. 

"dead a week," said the officer curtly, moving on and absently pull 
out his watch as if to verify his estimate of time. six o'clock and 
forty minutes. 




kill at resaca 

the best soldier of our staff was lieutenant herman brayle, one of the 
two aides-de-camp. i don't remember where the general picked him up; 
from some ohio regiment, i think; none of us had previous known him, 
and it would have been strange if we had, for no two of us came from the 
same state, nor even from adjoin states. the general seem to think 
that a position on his staff was a distinction that should be so 
judicious confer as not to beget any sectional jealousy and 
imperil the integrity of that part of the country which was still an 
integer. he would not even choose officer from his own command, but by 
some jugglery at department headquarters obtain them from other 
brigades. under such circumstances, a man's service had to be very 
distinguished indeed to be heard of by his family and the friends of his 
youth; and "the speak trump of fame" was a trifle hoarse from 
loquacity, anyhow. 

lieutenant brayle was more than six feet in height and of splendid 
proportions, with the light hair and gray-blue eyes which men so gifted 
usually find associate with a high order of courage. as he was commonly 
in full uniform, especially in action, when most officer are content to 
be less flamboyant attired, he was a very striking and conspicuous 
figure. as to the rest, he had a gentleman's manners, a scholar's head, 
and a lion's heart. his age was about thirty. 

we all soon came to like brayle as much as we admire him, and it was 
with sincere concern that in the engagement at stone's river--our first 
action after he join us--we observe that he had one most 
objectionable and unsoldier quality: he was vain of his courage. 
during all the vicissitudes and mutation of that hideous encounter, 
whether our troops were fight in the open cotton fields, in the cedar 
thickets, or behind the railway embankment, he did not once take cover, 
except when stern command to do so by the general, who usually had 
other things to think of than the lives of his staff officers--or those 
of his men, for that matter. 

in every later engagement while brayle was with us it was the same way. 
he would sit his horse like an equestrian statue, in a storm of bullet 
and grape, in the most expose places--wherever, in fact, duty, 
require him to go, permit him to remain--when, without trouble and 
with distinct advantage to his reputation for common sense, he might 
have been in such security as is possible on a battlefield in the brief 
interval of personal inaction. 

on foot, from necessity or in deference to his dismount commander or 
associates, his conduct was the same. he would stand like a rock in the 
open when officer and men alike had taken to cover; while men old in 
service and years, higher in rank and of unquestionable intrepidity, 
were loyal preserve behind the crest of a hill lives infinite 
precious to their country, this fellow would stand, equally idle, on the 
ridge, facing in the direction of the sharpest fire. 

when battle are go on in open ground it frequent occur that the 
oppose lines, confront each other within a stone's throw for hours, 
hug the earth as close as if they love it. the line officer in their 
proper place flatten themselves no less, and the field officers, their 
horse all kill or sent to the rear, crouch beneath the infernal 
canopy of hiss lead and scream iron without a thought of personal 
dignity. 

in such circumstances the life of a staff officer of a brigade is 
distinct "not a happy one," mainly because of its precarious tenure 
and the unnerve alternate of emotion to which he is exposed. from a 
position of that comparative security from which a civilian would 
ascribe his escape to a "miracle," he may be despatch with an order to 
some commander of a prone regiment in the front line--a person for the 
moment inconspicuous and not always easy to find without a deal of 
search among men somewhat preoccupied, and in a din in which question 
and answer alike must be impart in the sign language. it is customary 
in such case to duck the head and scuttle away on a keen run, an object 
of lively interest to some thousand of admire marksmen. in return 
--well, it is not customary to return. 

brayle's practice was different. he would consign his horse to the care 
of an orderly,--he love his horse,--and walk quiet away on his 
perilous errand with never a stoop of the back, his splendid figure, 
accentuate by his uniform, holding the eye with a strange fascination. 
we watch him with suspend breath, our heart in our mouths. on one 
occasion of this kind, indeed, one of our number, an impetuous 
stammerer, was so possessed by his emotion that he shout at me: 

"i'll b-b-bet you t-two d-d-dollars they d-drop him b-b-before he g-gets 
to that d-d-ditch!" 

i did not accept the brutal wager; i thought they would. 

let me do justice to a brave man's memory; in all these needless 
exposure of life there was no visible bravado nor subsequent narration. 
in the few instance when some of us had venture to remonstrate, brayle 
had smile pleasant and made some light reply, which, however, had not 
encourage a further pursuit of the subject. once he said: 

"captain, if ever i come to grief by forget your advice, i hope my 
last moments will be cheer by the sound of your beloved voice 
breathing into my ear the blessed words, 'i told you so.'" 

we laugh at the captain--just why we could probably not have 
explained--and that afternoon when he was shot to rag from an ambuscade 
brayle remain by the body for some time, adjust the limb with 
needless care--there in the middle of a road swept by gust of grape and 
canister! it is easy to condemn this kind of thing, and not very 
difficult to refrain from imitation, but it is impossible not to 
respect, and brayle was like none the less for the weakness which had 
so heroic an expression. we wish he were not a fool, but he went on 
that way to the end, sometimes hard hit, but always return to duty 
about as good as new. 

of course, it came at last; he who ignore the law of probability 
challenge an adversary that is seldom beaten. it was at resaca, in 
georgia, during the movement that result in the taking of atlanta. in 
front of our brigade the enemy's line of earthwork ran through open 
field along a slight crest. at each end of this open ground we were 
close up to him in the woods, but the clear ground we could not hope to 
occupy until night, when dark would enable us to burrow like mole 
and throw up earth. at this point our line was a quarter-mile away in 
the edge of a wood. roughly, we form a semicircle, the enemy's 
fortify line being the chord of the arc. 

"lieutenant, go tell colonel ward to work up as close as he can get 
cover, and not to waste much ammunition in unnecessary firing. you may 
leave your horse." 

when the general gave this direction we were in the fringe of the 
forest, near the right extremity of the arc. colonel ward was at the 
left. the suggestion to leave the horse obviously enough meant that 
brayle was to take the long line, through the wood and among the men. 
indeed, the suggestion was needless; to go by the short route meant 
absolutely certain failure to deliver the message. before anybody could 
interpose, brayle had canter lightly into the field and the enemy's 
works were in crackling conflagration. 

"stop that damn fool!" shout the general. 

a private of the escort, with more ambition than brains, spur forward 
to obey, and within ten yard left himself and his horse dead on the 
field of honor. 

brayle was beyond recall, galloping easily along, parallel to the enemy 
and less than two hundred yard distant. he was a picture to see! his 
hat had been blown or shot from his head, and his long, blond hair rose 
and fell with the motion of his horse. he sat erect in the saddle, 
holding the reins lightly in his left hand, his right hanging careless 
at his side. an occasional glimpse of his handsome profile as he turn 
his head one way or the other prove that the interest which he took in 
what was go on was natural and without affectation. 

the picture was intense dramatic, but in no degree theatrical. 
successive score of rifles spat at him vicious as he came within 
range, and our own line in the edge of the timber broke out in visible 
and audible defense. no long regardful of themselves or their orders, 
our fellow sprang to their feet, and swarm into the open sent broad 
sheet of bullet against the blazing crest of the offend works, 
which pour an answer fire into their unprotected group with deadly 
effect. the artillery on both side join the battle, punctuate the 
rattle and roar with deep, earth-shaking explosion and tear the air 
with storm of scream grape, which from the enemy's side splinter 
the tree and spatter them with blood, and from ours defile the smoke 
of his arms with bank and cloud of dust from his parapet. 

my attention had been for a moment drawn to the general combat, but now, 
glancing down the unobscured avenue between these two thunderclouds, i 
saw brayle, the cause of the carnage. invisible now from either side, 
and equally doom by friend and foe, he stood in the shot-swept space, 
motionless, his face toward the enemy. at some little distance lay his 
horse. i instantly saw what had stop him. 

as topographical engineer i had, early in the day, made a hasty 
examination of the ground, and now remember that at that point was a 
deep and sinuous gully, crossing half the field from the enemy's line, 
its general course at right angle to it. from where we now were it was 
invisible, and brayle had evidently not known about it. clearly, it was 
impassable. its salient angle would have afford him absolute security 
if he had chosen to be satisfy with the miracle already wrought in his 
favor and leapt into it. he could not go forward, he would not turn 
back; he stood await death. it did not keep him long waiting. 

by some mysterious coincidence, almost instantaneous as he fell, the 
fire ceased, a few desultory shot at long interval serving rather to 
accentuate than break the silence. it was as if both side had sudden 
repent of their profitless crime. four stretcher-bearers of ours, 
following a sergeant with a white flag, soon afterward move unmolested 
into the field, and made straight for brayle's body. several confederate 
officer and men came out to meet them, and with uncover head 
assist them to take up their sacred burden. as it was borne toward us 
we heard beyond the hostile works fife and a muffle drum--a dirge. a 
generous enemy honor the fallen brave. 

amongst the dead man's effects was a soil russia-leather pocketbook. 
in the distribution of memento of our friend, which the general, as 
administrator, decreed, this fell to me. 

a year after the close of the war, on my way to california, i open and 
idle inspect it. out of an overlook compartment fell a letter 
without envelope or address. it was in a woman's handwriting, and began 
with words of endearment, but no name. 

it had the following date line: "san francisco, cal., july 9, 1862." the 
signature was "darling," in mark of quotation. incidentally, in the 
body of the text, the writer's full name was given--marian mendenhall. 

the letter show evidence of cultivation and good breeding, but it was 
an ordinary love letter, if a love letter can be ordinary. there was not 
much in it, but there was something. it was this: 

"mr. winters, whom i shall always hate for it, has been telling that at 
some battle in virginia, where he got his hurt, you were seen crouch 
behind a tree. i think he wants to injure you in my regard, which he 
know the story would do if i believe it. i could bear to hear of my 
soldier lover's death, but not of his cowardice." 

these were the words which on that sunny afternoon, in a distant region, 
had slain a hundred men. is woman weak? 

one evening i call on miss mendenhall to return the letter to her. i 
intended, also, to tell her what she had done--but not that she did it. 
i found her in a handsome dwelling on rincon hill. she was beautiful, 
well bred--in a word, charming. 

"you knew lieutenant herman brayle," i said, rather abruptly. "you know, 
doubtless, that he fell in battle. among his effects was found this 
letter from you. my errand here is to place it in your hands." 

she mechanical took the letter, glance through it with deepen 
color, and then, look at me with a smile, said: 

"it is very good of you, though i am sure it was hardly worth while." 
she start sudden and change color. "this stain," she said, "is it-- 
surely it is not--" 

"madam," i said, "pardon me, but that is the blood of the truest and 
bravest heart that ever beat." 

she hasty flung the letter on the blazing coals. "uh! i cannot bear 
the sight of blood!" she said. "how did he die?" 

i had involuntary risen to rescue that scrap of paper, sacred even to 
me, and now stood partly behind her. as she ask the question she 
turn her face about and slightly upward. the light of the burning 
letter was reflect in her eyes and touched her cheek with a tinge of 
crimson like the stain upon its page. i had never seen anything so 
beautiful as this detest creature. 

"he was bitten by a snake," i replied. 




the affair at coulter's notch 

"do you think, colonel, that your brave coulter would like to put one of 
his gun in here?" the general asked. 

he was apparently not altogether serious; it certainly did not seem a 
place where any artillerist, however brave, would like to put a gun. the 
colonel thought that possibly his division commander meant 
good-humoredly to intimate that in a recent conversation between them 
captain coulter's courage had been too highly extolled. 

"general," he reply warmly, "coulter would like to put a gun anywhere 
within reach of those people," with a motion of his hand in the 
direction of the enemy. 

"it is the only place," said the general. he was serious, then. 

the place was a depression, a "notch," in the sharp crest of a hill. it 
was a pass, and through it ran a turnpike, which reach this highest 
point in its course by a sinuous ascent through a thin forest made a 
similar, though less steep, descent toward the enemy. for a mile to the 
left and a mile to the right, the ridge, though occupy by federal 
infantry lie close behind the sharp crest and appear as if held in 
place by atmospheric pressure, was inaccessible to artillery. there was 
no place but the bottom of the notch, and that was barely wide enough 
for the roadbed. from the confederate side this point was command by 
two battery post on a slightly lower elevation beyond a creek, and a 
half-mile away. all the gun but one were masked by the tree of an 
orchard; that one--it seem a bit of impudence--was on an open lawn 
directly in front of a rather grandiose building, the planter's 
dwelling. the gun was safe enough in its exposure--but only because the 
federal infantry had been forbidden to fire. coulter's notch--it came to 
be call so--was not, that pleasant summer afternoon, a place where one 
would "like to put a gun." 

three or four dead horse lay there sprawl in the road, three or four 
dead men in a trim row at one side of it, and a little back, down the 
hill. all but one were cavalrymen belong to the federal advance. one 
was a quartermaster. the general commanding the division and the colonel 
commanding the brigade, with their staff and escorts, had ridden into 
the notch to have a look at the enemy's guns--which had straightway 
obscure themselves in towering cloud of smoke. it was hardly 
profitable to be curious about gun which had the trick of the 
cuttle-fish, and the season of observation had been brief. at its 
conclusion--a short remove backward from where it began--occurred the 
conversation already partly reported. "it is the only place," the 
general repeated thoughtfully, "to get at them." 

the colonel look at him gravely. "there is room for only one gun, 
general--one against twelve." 

"that is true--for only one at a time," said the commander with 
something like, yet not altogether like, a smile. "but then, your brave 
coulter--a whole battery in himself." 

the tone of irony was now unmistakable. it anger the colonel, but he 
did not know what to say. the spirit of military subordinate is not 
favorable to retort, nor even to deprecation. 

at this moment a young officer of artillery came riding slow up the 
road attend by his bugler. it was captain coulter. he could not have 
been more than twenty-three years of age. he was of medium height, but 
very slender and lithe, and sat his horse with something of the air of a 
civilian. in face he was of a type singularly unlike the men about him; 
thin, high-nosed, gray-eyed, with a slight blond mustache, and long, 
rather straggle hair of the same color. there was an apparent 
negligence in his attire. his cap was worn with the visor a trifle 
askew; his coat was button only at the sword-belt, showing a 
considerable expanse of white shirt, tolerably clean for that stage of 
the campaign. but the negligence was all in his dress and bearing; in 
his face was a look of intense interest in his surroundings. his gray 
eyes, which seem occasional to strike right and left across the 
landscape, like search-lights, were for the most part fixed upon the sky 
beyond the notch; until he should arrive at the summit of the road there 
was nothing else in that direction to see. as he came opposite his 
division and brigade commander at the road-side he salute mechanical 
and was about to pass on. the colonel sign to him to halt. 

"captain coulter," he said, "the enemy has twelve pieces over there on 
the next ridge. if i rightly understand the general, he direct that you 
bring up a gun and engage them." 

there was a blank silence; the general look stolid at a distant 
regiment swarm slow up the hill through rough undergrowth, like a 
torn and draggled cloud of blue smoke; the captain appear not to have 
observe him. presently the captain spoke, slow and with apparent 
effort: 

"on the next ridge, did you say, sir? are the gun near the house?" 

"ah, you have been over this road before. directly at the house." 

"and it is--necessary--to engage them? the order is imperative?" 

his voice was husky and broken. he was visibly paler. the colonel was 
astonish and mortified. he stole a glance at the commander. in that 
set, immobile face was no sign; it was as hard as bronze. a moment later 
the general rode away, follow by his staff and escort. the colonel, 
humiliate and indignant, was about to order captain coulter in arrest, 
when the latter spoke a few words in a low tone to his bugler, saluted, 
and rode straight forward into the notch, where, presently, at the 
summit of the road, his field-glass at his eyes, he show against the 
sky, he and his horse, sharp define and statuesque. the bugle had 
dashed down the speed and disappear behind a wood. presently his bugle 
was heard singing in the cedars, and in an incredible short time a 
single gun with its caisson, each drawn by six horse and manned by its 
full complement of gunners, came bound and bang up the grade in a 
storm of dust, unlimbered under cover, and was run forward by hand to 
the fatal crest among the dead horses. a gesture of the captain's arm, 
some strange agile movements of the men in loading, and almost before 
the troops along the way had cease to hear the rattle of the wheels, a 
great white cloud sprang forward down the slope, and with a deafen 
report the affair at coulter's notch had begun. 

it is not intended to relate in detail the progress and incident of 
that ghastly contest--a contest without vicissitudes, its alternate 
only different degree of despair. almost at the instant when captain 
coulter's gun blew its challenging cloud twelve answer cloud roll 
upward from among the tree about the plantation house, a deep multiple 
report roar back like a broken echo, and thenceforth to the end the 
federal cannon fought their hopeless battle in an atmosphere of 
living iron whose thought were lightning and whose deed were death. 

unwill to see the effort which he could not aid and the slaughter 
which he could not stay, the colonel ascend the ridge at a point a 
quarter of a mile to the left, whence the notch, itself invisible, but 
push up successive masses of smoke, seem the crater of a volcano in 
thundering eruption. with his glass he watch the enemy's guns, note 
as he could the effects of coulter's fire--if coulter still live to 
direct it. he saw that the federal gunners, ignore those of the 
enemy's pieces whose position could be determined by their smoke only, 
gave their whole attention to the one that maintain its place in the 
open--the lawn in front of the house. over and about that hardy piece 
the shell exploded at interval of a few seconds. some exploded in the 
house, as could be seen by thin ascension of smoke from the breach 
roof. figures of prostrate men and horse were plainly visible. 

"if our fellow are do so good work with a single gun," said the 
colonel to an aide who happen to be nearest, "they must be suffering 
like the devil from twelve. go down and present the commander of that 
piece with my congratulations on the accuracy of his fire." 

turning to his adjutant-general he said, "did you observe coulter's 
damn reluctance to obey orders?" 

"yes, sir, i did." 

"well, say nothing about it, please. i don't think the general will care 
to make any accusations. he will probably have enough to do in 
explain his own connection with this uncommon way of amuse the 
rear-guard of a retreat enemy." 

a young officer approach from below, climb breathless up the 
acclivity. almost before he had saluted, he gasp out: 

"colonel, i am direct by colonel harmon to say that the enemy's gun 
are within easy reach of our rifles, and most of them visible from 
several points along the ridge." 

the brigade commander look at him without a trace of interest in his 
expression. "i know it," he said quietly. 

the young adjutant was visibly embarrassed. "colonel harmon would like 
to have permission to silence those guns," he stammered. 

"so should i," the colonel said in the same tone. "present my 
compliments to colonel harmon and say to him that the general's orders 
for the infantry not to fire are still in force." 

the adjutant salute and retired. the colonel ground his heel into the 
earth and turn to look again at the enemy's guns. 

"colonel," said the adjutant-general, "i don't know that i ought to say 
anything, but there is something wrong in all this. do you happen to 
know that captain coulter is from the south?" 

"no; _was_ he, indeed?" 

"i heard that last summer the division which the general then command 
was in the vicinity of coulter's home--camped there for weeks, and--" 

"listen!" said the colonel, interrupt with an upward gesture. "do you 
hear _that_?" 

"that" was the silence of the federal gun. the staff, the orderlies, the 
lines of infantry behind the crest--all had "heard," and were look 
curious in the direction of the crater, whence no smoke now ascend 
except desultory cloudlet from the enemy's shells. then came the blare 
of a bugle, a faint rattle of wheels; a minute later the sharp report 
recommence with double activity. the demolish gun had been replace 
with a sound one. 

"yes," said the adjutant-general, resume his narrative, "the general 
made the acquaintance of coulter's family. there was trouble--i don't 
know the exact nature of it--something about coulter's wife. she is a 
red-hot secessionist, as they all are, except coulter himself, but she 
is a good wife and high-bred lady. there was a complaint to army 
headquarters. the general was transfer to this division. it is odd 
that coulter's battery should afterward have been assign to it." 

the colonel had risen from the rock upon which they had been sitting. 
his eyes were blazing with a generous indignation. 

"see here, morrison," said he, look his gossip staff officer 
straight in the face, "did you get that story from a gentleman or a 
liar?" 

"i don't want to say how i got it, colonel, unless it is necessary"--he 
was blush a trifle--"but i'll stake my life upon its truth in the 
main." 

the colonel turn toward a small knot of officer some distance away. 
"lieutenant williams!" he shouted. 

one of the officer detached himself from the group and coming forward 
saluted, saying: "pardon me, colonel, i thought you had been informed. 
williams is dead down there by the gun. what can i do, sir?" 

lieutenant williams was the aide who had had the pleasure of convey 
to the officer in charge of the gun his brigade commander's 
congratulations. 

"go," said the colonel, "and direct the withdrawal of that gun 
instantly. no--i'll go myself." 

he strode down the declivity toward the rear of the notch at a 
break-neck pace, over rocks and through brambles, follow by his little 
retinue in tumultuous disorder. at the foot of the declivity they 
mount their wait animal and took to the road at a lively trot, 
round a bend and into the notch. the spectacle which they encounter 
there was appalling! 

within that defile, barely broad enough for a single gun, were pile the 
wreck of no few than four. they had noted the silence of only the 
last one disabled--there had been a lack of men to replace it quick 
with another. the débris lay on both side of the road; the men had 
manage to keep an open way between, through which the fifth piece was 
now firing. the men?--they look like demon of the pit! all were 
hatless, all strip to the waist, their reek skin black with 
blotch of powder and spatter with gout of blood. they work like 
madmen, with ram and cartridge, lever and lanyard. they set their 
swollen shoulder and bleeding hand against the wheels at each recoil 
and heave the heavy gun back to its place. there were no commands; in 
that awful environment of whoop shot, explode shells, shriek 
fragment of iron, and flying splinter of wood, none could have been 
heard. officers, if officer there were, were indistinguishable; all 
work together--each while he lasted--governed by the eye. when the gun 
was sponged, it was loaded; when loaded, aim and fired. the colonel 
observe something new to his military experience--something horrible 
and unnatural: the gun was bleeding at the mouth! in temporary default 
of water, the man sponge had dip his sponge into a pool of 
comrade's blood. in all this work there was no clashing; the duty of the 
instant was obvious. when one fell, another, look a trifle cleaner, 
seem to rise from the earth in the dead man's tracks, to fall in his 
turn. 

with the ruin gun lay the ruin men--alongside the wreckage, under 
it and atop of it; and back down the road--a ghastly procession!--crept 
on hand and knee such of the wound as were able to move. the 
colonel--he had compassionate sent his cavalcade to the right about-- 
had to ride over those who were entire dead in order not to crush 
those who were partly alive. into that hell he tranquil held his way, 
rode up alongside the gun, and, in the obscurity of the last discharge, 
tap upon the cheek the man holding the rammer--who straightway fell, 
thinking himself killed. a fiend seven times damn sprang out of the 
smoke to take his place, but pause and gaze up at the mount officer 
with an unearthly regard, his teeth flash between his black lips, his 
eyes, fierce and expanded, burning like coal beneath his bloody brow. 
the colonel made an authoritative gesture and pointed to the rear. the 
fiend bowed in token of obedience. it was captain coulter. 

simultaneous with the colonel's arrest sign, silence fell upon the 
whole field of action. the procession of missile no long stream 
into that defile of death, for the enemy also had cease firing. his 
army had been gone for hours, and the commander of his rear-guard, who 
had held his position perilous long in hope to silence the federal 
fire, at that strange moment had silence his own. "i was not aware of 
the breadth of my authority," said the colonel to anybody, riding 
forward to the crest to see what had really happened. an hour later his 
brigade was in bivouac on the enemy's ground, and its idle were 
examining, with something of awe, as the faithful inspect a saint's 
relics, a score of straddle dead horse and three disabled guns, all 
spiked. the fallen men had been carry away; their torn and broken 
body would have given too great satisfaction. 

naturally, the colonel establish himself and his military family in 
the plantation house. it was somewhat shattered, but it was better than 
the open air. the furniture was greatly derange and broken. wall and 
ceiling were knock away here and there, and a lingering odor of 
powder smoke was everywhere. the beds, the closet of women's clothing, 
the cupboard were not greatly damaged. the new tenant for a night 
made themselves comfortable, and the virtual efface of coulter's 
battery supply them with an interesting topic. 

during supper an orderly of the escort show himself into the 
dining-room and ask permission to speak to the colonel. 

"what is it, barbour?" said that officer pleasantly, have overheard 
the request. 

"colonel, there is something wrong in the cellar; i don't know what-- 
somebody there. i was down there rummage about." 

"i will go down and see," said a staff officer, rising. 

"so will i," the colonel said; "let the other remain. lead on, 
orderly." 

they took a candle from the table and descended the cellar stairs, the 
orderly in visible trepidation. the candle made but a feeble light, but 
presently, as they advanced, its narrow circle of illumination reveal 
a human figure seat on the ground against the black stone wall which 
they were skirting, its knee elevated, its head bowed sharp forward. 
the face, which should have been seen in profile, was invisible, for the 
man was bent so far forward that his long hair conceal it; and, 
strange to relate, the beard, of a much dark hue, fell in a great 
tangle mass and lay along the ground at his side. they involuntary 
paused; then the colonel, taking the candle from the orderly's shake 
hand, approach the man and attentive considered him. the long dark 
beard was the hair of a woman--dead. the dead woman clasp in her arms 
a dead babe. both were clasp in the arms of the man, pressed against 
his breast, against his lips. there was blood in the hair of the woman; 
there was blood in the hair of the man. a yard away, near an irregular 
depression in the beaten earth which form the cellar's floor--fresh 
excavation with a convex bit of iron, have jagged edges, visible in 
one of the sides--lay an infant's foot. the colonel held the light as 
high as he could. the floor of the room above was broken through, the 
splinter point at all angle downward. "this casemate is not 
bomb-proof," said the colonel gravely. it did not occur to him that his 
sum up of the matter had any levity in it. 

they stood about the group awhile in silence; the staff officer was 
thinking of his unfinished supper, the orderly of what might possibly be 
in one of the cask on the other side of the cellar. sudden the man 
whom they had thought dead raise his head and gaze tranquil into 
their faces. his complexion was coal black; the cheek were apparently 
tattoo in irregular sinuous lines from the eyes downward. the lips, 
too, were white, like those of a stage negro. there was blood upon his 
forehead. 

the staff officer drew back a pace, the orderly two paces. 

"what are you do here, my man?" said the colonel, unmoved. 

"this house belong to me, sir," was the reply, civilly delivered. 

"to you? ah, i see! and these?" 

"my wife and child. i am captain coulter." 




the coup de grÂce 

the fight had been hard and continuous; that was attested by all the 
senses. the very taste of battle was in the air. all was now over; it 
remain only to succor the wound and bury the dead--to "tidy up a 
bit," as the humorist of a burial squad put it. a good deal of "tidying 
up" was required. as far as one could see through the forests, among the 
splinter trees, lay wreck of men and horses. among them move the 
stretcher-bearers, gathering and carry away the few who show sign 
of life. most of the wound had die of neglect while the right to 
minister to their wants was in dispute. it is an army regulation that 
the wound must wait; the best way to care for them is to win the 
battle. it must be confessed that victory is a distinct advantage to a 
man require attention, but many do not live to avail themselves of it. 

the dead were collected in group of a dozen or a score and laid side by 
side in row while the trench were dug to receive them. 

some, found at too great a distance from these rally points, were 
bury where they lay. there was little attempt at identification, 
though in most cases, the burial party being detailed to glean the 
same ground which they had assist to reap, the name of the victorious 
dead were known and listed. the enemy's fallen had to be content with 
counting. but of that they got enough: many of them were count several 
times, and the total, as given afterward in the official report of the 
victorious commander, denote rather a hope than a result. 

at some little distance from the spot where one of the burial party 
had establish its "bivouac of the dead," a man in the uniform of a 
federal officer stood leaning against a tree. from his feet upward to 
his neck his attitude was that of weary reposing; but he turn his 
head uneasy from side to side; his mind was apparently not at rest. he 
was perhaps uncertain in which direction to go; he was not likely to 
remain long where he was, for already the level ray of the setting sun 
straggle red through the open space of the wood and the weary 
soldier were quit their task for the day. he would hardly make a 
night of it alone there among the dead. 

nine men in ten whom you meet after a battle inquire the way to some 
fraction of the army--as if any one could know. doubtless this officer 
was lost. after rest himself a moment he would presumable follow one 
of the retiring burial squads. 

when all were gone he walk straight away into the forest toward the 
red west, its light stain his face like blood. the air of confidence 
with which he now strode along show that he was on familiar ground; he 
had recover his bearings. the dead on his right and on his left were 
unregarded as he passed. an occasional low moan from some 
sorely-stricken wretch whom the relief-parties had not reached, and who 
would have to pass a comfortless night beneath the stars with his thirst 
to keep him company, was equally unheeded. what, indeed, could the 
officer have done, being no surgeon and have no water? 

at the head of a shallow ravine, a mere depression of the ground, lay a 
small group of bodies. he saw, and swerve sudden from his course 
walk rapid toward them. scan each one sharp as he passed, he 
stop at last above one which lay at a slight remove from the others, 
near a clump of small trees. he look at it narrowly. it seem to 
stir. he stoop and laid his hand upon its face. it screamed. 

* * * * * 

the officer was captain down madwell, of a massachusetts regiment of 
infantry, a daring and intelligent soldier, an honorable man. 

in the regiment were two brother name halcrow--caffal and creede 
halcrow. caffal halcrow was a sergeant in captain madwell's company, and 
these two men, the sergeant and the captain, were devoted friends. in so 
far as disparity of rank, difference in duty and consideration of 
military discipline would permit they were commonly together. they had, 
indeed, grown up together from childhood. a habit of the heart is not 
easily broken off. caffal halcrow had nothing military in his taste nor 
disposition, but the thought of separation from his friend was 
disagreeable; he enlist in the company in which madwell was 
second-lieutenant. each had taken two steps upward in rank, but between 
the highest non-commissioned and the lowest commission officer the 
gulf is deep and wide and the old relation was maintain with 
difficulty and a difference. 

creede halcrow, the brother of caffal, was the major of the regiment--a 
cynical, saturnine man, between whom and captain madwell there was a 
natural antipathy which circumstances had nourish and strengthen to 
an active animosity. but for the restrain influence of their mutual 
relation to caffal these two patriot would doubtless have endeavor to 
deprive their country of each other's services. 

at the opening of the battle that morning the regiment was perform 
outpost duty a mile away from the main army. it was attack and nearly 
surround in the forest, but stubborn held its ground. during a lull 
in the fighting, major halcrow came to captain madwell. the two 
exchange formal salutes, and the major said: "captain, the colonel 
direct that you push your company to the head of this ravine and hold 
your place there until recalled. i need hardly apprise you of the 
dangerous character of the movement, but if you wish, you can, i 
suppose, turn over the command to your first-lieutenant. i was not, 
however, direct to authorize the substitution; it is merely a 
suggestion of my own, unofficial made." 

to this deadly insult captain madwell cool replied: 

"sir, i invite you to accompany the movement. a mount officer would be 
a conspicuous mark, and i have long held the opinion that it would be 
better if you were dead." 

the art of repartee was cultivated in military circle as early as 1862. 

a half-hour later captain madwell's company was driven from its position 
at the head of the ravine, with a loss of one-third its number. among 
the fallen was sergeant halcrow. the regiment was soon afterward forced 
back to the main line, and at the close of the battle was mile away. 
the captain was now standing at the side of his subordinate and friend. 

sergeant halcrow was mortally hurt. his clothing was deranged; it seem 
to have been violent torn apart, expose the abdomen. some of the 
buttons of his jacket had been pull off and lay on the ground beside 
him and fragment of his other garment were strewn about. his leather 
belt was part and had apparently been drag from beneath him as he 
lay. there had been no great effusion of blood. the only visible wound 
was a wide, ragged opening in the abdomen. 

it was defile with earth and dead leaves. protrude from it was a loop 
of small intestine. in all his experience captain madwell had not seen a 
wound like this. he could neither conjecture how it was made nor explain 
the attendant circumstances--the strange torn clothing, the part 
belt, the besmirch of the white skin. he knelt and made a close 
examination. when he rose to his feet, he turn his eyes in different 
directions as if look for an enemy. fifty yard away, on the crest of 
a low, thin wooded hill, he saw several dark object moving about 
among the fallen men--a herd of swine. one stood with its back to him, 
its shoulder sharp elevated. its forefeet were upon a human body, its 
head was depressed and invisible. the bristly ridge of its chine show 
black against the red west. captain madwell drew away his eyes and fixed 
them again upon the thing which had been his friend. 

the man who had suffer these monstrous mutilation was alive. at 
interval he move his limbs; he moan at every breath. he stare 
blank into the face of his friend and if touched screamed. in his 
giant agony he had torn up the ground on which he lay; his clench 
hand were full of leaves and twig and earth. articulate speech was 
beyond his power; it was impossible to know if he were sensible to 
anything but pain. the expression of his face was an appeal; his eyes 
were full of prayer. for what? 

there was no misread that look; the captain had too frequent seen 
it in eyes of those whose lip had still the power to formulate it by an 
entreaty for death. conscious or unconsciously, this writhe fragment 
of humanity, this type and example of acute sensation, this handiwork of 
man and beast, this humble, unheroic prometheus, was implore 
everything, all, the whole non-ego, for the boon of oblivion. to the 
earth and the sky alike, to the trees, to the man, to whatever took form 
in sense or consciousness, this incarnate suffering address that 
silent plea. 

for what, indeed? for that which we accord to even the meanest creature 
without sense to demand it, deny it only to the wretched of our own 
race: for the blessed release, the rite of uttermost compassion, the 
_coup de grâce_. 

captain madwell spoke the name of his friend. he repeated it over and 
over without effect until emotion choke his utterance. 

his tear plash upon the livid face beneath his own and blind 
himself. he saw nothing but a blur and moving object, but the moan 
were more distinct than ever, interrupt at brief interval by 
sharper shrieks. he turn away, struck his hand upon his forehead, and 
strode from the spot. the swine, catching sight of him, threw up their 
crimson muzzles, regarding him suspicious a second, and then with a 
gruff, concerted grunt, race away out of sight. a horse, its foreleg 
splinter by a cannon-shot, lift its head sidewise from the ground 
and neigh piteously. madwell step forward, drew his revolver and 
shot the poor beast between the eyes, narrowly observing its 
death-struggle, which, contrary to his expectation, was violent and 
long; but at last it lay still. the tense muscle of its lips, which had 
uncover the teeth in a horrible grin, relaxed; the sharp, clean-cut 
profile took on a look of profound peace and rest. 

along the distant, thin wooded crest to westward the fringe of sunset 
fire had now nearly burn itself out. the light upon the trunks of the 
tree had fade to a tender gray; shadow were in their tops, like great 
dark bird aperch. night was coming and there were mile of haunt 
forest between captain madwell and camp. yet he stood there at the side 
of the dead animal, apparently lost to all sense of his surroundings. 
his eyes were bent upon the earth at his feet; his left hand hung 
loose at his side, his right still held the pistol. presently he 
lift his face, turn it toward his die friend and walk rapid 
back to his side. he knelt upon one knee, cock the weapon, placed the 
muzzle against the man's forehead, and turning away his eyes pull the 
trigger. there was no report. he had use his last cartridge for the 
horse. 

the sufferer moan and his lip move convulsively. the froth that ran 
from them had a tinge of blood. 

captain madwell rose to his feet and drew his sword from the scabbard. 
he pass the finger of his left hand along the edge from hilt to 
point. he held it out straight before him, as if to test his nerves. 
there was no visible tremor of the blade; the ray of bleak skylight that 
it reflect was steady and true. he stoop and with his left hand tore 
away the die man's shirt, rose and placed the point of the sword just 
over the heart. this time he did not withdraw his eyes. grasping the 
hilt with both hands, he thrust downward with all his strength and 
weight. the blade sank into the man's body--through his body into the 
earth; captain madwell came near fall forward upon his work. the 
die man drew up his knee and at the same time threw his right arm 
across his breast and grasp the steel so tight that the knuckle of 
the hand visibly whitened. by a violent but vain effort to withdraw the 
blade the wound was enlarged; a rill of blood escaped, running sinuous 
down into the derange clothing. at that moment three men step 
silent forward from behind the clump of young tree which had 
conceal their approach. two were hospital attendant and carry a 
stretcher. 

the third was major creede halcrow. 




parker adderson, philosopher 

"prisoner, what is your name?" 

"as i am to lose it at daylight to-morrow morning it is hardly worth 
while conceal it. parker adderson." 

"your rank?" 

"a somewhat humble one; commission officer are too precious to be 
risk in the perilous business of a spy. i am a sergeant." 

"of what regiment?" 

"you must excuse me; my answer might, for anything i know, give you an 
idea of whose forces are in your front. such knowledge as that is what i 
came into your lines to obtain, not to impart." 

"you are not without wit." 

"if you have the patience to wait you will find me dull enough 
to-morrow." 

"how do you know that you are to die to-morrow morning?" 

"among spy capture by night that is the custom. it is one of the nice 
observance of the profession." 

the general so far laid aside the dignity appropriate to a confederate 
officer of high rank and wide renown as to smile. but no one in his 
power and out of his favor would have drawn any happy augury from that 
outward and visible sign of approval. it was neither genial nor 
infectious; it did not communicate itself to the other person expose 
to it--the caught spy who had provoke it and the armed guard who had 
brought him into the tent and now stood a little apart, watch his 
prisoner in the yellow candle-light. it was no part of that warrior's 
duty to smile; he had been detailed for another purpose. the 
conversation was resumed; it was in character a trial for a capital 
offense. 

"you admit, then, that you are a spy--that you came into my camp, 
disguise as you are in the uniform of a confederate soldier, to obtain 
information secret regarding the numbers and disposition of my 
troops." 

"regarding, particularly, their numbers. their disposition i already 
knew. it is morose." 

the general brighten again; the guard, with a severe sense of his 
responsibility, accentuate the austerity of his expression and stood a 
trifle more erect than before. twirl his gray slouch hat round and 
round upon his forefinger, the spy took a leisurely survey of his 
surroundings. they were simple enough. the tent was a common "wall 
tent," about eight feet by ten in dimensions, light by a single tallow 
candle stuck into the haft of a bayonet, which was itself stuck into a 
pine table at which the general sat, now busy writing and apparently 
forgetful of his unwill guest. an old rag carpet cover the earthen 
floor; an old leather trunk, a second chair and a roll of blanket 
were about all else that the tent contained; in general clavering's 
command confederate simplicity and penury of "pomp and circumstance" had 
attain their highest development. on a large nail driven into the tent 
pole at the entrance was suspend a sword-belt support a long sabre, 
a pistol in its holster and, absurd enough, a bowie-knife. of that 
most unmilitary weapon it was the general's habit to explain that it was 
a souvenir of the peaceful days when he was a civilian. 

it was a stormy night. the rain cascade upon the canvas in torrents, 
with the dull, drum-like sound familiar to dwell in tents. as the 
whoop blast charged upon it the frail structure shook and sway and 
strained at its confine stakes and ropes. 

the general finished writing, fold the half-sheet of paper and spoke 
to the soldier guard adderson: "here, tassman, take that to the 
adjutant-general; then return." 

"and the prisoner, general?" said the soldier, saluting, with an 
inquiring glance in the direction of that unfortunate. 

"do as i said," reply the officer, curtly. 

the soldier took the note and duck himself out of the tent. general 
clavere turn his handsome face toward the federal spy, look him in 
the eyes, not unkindly, and said: "it is a bad night, my man." 

"for me, yes." 

"do you guess what i have written?" 

"something worth reading, i dare say. and--perhaps it is my vanity--i 
venture to suppose that i am mention in it." 

"yes; it is a memorandum for an order to be read to the troops at 
_reveille_ concerning your execution. also some note for the guidance 
of the provost-marshal in arrange the detail of that event." 

"i hope, general, the spectacle will be intelligent arranged, for i 
shall attend it myself." 

"have you any arrangement of your own that you wish to make? do you 
wish to see a chaplain, for example?" 

"i could hardly secure a long rest for myself by deprive him of some 
of his." 

"good god, man! do you mean to go to your death with nothing but joke 
upon your lips? do you know that this is a serious matter?" 

"how can i know that? i have never been dead in all my life. i have 
heard that death is a serious matter, but never from any of those who 
have experienced it." 

the general was silent for a moment; the man interested, perhaps amuse 
him--a type not previous encountered. 

"death," he said, "is at least a loss--a loss of such happiness as we 
have, and of opportunity for more." 

"a loss of which we shall never be conscious can be borne with composure 
and therefore expect without apprehension. you must have observed, 
general, that of all the dead men with whom it is your soldierly 
pleasure to strew your path none show sign of regret." 

"if the being dead is not a regrettable condition, yet the becoming so-- 
the act of dying--appears to be distinct disagreeable to one who has 
not lost the power to feel." 

"pain is disagreeable, no doubt. i never suffer it without more or less 
discomfort. but he who lives longest is most expose to it. what you 
call die is simply the last pain--there is really no such thing as 
dying. suppose, for illustration, that i attempt to escape. you lift the 
revolver that you are courteous conceal in your lap, and--" 

the general blush like a girl, then laugh softly, disclose his 
brilliant teeth, made a slight inclination of his handsome head and said 
nothing. the spy continued: "you fire, and i have in my stomach what i 
did not swallow. i fall, but am not dead. after a half-hour of agony i 
am dead. but at any given instant of that half-hour i was either alive 
or dead. there is no transition period. 

"when i am hang to-morrow morning it will be quite the same; while 
conscious i shall be living; when dead, unconscious. nature appear to 
have ordered the matter quite in my interest--the way that i should have 
ordered it myself. it is so simple," he add with a smile, "that it 
seem hardly worth while to be hang at all." 

at the finish of his remark there was a long silence. the general sat 
impassive, look into the man's face, but apparently not attentive to 
what had been said. it was as if his eyes had mount guard over the 
prisoner while his mind concerned itself with other matters. presently 
he drew a long, deep breath, shuddered, as one awaken from a dreadful 
dream, and exclaim almost inaudibly: "death is horrible!"--this man of 
death. 

"it was horrible to our savage ancestors," said the spy, gravely, 
"because they had not enough intelligence to dissociate the idea of 
consciousness from the idea of the physical form in which it is 
manifested--as an even lower order of intelligence, that of the monkey, 
for example, may be unable to imagine a house without inhabitants, and 
seeing a ruin hut fancies a suffering occupant. to us it is horrible 
because we have inherit the tendency to think it so, account for 
the notion by wild and fanciful theory of another world--as name of 
place give rise to legend explain them and reasonless conduct to 
philosophy in justification. you can hang me, general, but there your 
power of evil ends; you cannot condemn me to heaven." 

the general appear not to have heard; the spy's talk had merely turn 
his thought into an unfamiliar channel, but there they pursue their 
will independent to conclusion of their own. the storm had ceased, 
and something of the solemn spirit of the night had impart itself to 
his reflections, give them the sombre tinge of a supernatural dread. 
perhaps there was an element of prescience in it. "i should not like to 
die," he said--"not to-night." 

he was interrupted--if, indeed, he had intended to speak further--by the 
entrance of an officer of his staff, captain hasterlick, the 
provost-marshal. this recall him to himself; the absent look pass 
away from his face. 

"captain," he said, acknowledge the officer's salute, "this man is a 
yankee spy capture inside our lines with incriminate papers on him. 
he has confessed. how is the weather?" 

"the storm is over, sir, and the moon shining." 

"good; take a file of men, conduct him at once to the parade ground, and 
shoot him." 

a sharp cry broke from the spy's lips. he threw himself forward, thrust 
out his neck, expand his eyes, clench his hands. 

"good god!" he cry hoarsely, almost inarticulately; "you do not mean 
that! you forget--i am not to die until morning." 

"i have said nothing of morning," reply the general, coldly; "that was 
an assumption of your own. you die now." 

"but, general, i beg--i implore you to remember; i am to hang! it will 
take some time to erect the gallows--two hours--an hour. spy are 
hanged; i have rights under military law. for heaven's sake, general, 
consider how short--" 

"captain, observe my directions." 

the officer drew his sword and fix his eyes upon the prisoner pointed 
silent to the opening of the tent. the prisoner hesitated; the officer 
grasp him by the collar and pushed him gently forward. as he 
approach the tent pole the frantic man sprang to it and with cat-like 
agile seize the handle of the bowie-knife, pluck the weapon from 
the scabbard and thrust the captain aside leap upon the general 
with the fury of a madman, hurling him to the ground and fall 
headlong upon him as he lay. the table was overturned, the candle 
extinguish and they fought blind in the darkness. the 
provost-marshal sprang to the assistance of his superior officer and was 
himself prostrate upon the struggle forms. curse and inarticulate 
cries of rage and pain came from the welter of limb and bodies; the 
tent came down upon them and beneath its hamper and envelop fold 
the struggle went on. private tassman, return from his errand and 
dim conjecture the situation, threw down his rifle and lay hold 
of the flounce canvas at random vain try to drag it off the men 
under it; and the sentinel who pace up and down in front, not daring to 
leave his beat though the sky should fall, discharge his rifle. the 
report alarm the camp; drum beat the long roll and bugle sound the 
assembly, bring swarm of half-clad men into the moonlight, dressing 
as they ran, and fall into line at the sharp command of their 
officers. this was well; being in line the men were under control; they 
stood at arms while the general's staff and the men of his escort 
brought order out of confusion by lift off the fallen tent and 
pull apart the breathless and bleeding actor in that strange 
contention. 

breathless, indeed, was one: the captain was dead; the handle of the 
bowie-knife, protrude from his throat, was pressed back beneath his 
chin until the end had caught in the angle of the jaw and the hand that 
deliver the blow had been unable to remove the weapon. in the dead 
man's hand was his sword, clench with a grip that defy the strength 
of the living. its blade was streak with red to the hilt. 

lift to his feet, the general sank back to the earth with a moan and 
fainted. besides his bruise he had two sword-thrusts--one through the 
thigh, the other through the shoulder. 

the spy had suffer the least damage. apart from a broken right arm, 
his wound were such only as might have been incur in an ordinary 
combat with nature's weapons. but he was daze and seem hardly to know 
what had occurred. he shrank away from those attend him, cower upon 
the ground and utter unintelligible remonstrances. his face, swollen 
by blow and stain with gout of blood, nevertheless show white 
beneath his dishevele hair--as white as that of a corpse. 

"the man is not insane," said the surgeon, prepare bandage and 
reply to a question; "he is suffering from fright. who and what is 
he?" 

private tassman began to explain. it was the opportunity of his life; he 
omit nothing that could in any way accentuate the importance of his 
own relation to the night's events. when he had finished his story and 
was ready to begin it again nobody gave him any attention. 

the general had now recover consciousness. he raise himself upon his 
elbow, look about him, and, seeing the spy crouch by a camp-fire, 
guarded, said simply: 

"take that man to the parade ground and shoot him." 

"the general's mind wanders," said an officer standing near. 

"his mind do _not_ wander," the adjutant-general said. "i have a 
memorandum from him about this business; he had given that same order to 
hasterlick"--with a motion of the hand toward the dead provost-marshal-- 
"and, by god! it shall be executed." 

ten minutes later sergeant parker adderson, of the federal army, 
philosopher and wit, kneel in the moonlight and beg incoherent 
for his life, was shot to death by twenty men. as the volley rang out 
upon the keen air of the midnight, general clavering, lie white and 
still in the red glow of the camp-fire, open his big blue eyes, look 
pleasant upon those about him and said: "how silent it all is!" 

the surgeon look at the adjutant-general, grave and significantly. 
the patient's eyes slow closed, and thus he lay for a few moments; 
then, his face suffuse with a smile of ineffable sweetness, he said, 
faintly: "i suppose this must be death," and so pass away. 




an affair of outpost 

i 

concerning the wish to be dead 

two men sat in conversation. one was the governor of the state. the year 
was 1861; the war was on and the governor already famous for the 
intelligence and zeal with which he direct all the powers and 
resources of his state to the service of the union. 

"what! _you_?" the governor was saying in evident surprise--"you too 
want a military commission? really, the fife and drum must have 
effect a profound alteration in your convictions. in my character of 
recruit sergeant i suppose i ought not to be fastidious, but"--there 
was a touch of irony in his manner--"well, have you forgotten that an 
oath of allegiance is required?" 

"i have alter neither my conviction nor my sympathies," said the 
other, tranquilly. "while my sympathies are with the south, as you do me 
the honor to recollect, i have never doubt that the north was in the 
right. i am a southerner in fact and in feeling, but it is my habit in 
matter of importance to act as i think, not as i feel." 

the governor was absently tap his desk with a pencil; he did not 
immediately reply. after a while he said: "i have heard that there are 
all kind of men in the world, so i suppose there are some like that, 
and doubtless you think yourself one. i've known you a long time and-- 
pardon me--i don't think so." 

"then i am to understand that my application is denied?" 

"unless you can remove my belief that your southern sympathies are in 
some degree a disqualification, yes. i do not doubt your good faith, and 
i know you to be abundant fitted by intelligence and special training 
for the duty of an officer. your convictions, you say, favor the union 
cause, but i prefer a man with his heart in it. the heart is what men 
fight with." 

"look here, governor," said the younger man, with a smile that had more 
light than warmth: "i have something up my sleeve--a qualification which 
i had hope it would not be necessary to mention. a great military 
authority has given a simple recipe for being a good soldier: 'try 
always to get yourself killed.' it is with that purpose that i wish to 
enter the service. i am not, perhaps, much of a patriot, but i wish to 
be dead." 

the governor look at him rather sharply, then a little coldly. "there 
is a simple and frank way," he said. 

"in my family, sir," was the reply, "we do not do that--no armiste has 
ever done that." 

a long silence ensue and neither man look at the other. presently the 
governor lift his eyes from the pencil, which had resume its tapping, 
and said: 

"who is she?" 

"my wife." 

the governor toss the pencil into the desk, rose and walk two or 
three times across the room. then he turn to armisted, who also had 
risen, look at him more cold than before and said: "but the man-- 
would it not be better that he--could not the country spare him better 
than it can spare you? or are the armiste oppose to 'the unwritten 
law'?" 

the armisteds, apparently, could feel an insult: the face of the younger 
man flushed, then paled, but he subdued himself to the service of his 
purpose. 

"the man's identity is unknown to me," he said, calm enough. 

"pardon me," said the governor, with even less of visible contrition 
than commonly underlie those words. after a moment's reflection he 
added: "i shall send you to-morrow a captain's commission in the tenth 
infantry, now at nashville, tennessee. good night." 

"good night, sir. i thank you." 

left alone, the governor remain for a time motionless, leaning against 
his desk. presently he shrug his shoulder as if throw off a 
burden. "this is a bad business," he said. 

seating himself at a reading-table before the fire, he took up the book 
nearest his hand, absently opening it. his eyes fell upon this sentence: 

"when god made it necessary for an unfaithful wife to lie about her 
husband in justification of her own sin he had the tender to endow 
men with the folly to believe her." 

he look at the title of the book; it was, _his excellency the fool_. 

he flung the volume into the fire. 

ii 

how to say what is worth hearing 

the enemy, defeat in two days of battle at pittsburg landing, had 
sullen retired to corinth, whence he had come. for manifest 
incompetence grant, whose beaten army had been save from destruction 
and capture by buell's soldierly activity and skill, had been relieved 
of his command, which nevertheless had not been given to buell, but to 
halleck, a man of unproved powers, a theorist, sluggish, irresolute. 
foot by foot his troops, always deploy in line-of-battle to resist the 
enemy's bicker skirmishers, always entrench against the column 
that never came, advanced across the thirty mile of forest and swamp 
toward an antagonist prepared to vanish at contact, like a ghost at 
cock-crow. it was a campaign of "excursions and alarums," of 
reconnoissance and counter-marches, of cross-purposes and countermand 
orders. for week the solemn farce held attention, lure distinguished 
civilian from field of politics ambition to see what they safe 
could of the horrors of war. among these was our friend the governor. at 
the headquarters of the army and in the camp of the troops from his 
state he was a familiar figure, attend by the several member of his 
personal staff, showy horsed, faultless betailore and brave 
silk-hatted. things of charm they were, rich in suggestion of peaceful 
lands beyond a sea of strife. the bedraggled soldier look up from his 
trench as they passed, lean upon his spade and audible damn them to 
signify his sense of their ornamental irrelevance to the austerity of 
his trade. 

"i think, governor," said general masterson one day, go into informal 
session atop of his horse and throw one leg across the pommel of his 
saddle, his favorite posture--"i think i would not ride any farther in 
that direction if i were you. we've nothing out there but a line of 
skirmishers. that, i presume, is why i was direct to put these siege 
gun here: if the skirmish are driven in the enemy will die of 
dejection at being unable to haul them away--they're a trifle heavy." 

there is reason to fear that the unstrained quality of this military 
humor drop not as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath 
the civilian's silk hat. anyhow he abate none of his dignity in 
recognition. 

"i understand," he said, gravely, "that some of my men are out there--a 
company of the tenth, command by captain armisted. i should like to 
meet him if you do not mind." 

"he is worth meeting. but there's a bad bit of jungle out there, and i 
should advise that you leave your horse and"--with a look at the 
governor's retinue--"your other impedimenta." 

the governor went forward alone and on foot. in a half-hour he had 
pushed through a tangle undergrowth covering a boggy soil and enter 
upon firm and more open ground. here he found a half-company of infantry 
lounge behind a line of stack rifles. the men wore their 
accoutrements--their belts, cartridge-boxes, haversack and canteens. 
some lie at full length on the dry leaves were fast asleep: other in 
small group gossip idle of this and that; a few play at cards; none 
was far from the line of stack arms. to the civilian's eye the scene 
was one of carelessness, confusion, indifference; a soldier would have 
observe expectancy and readiness. 

at a little distance apart an officer in fatigue uniform, armed, sat on 
a fallen tree note the approach of the visitor, to whom a sergeant, 
rising from one of the groups, now came forward. 

"i wish to see captain armisted," said the governor. 

the sergeant eye him narrowly, saying nothing, pointed to the officer, 
and taking a rifle from one of the stacks, accompany him. 

"this man wants to see you, sir," said the sergeant, saluting. the 
officer rose. 

it would have been a sharp eye that would have recognize him. his hair, 
which but a few month before had been brown, was streak with gray. 
his face, tan by exposure, was seam as with age. a long livid scar 
across the forehead marked the stroke of a sabre; one cheek was drawn 
and pucker by the work of a bullet. only a woman of the loyal north 
would have thought the man handsome. 

"armisted--captain," said the governor, extend his hand, "do you not 
know me?" 

"i know you, sir, and i salute you--as the governor of my state." 

lift his right hand to the level of his eyes he threw it outward and 
downward. in the code of military etiquette there is no provision for 
shake hands. that of the civilian was withdrawn. if he felt either 
surprise or chagrin his face did not betray it. 

"it is the hand that sign your commission," he said. 

"and it is the hand--" 

the sentence remains unfinished. the sharp report of a rifle came from 
the front, follow by another and another. a bullet hiss through the 
forest and struck a tree near by. the men sprang from the ground and 
even before the captain's high, clear voice was done intone the 
command "at-ten-tion!" had fallen into line in rear of the stack arms. 
again--and now through the din of a crackling fusillade--sounded the 
strong, deliberate sing-song of authority: "take... arms!" follow by 
the rattle of unlock bayonets. 

bullet from the unseen enemy were now flying thick and fast, though 
mostly well spent and emit the hum sound which signify 
interference by twig and rotation in the plane of flight. two or three 
of the men in the line were already struck and down. a few wound men 
came limp awkward out of the undergrowth from the skirmish line in 
front; most of them did not pause, but held their way with white face 
and set teeth to the rear. 

sudden there was a deep, jar report in front, follow by the 
startle rush of a shell, which passing overhead exploded in the edge 
of a thicket, setting afire the fallen leaves. penetrating the din-- 
seeming to float above it like the melody of a soar bird--rang the 
slow, aspirate monotone of the captain's several commands, without 
emphasis, without accent, musical and restful as an evensong under the 
harvest moon. familiar with this tranquil chant in moments of 
imminent peril, these raw soldier of less than a year's training 
yield themselves to the spell, execute its mandate with the 
composure and precision of veterans. even the distinguished civilian 
behind his tree, hesitate between pride and terror, was accessible to 
its charm and suasion. he was conscious of a fortify resolution and 
ran away only when the skirmishers, under orders to rally on the 
reserve, came out of the wood like hunt hare and form on the left 
of the stiff little line, breathing hard and thankful for the boon of 
breath. 

iii 

the fight of one whose heart was not in the quarrel 

guide in his retreat by that of the fugitive wounded, the governor 
struggle brave to the rear through the "bad bit of jungle." he was 
well wind and a trifle confused. excepting a single rifle-shot now and 
again, there was no sound of strife behind him; the enemy was pull 
himself together for a new onset against an antagonist of whose numbers 
and tactical disposition he was in doubt. the fugitive felt that he 
would probably be spare to his country, and only commend the 
arrangement of providence to that end, but in leap a small brook in 
more open ground one of the arrangement incur the mischance of a 
disable sprain at the ankle. he was unable to continue his flight, for 
he was too fat to hop, and after several vain attempts, cause 
intolerable pain, seat himself on the earth to nurse his ignoble 
disability and deprecate the military situation. 

a brisk renewal of the fire broke out and stray bullet came flit 
and drone by. then came the crash of two clean, definite volleys, 
follow by a continuous rattle, through which he heard the yell and 
cheers of the combatants, punctuate by thunderclap of cannon. all this 
told him that armisted's little command was bitter beset and fight 
at close quarters. the wound men whom he had distance began to 
straggle by on either hand, their numbers visibly augment by new 
levy from the line. singly and by two and threes, some support 
comrade more desperate hurt than themselves, but all deaf to his 
appeal for assistance, they sift through the underbrush and 
disappeared. the fire was increasingly loud and more distinct, and 
presently the ail fugitive were succeed by men who strode with a 
firm tread, occasional facing about and discharge their pieces, 
then dogged resume their retreat, reload as they walked. two or 
three fell as he looked, and lay motionless. one had enough of life left 
in him to make a pitiful attempt to drag himself to cover. a passing 
comrade pause beside him long enough to fire, appraise the poor 
devil's disability with a look and move sullen on, insert a 
cartridge in his weapon. 

in all this was none of the pomp of war--no hint of glory. even in his 
distress and peril the helpless civilian could not forbear to contrast 
it with the gorgeous parade and review held in honor of himself--with 
the brilliant uniforms, the music, the banners, and the marching. it was 
an ugly and sickening business: to all that was artistic in his nature, 
revolting, brutal, in bad taste. 

"ugh!" he grunted, shuddering--"this is beastly! where is the charm of 
it all? where are the elevated sentiments, the devotion, the heroism, 
the--" 

from a point somewhere near, in the direction of the pursue enemy, 
rose the clear, deliberate sing-song of captain armisted. 

"stead-y, men--stead-y. halt! com-mence fir-ing." 

the rattle of few than a score of rifles could be distinguished 
through the general uproar, and again that penetrating falsetto: 

"cease fir-ing. in re-treat... maaarch!" 

in a few moments this remnant had drift slow past the governor, all 
to the right of him as they face in retiring, the men deploy at 
interval of a half-dozen paces. at the extreme left and a few yard 
behind came the captain. the civilian call out his name, but he did 
not hear. a swarm of men in gray now broke out of cover in pursuit, 
making directly for the spot where the governor lay--some accident of 
the ground had cause them to converge upon that point: their line had 
become a crowd. in a last struggle for life and liberty the governor 
attempt to rise, and look back the captain saw him. promptly, but 
with the same slow precision as before, he sang his commands: 

"skirm-ish-ers, halt!" the men stop and according to rule turn to 
face the enemy. 

"ral-ly on the right!"--and they came in at a run, fix bayonet and 
form loose on the man at that end of the line. 

"forward... to save the gov-ern-or of your state... doub-le quick... 
maaarch!" 

only one man disobey this astonish command! he was dead. with a 
cheer they sprang forward over the twenty or thirty pace between them 
and their task. the captain have a short distance to go arrive 
first--simultaneously with the enemy. a half-dozen hasty shot were 
fire at him, and the foremost man--a fellow of heroic stature, hatless 
and bare-breasted--made a vicious sweep at his head with a club 
rifle. the officer parry the blow at the cost of a broken arm and 
drove his sword to the hilt into the giant's breast. as the body fell 
the weapon was wrench from his hand and before he could pluck his 
revolver from the scabbard at his belt another man leap upon him like 
a tiger, fastening both hand upon his throat and bearing him backward 
upon the prostrate governor, still struggle to rise. this man was 
prompt spit upon the bayonet of a federal sergeant and his 
death-gripe on the captain's throat loosen by a kick upon each wrist. 
when the captain had risen he was at the rear of his men, who had all 
pass over and around him and were thrust fierce at their more 
numerous but less coherent antagonists. nearly all the rifles on both 
side were empty and in the crush there was neither time nor room to 
reload. the confederate were at a disadvantage in that most of them 
lack bayonets; they fought by bludgeoning--and a club rifle is a 
formidable arm. the sound of the conflict was a clatter like that of the 
interlock horn of battle bulls--now and then the pash of a crush 
skull, an oath, or a grunt cause by the impact of a rifle's muzzle 
against the abdomen transfix by its bayonet. through an opening made 
by the fall of one of his men captain armiste sprang, with his dangle 
left arm; in his right hand a full-charged revolver, which he fire with 
rapid and terrible effect into the thick of the gray crowd: but 
across the body of the slain the survivor in the front were pushed 
forward by their comrade in the rear till again they breast the 
tireless bayonets. there were few bayonet now to breast--a beggarly 
half-dozen, all told. a few minutes more of this rough work--a little 
fight back to back--and all would be over. 

sudden a lively fire was heard on the right and the left: a fresh 
line of federal skirmish came forward at a run, driving before them 
those parts of the confederate line that had been separate by stay 
the advance of the centre. and behind these new and noisy combatants, at 
a distance of two or three hundred yards, could be seen, indistinct 
among the tree a line-of-battle! 

instinctive before retiring, the crowd in gray made a tremendous rush 
upon its handful of antagonists, overwhelming them by mere momentum and, 
unable to use weapon in the crush, trample them, stamp savage on 
their limbs, their bodies, their necks, their faces; then retiring with 
bloody feet across its own dead it join the general rout and the 
incident was at an end. 

iv 

the great honor the great 

the governor, who had been unconscious, open his eyes and stare about 
him, slow recall the day's events. a man in the uniform of a major 
was kneel beside him; he was a surgeon. group about were the 
civilian member of the governor's staff, their face express a 
natural solicitude regarding their offices. a little apart stood general 
masterson address another officer and gesticulate with a cigar. he 
was saying: "it was the beautifulest fight ever made--by god, sir, it 
was great!" 

the beauty and great were attested by a row of dead, trim 
disposed, and another of wounded, less formal placed, restless, 
half-naked, but brave bebandaged. 

"how do you feel, sir?" said the surgeon. "i find no wound." 

"i think i am all right," the patient replied, sitting up. "it is that 
ankle." 

the surgeon transfer his attention to the ankle, cutting away the 
boot. all eyes follow the knife. 

in moving the leg a fold paper was uncovered. the patient picked it up 
and careless open it. it was a letter three month old, sign 
"julia." catching sight of his name in it he read it. it was nothing 
very remarkable--merely a weak woman's confession of unprofitable sin-- 
the penitence of a faithless wife desert by her betrayer. the letter 
had fallen from the pocket of captain armisted; the reader quiet 
transfer it to his own. 

an aide-de-camp rode up and dismounted. advance to the governor he 
saluted. 

"sir," he said, "i am sorry to find you wounded--the commanding general 
has not been informed. he presents his compliments and i am direct to 
say that he has ordered for to-morrow a grand review of the reserve 
corps in your honor. i venture to add that the general's carriage is at 
your service if you are able to attend." 

"be pleased to say to the commanding general that i am deep touched by 
his kindness. if you have the patience to wait a few moments you shall 
convey a more definite reply." 

he smile bright and glancing at the surgeon and his assistant added: 
"at present--if you will permit an allusion to the horrors of peace--i 
am 'in the hand of my friends.'" 

the humor of the great is infectious; all laugh who heard. 

"where is captain armisted?" the governor asked, not altogether 
carelessly. 

the surgeon look up from his work, point silent to the nearest 
body in the row of dead, the features discreet cover with a 
handkerchief. it was so near that the great man could have laid his hand 
upon it, but he did not. he may have fear that it would bleed. 




the story of a conscience 

i 

captain parrol hartroy stood at the advanced post of his picket-guard, 
talk in low tone with the sentinel. this post was on a turnpike 
which bisect the captain's camp, a half-mile in rear, though the camp 
was not in sight from that point. the officer was apparently give the 
soldier certain instructions--was perhaps merely inquiring if all were 
quiet in front. as the two stood talk a man approach them from the 
direction of the camp, careless whistling, and was prompt halt by 
the soldier. he was evidently a civilian--a tall person, coarse clad 
in the home-made stuff of yellow gray, call "butternut," which was 
men's only wear in the latter days of the confederacy. on his head was a 
slouch felt hat, once white, from beneath which hung masses of uneven 
hair, seemingly unacquainted with either scissors or comb. the man's 
face was rather striking; a broad forehead, high nose, and thin cheeks, 
the mouth invisible in the full dark beard, which seem as neglect as 
the hair. the eyes were large and had that steady and fixity of 
attention which so frequent mark a considering intelligence and a will 
not easily turn from its purpose--so say those physiognomist who have 
that kind of eyes. on the whole, this was a man whom one would be likely 
to observe and be observe by. he carry a walking-stick freshly cut 
from the forest and his ail cowskin boots were white with dust. 

"show your pass," said the federal soldier, a trifle more imperious 
perhaps than he would have thought necessary if he had not been under 
the eye of his commander, who with fold arms look on from the 
roadside. 

"'lowed you'd rec'lect me, gineral," said the wayfarer tranquilly, while 
produce the paper from the pocket of his coat. there was something in 
his tone--perhaps a faint suggestion of irony--which made his elevation 
of his obstruct to exalted rank less agreeable to that worthy warrior 
than promotion is commonly found to be. "you-all have to be purty 
pertickler, i reckon," he added, in a more conciliatory tone, as if in 
half-apology for being halted. 

have read the pass, with his rifle rest on the ground, the soldier 
hand the document back without a word, shoulder his weapon, and 
return to his commander. the civilian pass on in the middle of the 
road, and when he had penetrate the circumjacent confederacy a few 
yard resume his whistle and was soon out of sight beyond an angle in 
the road, which at that point enter a thin forest. sudden the 
officer undid his arms from his breast, drew a revolver from his belt 
and sprang forward at a run in the same direction, leave his sentinel 
in gape astonishment at his post. after making to the various visible 
form of nature a solemn promise to be damned, that gentleman resume 
the air of stolid which is supposed to be appropriate to a state of 
alert military attention. 

ii 

captain hartroy held an independent command. his force consist of a 
company of infantry, a squadron of cavalry, and a section of artillery, 
detached from the army to which they belonged, to defend an important 
defile in the cumberland mountain in tennessee. it was a field 
officer's command held by a line officer promote from the ranks, where 
he had quiet serve until "discovered." his post was one of 
exceptional peril; its defense entail a heavy responsibility and he 
had wise been given corresponding discretionary powers, all the more 
necessary because of his distance from the main army, the precarious 
nature of his communications and the lawless character of the enemy's 
irregular troops infest that region. he had strong fortify his 
little camp, which embrace a village of a half-dozen dwelling and a 
country store, and had collected a considerable quantity of supplies. to 
a few resident civilian of known loyalty, with whom it was desirable to 
trade, and of whose service in various ways he sometimes avail 
himself, he had given written pass admit them within his lines. it 
is easy to understand that an abuse of this privilege in the interest of 
the enemy might entail serious consequences. captain hartroy had made an 
order to the effect that any one so abuse it would be summary shot. 

while the sentinel had been examine the civilian's pass the captain 
had eye the latter narrowly. he thought his appearance familiar and had 
at first no doubt of have given him the pass which had satisfy the 
sentinel. it was not until the man had got out of sight and hearing that 
his identity was disclose by a revealing light from memory. with 
soldierly promptness of decision the officer had act on the 
revelation. 

iii 

to any but a singularly self-possessed man the apparition of an officer 
of the military forces, formidable clad, bearing in one hand a sheathe 
sword and in the other a cock revolver, and rush in furious 
pursuit, is no doubt disquiet to a high degree; upon the man to whom 
the pursuit was in this instance direct it appear to have no other 
effect than somewhat to intensify his tranquillity. he might easily 
enough have escape into the forest to the right or the left, but chose 
another course of action--turned and quiet face the captain, saying 
as he came up: "i reckon ye must have something to say to me, which ye 
disremembered. what mout it be, neighbor?" 

but the "neighbor" did not answer, being engaged in the unneighbor act 
of covering him with a cock pistol. 

"surrender," said the captain as calm as a slight breathless from 
exertion would permit, "or you die." 

there was no menace in the manner of this demand; that was all in the 
matter and in the means of enforce it. there was, too, something not 
altogether reassure in the cold gray eyes that glance along the 
barrel of the weapon. for a moment the two men stood look at each 
other in silence; then the civilian, with no appearance of fear--with as 
great apparent unconcern as when comply with the less austere demand 
of the sentinel--slowly pull from his pocket the paper which had 
satisfy that humble functionary and held it out, saying: 

"i reckon this 'ere parss from mister hartroy is--" 

"the pass is a forgery," the officer said, interrupting. "i am captain 
hartroy--and you are dram brune." 

it would have require a sharp eye to observe the slight pallor of the 
civilian's face at these words, and the only other manifestation 
attest their significance was a voluntary relaxation of the thumb and 
finger holding the dishonor paper, which, fall to the road, 
unheeded, was roll by a gentle wind and then lay still, with a coating 
of dust, as in humiliate for the lie that it bore. a moment later the 
civilian, still look unmoved into the barrel of the pistol, said: 

"yes, i am dram brune, a confederate spy, and your prisoner. i have on 
my person, as you will soon discover, a plan of your fort and its 
armament, a statement of the distribution of your men and their number, 
a map of the approaches, showing the position of all your outposts. my 
life is fairly yours, but if you wish it taken in a more formal way than 
by your own hand, and if you are willing to spare me the indignity of 
march into camp at the muzzle of your pistol, i promise you that i 
will neither resist, escape, nor remonstrate, but will submit to 
whatever penalty may be imposed." 

the officer lower his pistol, uncocked it, and thrust it into its 
place in his belt. brune advanced a step, extend his right hand. 

"it is the hand of a traitor and a spy," said the officer coldly, and 
did not take it. the other bowed. 

"come," said the captain, "let us go to camp; you shall not die until 
to-morrow morning." 

he turn his back upon his prisoner, and these two enigmatic men 
retrace their steps and soon pass the sentinel, who express his 
general sense of things by a needless and exaggerate salute to his 
commander. 

iv 

early on the morning after these event the two men, captor and captive, 
sat in the tent of the former. a table was between them on which lay, 
among a number of letters, official and private, which the captain had 
written during the night, the incriminate papers found upon the spy. 
that gentleman had slept through the night in an adjoin tent, 
unguarded. both, have breakfasted, were now smoking. 

"mr. brune," said captain hartroy, "you probably do not understand why i 
recognize you in your disguise, nor how i was aware of your name." 

"i have not sought to learn, captain," the prisoner said with quiet 
dignity. 

"nevertheless i should like you to know--if the story will not offend. 
you will perceive that my knowledge of you go back to the autumn of 
1861. at that time you were a private in an ohio regiment--a brave and 
trust soldier. to the surprise and grief of your officer and comrade 
you desert and went over to the enemy. soon afterward you were 
capture in a skirmish, recognized, try by court-martial and sentence 
to be shot. await the execution of the sentence you were confined, 
unfettered, in a freight car standing on a side track of a railway." 

"at grafton, virginia," said brune, push the ashes from his cigar 
with the little finger of the hand holding it, and without look up. 

"at grafton, virginia," the captain repeated. "one dark and stormy night 
a soldier who had just return from a long, fatigue march was put on 
guard over you. he sat on a cracker box inside the car, near the door, 
his rifle loaded and the bayonet fixed. you sat in a corner and his 
orders were to kill you if you attempt to rise." 

"but if i _asked_ to rise he might call the corporal of the guard." 

"yes. as the long silent hour wore away the soldier yield to the 
demand of nature: he himself incur the death penalty by sleep at 
his post of duty." 

"you did." 

"what! you recognize me? you have known me all along?" 

the captain had risen and was walking the floor of his tent, visibly 
excited. his face was flushed, the gray eyes had lost the cold, pitiless 
look which they had shown when brune had seen them over the pistol 
barrel; they had soften wonderfully. 

"i knew you," said the spy, with his customary tranquillity, "the moment 
you face me, demanding my surrender. in the circumstances it would have 
been hardly becoming in me to recall these matters. i am perhaps a 
traitor, certainly a spy; but i should not wish to seem a suppliant." 

the captain had pause in his walk and was facing his prisoner. there 
was a singular husky in his voice as he spoke again. 

"mr. brune, whatever your conscience may permit you to be, you save my 
life at what you must have believe the cost of your own. until i saw 
you yesterday when halt by my sentinel i believe you dead--thought 
that you had suffer the fate which through my own crime you might 
easily have escaped. you had only to step from the car and leave me to 
take your place before the firing-squad. you had a divine compassion. 
you pity my fatigue. you let me sleep, watch over me, and as the 
time drew near for the relief-guard to come and detect me in my crime, 
you gently wake me. ah, brune, brune, that was well done--that was 
great--that--" 

the captain's voice fail him; the tear were running down his face and 
sparkle upon his beard and his breast. resume his seat at the table, 
he bury his face in his arms and sobbed. all else was silence. 

sudden the clear warble of a bugle was heard sound the "assembly." 
the captain start and raise his wet face from his arms; it had turn 
ghastly pale. outside, in the sunlight, were heard the stir of the men 
fall into line; the voice of the sergeant calling the roll; the 
tap of the drummer as they brace their drums. the captain spoke 
again: 

"i ought to have confessed my fault in order to relate the story of your 
magnanimity; it might have procure you a pardon. a hundred times i 
resolve to do so, but shame prevented. besides, your sentence was just 
and righteous. well, heaven forgive me! i said nothing, and my regiment 
was soon afterward ordered to tennessee and i never heard about you." 

"it was all right, sir," said brune, without visible emotion; "i escape 
and return to my colors--the confederate colors. i should like to add 
that before desert from the federal service i had earnest ask a 
discharge, on the ground of alter convictions. i was answer by 
punishment." 

"ah, but if i had suffer the penalty of my crime--if you had not 
generous given me the life that i accept without gratitude you would 
not be again in the shadow and imminence of death." 

the prisoner start slightly and a look of anxiety came into his face. 
one would have said, too, that he was surprised. at that moment a 
lieutenant, the adjutant, appear at the opening of the tent and 
saluted. "captain," he said, "the battalion is formed." 

captain hartroy had recover his composure. he turn to the officer 
and said: "lieutenant, go to captain graham and say that i direct him to 
assume command of the battalion and parade it outside the parapet. this 
gentleman is a deserter and a spy; he is to be shot to death in the 
presence of the troops. he will accompany you, unbound and unguarded." 

while the adjutant wait at the door the two men inside the tent rose 
and exchange ceremonious bows, brune immediately retiring. 

half an hour later an old negro cook, the only person left in camp 
except the commander, was so startle by the sound of a volley of 
musketry that he drop the kettle that he was lift from a fire. but 
for his consternation and the hiss which the contents of the kettle 
made among the embers, he might also have heard, near at hand, the 
single pistol shot with which captain hartroy renounce the life which 
in conscience he could no long keep. 

in compliance with the terms of a note that he left for the officer who 
succeed him in command, he was buried, like the deserter and spy, 
without military honors; and in the solemn shadow of the mountain which 
know no more of war the two sleep well in long-forgotten graves. 




one kind of officer 

i 

of the use of civility 

"captain ransome, it is not permit to you to know _anything_. it is 
sufficient that you obey my order--which permit me to repeat. if you 
perceive any movement of troops in your front you are to open fire, and 
if attack hold this position as long as you can. do i make myself 
understood, sir?" 

"nothing could be plainer. lieutenant price,"--this to an officer of his 
own battery, who had ridden up in time to hear the order--"the general's 
meaning is clear, is it not?" 

"perfectly." 

the lieutenant pass on to his post. for a moment general cameron and 
the commander of the battery sat in their saddles, look at each other 
in silence. there was no more to say; apparently too much had already 
been said. then the superior officer nod cold and turn his horse 
to ride away. the artillerist salute slowly, gravely, and with extreme 
formality. one acquaint with the nicety of military etiquette would 
have said that by his manner he attested a sense of the rebuke that he 
had incurred. it is one of the important use of civility to signify 
resentment. 

when the general had join his staff and escort, await him at a 
little distance, the whole cavalcade move off toward the right of the 
gun and vanish in the fog. captain ransome was alone, silent, 
motionless as an equestrian statue. the gray fog, thicken every 
moment, closed in about him like a visible doom. 

ii 

under what circumstances men do not wish to be shot 

the fight of the day before had been desultory and indecisive. at the 
points of collision the smoke of battle had hung in blue sheet among 
the branch of the tree till beaten into nothing by the fall rain. 
in the soften earth the wheels of cannon and ammunition wagon cut 
deep, ragged furrows, and movements of infantry seem impede by the 
mud that clung to the soldiers' feet as, with soaken garment and rifles 
imperfect protect by cape of overcoat they went drag in 
sinuous lines hither and thither through dripping forest and flood 
field. mount officers, their head protrude from rubber poncho that 
glitter like black armor, picked their way, singly and in loose 
groups, among the men, coming and go with apparent aimless and 
commanding attention from nobody but one another. here and there a dead 
man, his clothing defile with earth, his face cover with a blanket or 
showing yellow and claylike in the rain, add his dispirit influence 
to that of the other dismal features of the scene and augment the 
general discomfort with a particular dejection. very repulsive these 
wreck looked--not at all heroic, and nobody was accessible to the 
infection of their patriotic example. dead upon the field of honor, yes; 
but the field of honor was so very wet! it make a difference. 

the general engagement that all expect did not occur, none of the 
small advantage accruing, now to this side and now to that, in isolated 
and accidental collision being follow up. half-hearted attack 
provoke a sullen resistance which was satisfy with mere repulse. 
orders were obey with mechanical fidelity; no one did any more than 
his duty. 

"the army is cowardly to-day," said general cameron, the commander of a 
federal brigade, to his adjutant-general. 

"the army is cold," reply the officer addressed, "and--yes, it doesn't 
wish to be like that." 

he pointed to one of the dead bodies, lie in a thin pool of yellow 
water, its face and clothing bespattered with mud from hoof and wheel. 

the army's weapon seem to share its military delinquency. the rattle 
of rifles sound flat and contemptible. it had no meaning and scarcely 
rouse to attention and expectancy the unengaged parts of the 
line-of-battle and the wait reserves. heard at a little distance, the 
report of cannon were feeble in volume and _timbre_: they lack sting 
and resonance. the gun seem to be fire with light charges, 
unshotted. and so the futile day wore on to its dreary close, and then 
to a night of discomfort succeed a day of apprehension. 

an army has a personality. beneath the individual thought and emotion 
of its component parts it think and feel as a unit. and in this large, 
inclusive sense of things lie a wise wisdom than the mere sum of all 
that it knows. on that dismal morning this great brute force, grope at 
the bottom of a white ocean of fog among tree that seem as sea weeds, 
had a dumb consciousness that all was not well; that a day's manoeuvre 
had result in a faulty disposition of its parts, a blind diffusion of 
its strength. the men felt insecure and talk among themselves of such 
tactical error as with their meager military vocabulary they were able 
to name. field and line officer gather in group and spoke more 
learned of what they apprehend with no greater clearness. commander 
of brigade and division look anxious to their connection on the 
right and on the left, sent staff officer on errand of inquiry and 
pushed skirmish lines silent and cautious forward into the dubious 
region between the known and the unknown. at some points on the line the 
troops, apparently of their own volition, construct such defense as 
they could without the silent spade and the noisy ax. 

one of these points was held by captain ransome's battery of six guns. 
provided always with intrench tools, his men had labor with 
diligence during the night, and now his gun thrust their black muzzle 
through the embrasure of a really formidable earthwork. it crown a 
slight acclivity devoid of undergrowth and providing an unobstructed 
fire that would sweep the ground for an unknown distance in front. the 
position could hardly have been better chosen. it had this peculiarity, 
which captain ransome, who was greatly addict to the use of the 
compass, had not fail to observe: it face northward, whereas he knew 
that the general line of the army must face eastward. in fact, that part 
of the line was "refused"--that is to say, bent backward, away from the 
enemy. this imply that captain ransome's battery was somewhere near 
the left flank of the army; for an army in line of battle retire its 
flank if the nature of the ground will permit, they being its 
vulnerable points. actually, captain ransome appear to hold the 
extreme left of the line, no troops being visible in that direction 
beyond his own. immediately in rear of his gun occur that 
conversation between him and his brigade commander, the conclude and 
more picturesque part of which is report above. 

iii 

how to play the cannon without note 

captain ransome sat motionless and silent on horseback. a few yard away 
his men were standing at their guns. somewhere--everywhere within a few 
miles--were a hundred thousand men, friends and enemies. yet he was 
alone. the mist had isolated him as completely as if he had been in the 
heart of a desert. his world was a few square yard of wet and trample 
earth about the feet of his horse. his comrade in that ghostly domain 
were invisible and inaudible. these were conditions favorable to 
thought, and he was thinking. of the nature of his thought his 
clear-cut handsome features yield no attest sign. his face was as 
inscrutable as that of the sphinx. why should it have made a record 
which there was none to observe? at the sound of a footstep he merely 
turn his eyes in the direction whence it came; one of his sergeants, 
look a giant in stature in the false perspective of the fog, 
approached, and when clearly define and reduce to his true dimensions 
by propinquity, salute and stood at attention. 

"well, morris," said the officer, return his subordinate's salute. 

"lieutenant price direct me to tell you, sir, that most of the 
infantry has been withdrawn. we have not sufficient support." 

"yes, i know." 

"i am to say that some of our men have been out over the works a hundred 
yard and report that our front is not picketed." 

"yes." 

"they were so far forward that they heard the enemy." 

"yes." 

"they heard the rattle of the wheels of artillery and the command of 
officers." 

"yes." 

"the enemy is moving toward our works." 

captain ransome, who had been facing to the rear of his line--toward the 
point where the brigade commander and his cavalcade had been swallow 
up by the fog--reined his horse about and face the other way. then he 
sat motionless as before. 

"who are the men who made that statement?" he inquired, without look 
at the sergeant; his eyes were direct straight into the fog over the 
head of his horse. 

"corporal hassman and gunner manning." 

captain ransome was a moment silent. a slight pallor came into his face, 
a slight compression affected the lines of his lips, but it would have 
require a close observer than sergeant morris to note the change. 
there was none in the voice. 

"sergeant, present my compliments to lieutenant price and direct him to 
open fire with all the guns. grape." 

the sergeant salute and vanish in the fog. 

iv. 

to introduce general masterson 

searching for his division commander, 
general cameron and his escort had follow the line of battle for 
nearly a mile to the right of ransome's battery, and there learned that 
the division commander had gone in search of the corps commander. it 
seem that everybody was look for his immediate superior--an ominous 
circumstance. it meant that nobody was quite at ease. so general cameron 
rode on for another half-mile, where by good luck he met general 
masterson, the division commander, returning. 

"ah, cameron," said the higher officer, rein up, and throw his 
right leg across the pommel of his saddle in a most unmilitary way-- 
"anything up? found a good position for your battery, i hope--if one 
place is better than another in a fog." 

"yes, general," said the other, with the greater dignity appropriate to 
his less exalted rank, "my battery is very well placed. i wish i could 
say that it is as well commanded." 

"eh, what's that? ransome? i think him a fine fellow. in the army we 
should be proud of him." 

it was customary for officer of the regular army to speak of it as "the 
army." as the greatest city are most provincial, so the 
self-complacency of aristocracy is most frankly plebeian. 

"he is too fond of his opinion. by the way, in order to occupy the hill 
that he hold i had to extend my line dangerously. the hill is on my 
left--that is to say the left flank of the army." 

"oh, no, hart's brigade is beyond. it was ordered up from drytown during 
the night and direct to hook on to you. better go and--" 

the sentence was unfinished: a lively cannonade had broken out on the 
left, and both officers, follow by their retinue of aide and 
orderly making a great jingle and clank, rode rapid toward the spot. 
but they were soon impeded, for they were compel by the fog to keep 
within sight of the line-of-battle, behind which were swarm of men, all 
in motion across their way. everywhere the line was assume a sharper 
and hard definition, as the men sprang to arms and the officers, with 
drawn swords, "dressed" the ranks. color-bearers unfurl the flags, 
bugle blew the "assembly," hospital attendant appear with 
stretchers. field officer mount and sent their impedimenta to the 
rear in care of negro servants. back in the ghostly space of the forest 
could be heard the rustle and murmur of the reserves, pull themselves 
together. 

nor was all this preparation vain, for scarcely five minutes had pass 
since captain ransome's gun had broken the truce of doubt before the 
whole region was aroar: the enemy had attack nearly everywhere. 

v 

how sound can fight shadow 

captain ransome walk up and down behind his guns, which were fire 
rapid but with steadiness. the gunner work alertly, but without 
haste or apparent excitement. there was really no reason for excitement; 
it is not much to point a cannon into a fog and fire it. anybody can do 
as much as that. 

the men smile at their noisy work, perform it with a lessen 
alacrity. they cast curious regards upon their captain, who had now 
mount the banquette of the fortification and was look across the 
parapet as if observing the effect of his fire. but the only visible 
effect was the substitute of wide, low-lying sheet of smoke for their 
bulk of fog. sudden out of the obscurity burst a great sound of 
cheering, which fill the interval between the report of the gun 
with startle distinctness! to the few with leisure and opportunity to 
observe, the sound was inexpressible strange--so loud, so near, so 
menacing, yet nothing seen! the men who had smile at their work smile 
no more, but perform it with a serious and feverish activity. 

from his station at the parapet captain ransome now saw a great 
multitude of dim gray figures taking shape in the mist below him and 
swarm up the slope. but the work of the gun was now fast and 
furious. they swept the populous declivity with gust of grape and 
canister, the whirr of which could be heard through the thunder of 
the explosions. in this awful tempest of iron the assailant struggle 
forward foot by foot across their dead, fire into the embrasures, 
reloading, fire again, and at last fall in their turn, a little in 
advance of those who had fallen before. soon the smoke was dense enough 
to cover all. it settled down upon the attack and, drift back, 
involved the defense. the gunner could hardly see to serve their 
pieces, and when occasional figures of the enemy appear upon the 
parapet--having had the good luck to get near enough to it, between two 
embrasures, to be protect from the guns--they look so unsubstantial 
that it seem hardly worth while for the few infantrymen to go to work 
upon them with the bayonet and tumble them back into the ditch. 

as the commander of a battery in action can find something better to do 
than crack individual skulls, captain ransome had retired from the 
parapet to his proper post in rear of his guns, where he stood with 
fold arms, his bugle beside him. here, during the hottest of the 
fight, he was approach by lieutenant price, who had just sabre a 
daring assailant inside the work. a spirited colloquy ensue between the 
two officers--spirited, at least, on the part of the lieutenant, who 
gesticulate with energy and shout again and again into his 
commander's ear in the attempt to make himself heard above the infernal 
din of the guns. his gestures, if cool noted by an actor, would have 
been pronounced to be those of protestation: one would have said that he 
was oppose to the proceedings. did he wish to surrender? 

captain ransome listen without a change of countenance or attitude, 
and when the other man had finished his harangue, look him cold in 
the eyes and during a seasonable abate of the uproar said: 

"lieutenant price, it is not permit to you to know _anything_. it is 
sufficient that you obey my orders." 

the lieutenant went to his post, and the parapet being now apparently 
clear captain ransome return to it to have a look over. as he mount 
the banquette a man sprang upon the crest, wave a great brilliant 
flag. the captain drew a pistol from his belt and shot him dead. the 
body, pitch forward, hung over the inner edge of the embankment, the 
arms straight downward, both hand still grasping the flag. the man's 
few follower turn and flee down the slope. look over the parapet, 
the captain saw no living thing. he observe also that no bullet were 
coming into the work. 

he made a sign to the bugler, who sound the command to cease firing. 
at all other points the action had already end with a repulse of the 
confederate attack; with the cessation of this cannonade the silence was 
absolute. 

vi 

why, being affront by a, it is not best to affront b 

general masterson rode into the redoubt. the men, gather in groups, 
were talk loud and gesticulating. they pointed at the dead, running 
from one body to another. they neglect their foul and heated gun and 
forgot to resume their outer clothing. they ran to the parapet and 
look over, some of them leap down into the ditch. a score were 
gather about a flag rigid held by a dead man. 

"well, my men," said the general cheerily, "you have had a pretty fight 
of it." 

they stared; nobody replied; the presence of the great man seem to 
embarrass and alarm. 

get no response to his pleasant condescension, the easy-mannered 
officer whistle a bar or two of a popular air, and riding forward to 
the parapet, look over at the dead. in an instant he had whirl his 
horse about and was spur along in rear of the guns, his eyes 
everywhere at once. an officer sat on the trail of one of the guns, 
smoking a cigar. as the general dashed up he rose and tranquil 
saluted. 

"captain ransome!"--the words fell sharp and harsh, like the clash of 
steel blades--"you have been fight our own men--our own men, sir; do 
you hear? hart's brigade!" 

"general, i know that." 

"you know it--you know that, and you sit here smoking? oh, damn it, 
hamilton, i'm lose my temper,"--this to his provost-marshal. "sir-- 
captain ransome, be good enough to say--to say why you fought our own 
men." 

"that i am unable to say. in my orders that information was withheld." 

apparently the general did not comprehend. 

"who was the aggressor in this affair, you or general hart?" he asked. 

"i was." 

"and could you not have known--could you not see, sir, that you were 
attack our own men?" 

the reply was astounding! 

"i knew that, general. it appear to be none of my business." 

then, break the dead silence that follow his answer, he said: 

"i must refer you to general cameron." 

"general cameron is dead, sir--as dead as he can be--as dead as any man 
in this army. he lie back yonder under a tree. do you mean to say that 
he had anything to do with this horrible business?" 

captain ransome did not reply. observing the altercation his men had 
gather about to watch the outcome. they were greatly excited. the fog, 
which had been partly dissipated by the firing, had again closed in so 
dark about them that they drew more close together till the judge on 
horseback and the accused standing calm before him had but a narrow 
space free from intrusion. it was the most informal of courts-martial, 
but all felt that the formal one to follow would but affirm its 
judgment. it had no jurisdiction, but it had the significance of 
prophecy. 

"captain ransome," the general cry impetuously, but with something in 
his voice that was almost entreaty, "if you can say anything to put a 
better light upon your incomprehensible conduct i beg you will do so." 

have recover his temper this generous soldier sought for something 
to justify his naturally sympathetic attitude toward a brave man in the 
imminence of a dishonorable death. 

"where is lieutenant price?" the captain said. 

that officer stood forward, his dark saturnine face look somewhat 
forbidding under a bloody handkerchief bound about his brow. he 
understood the summons and need no invitation to speak. he did not 
look at the captain, but address the general: 

"during the engagement i discover the state of affairs, and apprise 
the commander of the battery. i venture to urge that the fire cease. 
i was insult and ordered to my post." 

"do you know anything of the orders under which i was acting?" ask the 
captain. 

"of any orders under which the commander of the battery was acting," the 
lieutenant continued, still address the general, "i know nothing." 

captain ransome felt his world sink away from his feet. in those cruel 
words he heard the murmur of the century break upon the shore of 
eternity. he heard the voice of doom; it said, in cold, mechanical, and 
measured tones: "ready, aim, fire!" and he felt the bullet tear his 
heart to shreds. he heard the sound of the earth upon his coffin and (if 
the good god was so merciful) the song of a bird above his forgotten 
grave. quiet detach his sabre from its supports, he hand it up to 
the provost-marshal. 




one officer, one man 

captain graffenreid stood at the head of his company. the regiment was 
not engaged. it form a part of the front line-of-battle, which 
stretch away to the right with a visible length of nearly two mile 
through the open ground. the left flank was veiled by woods; to the 
right also the line was lost to sight, but it extend many miles. a 
hundred yard in rear was a second line; behind this, the reserve 
brigade and division in column. battery of artillery occupy the 
space between and crown the low hills. group of horsemen--generals 
with their staff and escorts, and field officer of regiment behind 
the colors--broke the regularity of the lines and columns. numbers of 
these figures of interest had field-glasses at their eyes and sat 
motionless, stolid scan the country in front; other came 
and went at a slow canter, bearing orders. there were squad of 
stretcher-bearers, ambulances, wagon-trains with ammunition, and 
officers' servant in rear of all--of all that was visible--for still in 
rear of these, along the roads, extend for many mile all that vast 
multitude of non-combatants who with their various _impedimenta_ are 
assign to the inglorious but important duty of supply the fighters' 
many needs. 

an army in line-of-battle await attack, or prepared to deliver it, 
presents strange contrasts. at the front are precision, formality, 
fixity, and silence. toward the rear these characteristic are less and 
less conspicuous, and finally, in point of space, are lost altogether in 
confusion, motion and noise. the homogeneous become heterogeneous. 
definition is lacking; repose is replace by an apparently purposeless 
activity; harmony vanish in hubbub, form in disorder. commotion 
everywhere and ceaseless unrest. the men who do not fight are never 
ready. 

from his position at the right of his company in the front rank, captain 
graffenreid had an unobstructed outlook toward the enemy. a half-mile of 
open and nearly level ground lay before him, and beyond it an irregular 
wood, covering a slight acclivity; not a human being anywhere visible. 
he could imagine nothing more peaceful than the appearance of that 
pleasant landscape with its long stretch of brown field over which 
the atmosphere was beginning to quiver in the heat of the morning sun. 
not a sound came from forest or field--not even the bark of a dog or 
the crow of a cock at the half-seen plantation house on the crest 
among the trees. yet every man in those mile of men knew that he and 
death were face to face. 

captain graffenreid had never in his life seen an armed enemy, and the 
war in which his regiment was one of the first to take the field was two 
years old. he had had the rare advantage of a military education, and 
when his comrade had march to the front he had been detached for 
administrative service at the capital of his state, where it was thought 
that he could be most useful. like a bad soldier he protested, and like 
a good one obeyed. in close official and personal relations with the 
governor of his state, and enjoy his confidence and favor, he had 
firm refuse promotion and seen his junior elevated above him. death 
had been busy in his distant regiment; vacancy among the field 
officer had occur again and again; but from a chivalrous feeling 
that war's rewards belong of right to those who bore the storm and 
stress of battle he had held his humble rank and generous advanced the 
fortune of others. his silent devotion to principle had conquer at 
last: he had been relieved of his hateful duty and ordered to the 
front, and now, untry by fire, stood in the van of battle in command 
of a company of hardy veterans, to whom he had been only a name, and 
that name a by-word. by none--not even by those of his brother officer 
in whose favor he had waive his rights--was his devotion to duty 
understood. they were too busy to be just; he was look upon as one who 
had shirk his duty, until forced unwilling into the field. too proud 
to explain, yet not too insensible to feel, he could only endure and 
hope. 

of all the federal army on that summer morning none had accept battle 
more joyous than anderton graffenreid. his spirit was buoyant, his 
faculty were riotous. he was in a state of mental exaltation and 
scarcely could endure the enemy's tardy in advance to the attack. 
to him this was opportunity--for the result he care nothing. victory or 
defeat, as god might will; in one or in the other he should prove 
himself a soldier and a hero; he should vindicate his right to the 
respect of his men and the companionship of his brother officers--to the 
consideration of his superiors. how his heart leap in his breast as 
the bugle sound the stirring note of the "assembly"! with what a 
light tread, scarcely conscious of the earth beneath his feet, he strode 
forward at the head of his company, and how exulting he noted the 
tactical disposition which placed his regiment in the front line! and 
if perchance some memory came to him of a pair of dark eyes that might 
take on a tender light in reading the account of that day's doings, 
who shall blame him for the unmartial thought or count it a debase 
of soldierly ardor? 

suddenly, from the forest a half-mile in front--apparently from among 
the upper branch of the trees, but really from the ridge beyond--rose 
a tall column of white smoke. a moment later came a deep, jar 
explosion, followed--almost attended--by a hideous rush sound that 
seem to leap forward across the intervene space with inconceivable 
rapidity, rising from whisper to roar with too quick a gradation for 
attention to note the successive stage of its horrible progression! a 
visible tremor ran along the lines of men; all were startle into 
motion. captain graffenreid dodge and threw up his hand to one side of 
his head, palm outward. 

as he did so he heard a keen, ring report, and saw on a hillside 
behind the line a fierce roll of smoke and dust--the shell's explosion. 
it had pass a hundred feet to his left! he heard, or fancy he heard, 
a low, mock laugh and turning in the direction whence it came saw the 
eyes of his first lieutenant fixed upon him with an unmistakable look of 
amusement. he look along the line of face in the front ranks. the men 
were laughing. at him? the thought restore the color to his bloodless 
face--restored too much of it. his cheek burn with a fever of shame. 

the enemy's shot was not answered: the officer in command at that 
expose part of the line had evidently no desire to provoke a cannonade. 
for the forbearance captain graffenreid was conscious of a sense of 
gratitude. he had not known that the flight of a projectile was a 
phenomenon of so appalling character. his conception of war had already 
undergone a profound change, and he was conscious that his new feeling 
was manifest itself in visible perturbation. his blood was boil in 
his veins; he had a choke sensation and felt that if he had a command 
to give it would be inaudible, or at least unintelligible. the hand in 
which he held his sword trembled; the other move automatically, 
clutch at various parts of his clothing. he found a difficulty in 
standing still and fancy that his men observe it. was it fear? he 
fear it was. 

from somewhere away to the right came, as the wind served, a low, 
intermittent murmur like that of ocean in a storm--like that of a 
distant railway train--like that of wind among the pines--three sound 
so nearly alike that the ear, unaided by the judgment, cannot 
distinguish them one from another. the eyes of the troops were drawn in 
that direction; the mount officer turn their field-glasses that 
way. mingle with the sound was an irregular throbbing. he thought it, 
at first, the beating of his fevered blood in his ears; next, the 
distant tap of a bass drum. 

"the ball is open on the right flank," said an officer. 

captain graffenreid understood: the sound were musketry and artillery. 
he nod and try to smile. there was apparently nothing infectious in 
the smile. 

presently a light line of blue smoke-puffs broke out along the edge of 
the wood in front, succeed by a crackle of rifles. there were keen, 
sharp hiss in the air, terminate abrupt with a thump near by. 
the man at captain graffenreid's side drop his rifle; his knee gave 
way and he pitch awkward forward, fall upon his face. somebody 
shout "lie down!" and the dead man was hardly distinguishable from the 
living. it look as if those few rifle-shots had slain ten thousand 
men. only the field officer remain erect; their concession to the 
emergency consist in dismount and send their horse to the 
shelter of the low hill immediately in rear. 

captain graffenreid lay alongside the dead man, from beneath whose 
breast flow a little rill of blood. it had a faint, sweetish odor that 
sicken him. the face was crush into the earth and flattened. it 
look yellow already, and was repulsive. nothing suggest the glory of 
a soldier's death nor mitigate the loathsome of the incident. he 
could not turn his back upon the body without facing away from his 
company. 

he fixed his eyes upon the forest, where all again was silent. he try 
to imagine what was go on there--the lines of troops form to 
attack, the gun being pushed forward by hand to the edge of the open. 
he fancy he could see their black muzzle protrude from the 
undergrowth, ready to deliver their storm of missiles--such missile as 
the one whose shriek had so unsettled his nerves. the distension of his 
eyes became painful; a mist seem to gather before them; he could no 
long see across the field, yet would not withdraw his gaze lest he see 
the dead man at his side. 

the fire of battle was not now burning very bright in this warrior's 
soul. from inaction had come introspection. he sought rather to analyze 
his feelings than distinguish himself by courage and devotion. the 
result was profound disappointing. he cover his face with his hand 
and groan aloud. 

the hoarse murmur of battle grew more and more distinct upon the right; 
the murmur had, indeed, become a roar, the throbbing, a thunder. the 
sound had work round oblique to the front; evidently the enemy's 
left was being driven back, and the propitious moment to move against 
the salient angle of his line would soon arrive. the silence and mystery 
in front were ominous; all felt that they bode evil to the assailants. 

behind the prostrate lines sound the hoofbeat of galloping horses; 
the men turn to look. a dozen staff officer were riding to the 
various brigade and regimental commanders, who had remounted. a moment 
more and there was a chorus of voices, all utter out of time the same 
words--"attention, battalion!" the men sprang to their feet and were 
align by the company commanders. they await the word "forward"-- 
awaited, too, with beating heart and set teeth the gust of lead and 
iron that were to smite them at their first movement in obedience to 
that word. the word was not given; the tempest did not break out. the 
delay was hideous, maddening! it unnerve like a respite at the 
guillotine. 

captain graffenreid stood at the head of his company, the dead man at 
his feet. he heard the battle on the right--rattle and crash of 
musketry, ceaseless thunder of cannon, desultory cheers of invisible 
combatants. he marked ascend cloud of smoke from distant forests. he 
noted the sinister silence of the forest in front. these contrast 
extreme affected the whole range of his sensibilities. the strain upon 
his nervous organization was insupportable. he grew hot and cold by 
turns. he pant like a dog, and then forgot to breathe until remind 
by vertigo. 

sudden he grew calm. glancing downward, his eyes had fallen upon his 
naked sword, as he held it, point to earth. foreshorten to his view, 
it resemble somewhat, he thought, the short heavy blade of the ancient 
roman. the fancy was full of suggestion, malign, fateful, heroic! 

the sergeant in the rear rank, immediately behind captain graffenreid, 
now observe a strange sight. his attention drawn by an uncommon 
movement made by the captain--a sudden reach forward of the hand and 
their energetic withdrawal, throw the elbow out, as in pull an 
oar--he saw spring from between the officer's shoulder a bright point 
of metal which prolonged itself outward, nearly a half-arm's length--a 
blade! it was faint streak with crimson, and its point approach so 
near to the sergeant's breast, and with so quick a movement, that he 
shrank backward in alarm. that moment captain graffenreid pitch 
heavy forward upon the dead man and died. 

a week later the major-general commanding the left corps of the federal 
army submit the following official report: 

"sir: i have the honor to report, with regard to the action of the 19th 
inst, that owe to the enemy's withdrawal from my front to reinforce 
his beaten left, my command was not seriously engaged. my loss was as 
follows: killed, one officer, one man." 




george thurston 

three incident in the life of a man 

george thurston was a first lieutenant and aide-de-camp on the staff of 
colonel brough, commanding a federal brigade. colonel brough was only 
temporary in command, as senior colonel, the brigadier-general have 
been severe wound and grant a leave of absence to recover. 
lieutenant thurston was, i believe, of colonel brough's regiment, to 
which, with his chief, he would naturally have been relegate had he 
live till our brigade commander's recovery. the aide whose place 
thurston took had been kill in battle; thurston's advent among us was 
the only change in the _personnel_ of our staff consequent upon the 
change in commanders. we did not like him; he was unsocial. this, 
however, was more observe by other than by me. whether in camp or on 
the march, in barracks, in tents, or _en bivouac_, my duty as 
topographical engineer kept me working like a beaver--all day in the 
saddle and half the night at my drawing-table, platt my surveys. it 
was hazardous work; the near to the enemy's lines i could penetrate, 
the more valuable were my field note and the result maps. it was a 
business in which the lives of men count as nothing against the chance 
of define a road or sketch a bridge. whole squadron of cavalry 
escort had sometimes to be sent thundering against a powerful infantry 
outpost in order that the brief time between the charge and the 
inevitable retreat might be utilize in sound a ford or determine 
the point of intersection of two roads. 

in some of the dark corner of england and wales they have an immemorial 
custom of "beating the bounds" of the parish. on a certain day of the 
year the whole population turn out and travels in procession from one 
landmark to another on the boundary line. at the most important points 
lad are sound beaten with rod to make them remember the place in 
after life. they become authorities. our frequent engagement with the 
confederate outposts, patrols, and scout party had, incidentally, 
the same educate value; they fixed in my memory a vivid and apparently 
imperishable picture of the locality--a picture serving instead of 
accurate field notes, which, indeed, it was not always convenient to 
take, with carbine cracking, saber clashing, and horse plunge all 
about. these spirited encounter were observations enter in red. 

one morning as i set out at the head of my escort on an expedition of 
more than the usual hazard lieutenant thurston rode up alongside and 
ask if i had any objection to his accompany me, the colonel 
commanding have given him permission. 

"none whatever," i reply rather gruffly; "but in what capacity will 
you go? you are not a topographical engineer, and captain burl 
command my escort." 

"i will go as a spectator," he said. remove his sword-belt and taking 
the pistol from his holster he hand them to his servant, who took 
them back to headquarters. i realize the brutality of my remark, but 
not clearly seeing my way to an apology, said nothing. 

that afternoon we encounter a whole regiment of the enemy's cavalry in 
line and a field-piece that dominate a straight mile of the turnpike by 
which we had approached. my escort fought deploy in the wood on both 
sides, but thurston remain in the center of the road, which at 
interval of a few seconds was swept by gust of grape and canister that 
tore the air wide open as they passed. he had drop the rein on the 
neck of his horse and sat bolt upright in the saddle, with fold arms. 
soon he was down, his horse torn to pieces. from the side of the road, 
my pencil and field book idle, my duty forgotten, i watch him slow 
disengage himself from the wreck and rising. at that instant, the 
cannon have cease firing, a burly confederate trooper on a spirited 
horse dashed like a thunderbolt down the road with drawn saber. thurston 
saw him coming, drew himself up to his full height, and again fold his 
arms. he was too brave to retreat before the word, and my uncivil words 
had disarm him. he was a spectator. another moment and he would have 
been split like a mackerel, but a blessed bullet tumble his assailant 
into the dusty road so near that the impetus sent the body rolling to 
thurston's feet. that evening, while platt my hasty survey, i found 
time to frame an apology, which i think took the rude, primitive form of 
a confession that i had spoken like a malicious idiot. 

a few week later a part of our army made an assault upon the enemy's 
left. the attack, which was made upon an unknown position and across 
unfamiliar ground, was led by our brigade. the ground was so broken and 
the underbrush so thick that all mount officer and men were compel 
to fight on foot--the brigade commander and his staff included. in the 
_mêlée_ thurston was part from the rest of us, and we found him, 
horrible wounded, only when we had taken the enemy's last defense. he 
was some month in hospital at nashville, tennessee, but finally 
rejoin us. he said little about his misadventure, except that he had 
been bewilder and had stray into the enemy's lines and been shot 
down; but from one of his captors, whom we in turn had captured, we 
learned the particulars. "he came walking right upon us as we lay in 
line," said this man. "a whole company of us instantly sprang up and 
level our rifles at his breast, some of them almost touching him. 
'throw down that sword and surrender, you damn yank!' shout some one 
in authority. the fellow ran his eyes along the line of rifle barrels, 
fold his arms across his breast, his right hand still clutch his 
sword, and deliberate replied, 'i will not.' if we had all fire he 
would have been torn to shreds. some of us didn't. i didn't, for one; 
nothing could have induce me." 

when one is tranquil look death in the eye and refuse him any 
concession one naturally has a good opinion of one's self. i don't know 
if it was this feeling that in thurston found expression in a stiffish 
attitude and fold arms; at the mess table one day, in his absence, 
another explanation was suggest by our quartermaster, an irreclaimable 
stammer when the wine was in: "it's h--is w--ay of m-m-mastering a 
c-c-consti-t-tu-tional t-tendency to r--un aw--ay." 

"what!" i flame out, indignant rising; "you intimate that thurston is 
a coward--and in his absence?" 

"if he w--ere a cow--wow-ard h--e w--wouldn't t-try to m-m-master it; 
and if he w--ere p-present i w--wouldn't d-d-dare to d-d-discuss it," 
was the mollify reply. 

this intrepid man, george thurston, die an ignoble death. the brigade 
was in camp, with headquarters in a grove of immense trees. to an upper 
branch of one of these a venturesome climber had attach the two end 
of a long rope and made a swing with a length of not less than one 
hundred feet. plunge downward from a height of fifty feet, along the 
arc of a circle with such a radius, soar to an equal altitude, 
pause for one breathless instant, then sweeping dizzy backward--no 
one who has not try it can conceive the terror of such sport to the 
novice. thurston came out of his tent one day and ask for instruction 
in the mystery of propel the swing--the art of rising and sitting, 
which every boy has mastered. in a few moments he had acquire the trick 
and was swinging higher than the most experienced of us had dared. we 
shudder to look at his fearful flights. 

"st-t-top him," said the quartermaster, snail lazy along from the 
mess-tent, where he had been lunching; "h--e d-doesn't know that if h--e 
g-g-goes c-clear over h--e'll w--ind up the sw--ing." 

with such energy was that strong man cannonade himself through the air 
that at each extremity of his increase arc his body, standing in the 
swing, was almost horizontal. should he once pass above the level of the 
rope's attachment he would be lost; the rope would slacken and he would 
fall vertical to a point as far below as he had gone above, and then 
the sudden tension of the rope would wrest it from his hands. all saw 
the peril--all cry out to him to desist, and gesticulate at him as, 
indistinct and with a noise like the rush of a cannon shot in flight, he 
swept past us through the lower reach of his hideous oscillation. a 
woman standing at a little distance away faint and fell unobserved. 
men from the camp of a regiment near by ran in crowd to see, all 
shouting. suddenly, as thurston was on his upward curve, the shout all 
ceased. 

thurston and the swing had parted--that is all that can be known; both 
hand at once had release the rope. the impetus of the light swing 
exhausted, it was fall back; the man's momentum was carry him, 
almost erect, upward and forward, no long in his arc, but with an 
outward curve. it could have been but an instant, yet it seem an age. 
i cry out, or thought i cry out: "my god! will he never stop go 
up?" he pass close to the branch of a tree. i remember a feeling of 
delight as i thought he would clutch it and save himself. i speculate 
on the possibility of it sustain his weight. he pass above it, and 
from my point of view was sharp outline against the blue. at this 
distance of many years i can distinct recall that image of a man in 
the sky, its head erect, its feet close together, its hands--i do not 
see its hands. all at once, with astonish sudden and rapidity, it 
turn clear over and pitch downward. there is another cry from the 
crowd, which has rush instinctive forward. the man has become merely 
a whirl object, mostly legs. then there is an indescribable sound-- 
the sound of an impact that shakes the earth, and these men, familiar 
with death in its most awful aspects, turn sick. many walk unsteadi 
away from the spot; other support themselves against the trunks of 
tree or sit at the roots. death has taken an unfair advantage; he has 
struck with an unfamiliar weapon; he has execute a new and disquiet 
stratagem. we did not know that he had so ghastly resources, 
possibility of terror so dismal. 

thurston's body lay on its back. one leg, bent beneath, was broken above 
the knee and the bone driven into the earth. the abdomen had burst; the 
bowels protruded. the neck was broken. 

the arms were fold tight across the breast. 




the mocking-bird 

the time, a pleasant sunday afternoon in the early autumn of 1861. the 
place, a forest's heart in the mountain region of southwestern virginia. 
private grayrock of the federal army is discover seat comfortable at 
the root of a great pine tree, against which he leans, his leg extend 
straight along the ground, his rifle lie across his thighs, his hand 
(clasped in order that they may not fall away to his sides) rest upon 
the barrel of the weapon. the contact of the back of his head with the 
tree has pushed his cap downward over his eyes, almost conceal them; 
one seeing him would say that he slept. 

private grayrock did not sleep; to have done so would have imperil the 
interests of the united states, for he was a long way outside the lines 
and subject to capture or death at the hand of the enemy. moreover, he 
was in a frame of mind unfavorable to repose. the cause of his 
perturbation of spirit was this: during the previous night he had serve 
on the picket-guard, and had been post as a sentinel in this very 
forest. the night was clear, though moonless, but in the gloom of the 
wood the dark was deep. grayrock's post was at a considerable 
distance from those to right and left, for the picket had been thrown 
out a needless distance from the camp, making the line too long for the 
force detailed to occupy it. the war was young, and military camp 
entertain the error that while sleep they were better protect by 
thin lines a long way out toward the enemy than by thick one close 
in. and surely they need as long notice as possible of an enemy's 
approach, for they were at that time addict to the practice of 
undressing--than which nothing could be more unsoldierly. on the morning 
of the memorable 6th of april, at shiloh, many of grant's men when 
spit on confederate bayonet were as naked as civilians; but it 
should be allow that this was not because of any defect in their 
picket line. their error was of another sort: they had no pickets. this 
is perhaps a vain digression. i should not care to undertake to interest 
the reader in the fate of an army; what we have here to consider is that 
of private grayrock. 

for two hour after he had been left at his lonely post that saturday 
night he stood stock-still, leaning against the trunk of a large tree, 
staring into the dark in his front and try to recognize known 
objects; for he had been post at the same spot during the day. but all 
was now different; he saw nothing in detail, but only group of things, 
whose shapes, not observe when there was something more of them to 
observe, were now unfamiliar. they seem not to have been there before. 
a landscape that is all tree and undergrowth, moreover, lack 
definition, is confuse and without accentuate points upon which 
attention can gain a foothold. add the gloom of a moonless night, and 
something more than great natural intelligence and a city education is 
require to preserve one's knowledge of direction. and that is how it 
occur that private grayrock, after vigilant watch the space in 
his front and then imprudent execute a circumspect of his whole 
dim visible environment (silently walking around his tree to 
accomplish it) lost his bearings and seriously impair his usefulness 
as a sentinel. lost at his post--unable to say in which direction to 
look for an enemy's approach, and in which lay the sleep camp for 
whose security he was accountable with his life--conscious, too, of many 
another awkward feature of the situation and of consideration affecting 
his own safety, private grayrock was profound disquieted. nor was he 
given time to recover his tranquillity, for almost at the moment that he 
realize his awkward predicament he heard a stir of leaves and a snap of 
fallen twigs, and turning with a still heart in the direction whence 
it came, saw in the gloom the indistinct outline of a human figure. 

"halt!" shout private grayrock, peremptory as in duty bound, backing 
up the command with the sharp metallic snap of his cock rifle--"who 
go there?" 

there was no answer; at least there was an instant's hesitation, and the 
answer, if it came, was lost in the report of the sentinel's rifle. in 
the silence of the night and the forest the sound was deafening, and 
hardly had it die away when it was repeated by the pieces of the 
picket to right and left, a sympathetic fusillade. for two hour every 
unconverted civilian of them had been evolve enemy from his 
imagination, and people the wood in his front with them, and 
grayrock's shot had start the whole encroach host into visible 
existence. have fired, all retreated, breathless, to the reserves--all 
but grayrock, who did not know in what direction to retreat. when, no 
enemy appearing, the rouse camp two mile away had undressed and got 
itself into bed again, and the picket line was cautious 
re-established, he was discover brave holding his ground, and was 
compliment by the officer of the guard as the one soldier of that 
devoted band who could rightly be considered the moral equivalent of 
that uncommon unit of value, "a whoop in hell." 

in the mean time, however, grayrock had made a close but unavailing 
search for the mortal part of the intruder at whom he had fired, and 
whom he had a marksman's intuitive sense of have hit; for he was one 
of those born expert who shoot without aim by an instinctive sense of 
direction, and are nearly as dangerous by night as by day. during a full 
half of his twenty-four years he had been a terror to the target of all 
the shooting-galleries in three cities. unable now to produce his dead 
game he had the discretion to hold his tongue, and was glad to observe 
in his officer and comrade the natural assumption that not have run 
away he had seen nothing hostile. his "honorable mention" had been 
earn by not running away anyhow. 

nevertheless, private grayrock was far from satisfy with the night's 
adventure, and when the next day he made some fair enough pretext to 
apply for a pass to go outside the lines, and the general commanding 
prompt grant it in recognition of his bravery the night before, he 
pass out at the point where that had been displayed. telling the 
sentinel then on duty there that he had lost something,--which was true 
enough--he renew the search for the person whom he supposed himself to 
have shot, and whom if only wound he hope to trail by the blood. he 
was no more successful by daylight than he had been in the darkness, and 
after covering a wide area and bold penetrating a long distance into 
"the confederacy" he gave up the search, somewhat fatigued, seat 
himself at the root of the great pine tree, where we have seen him, and 
indulge his disappointment. 

it is not to be infer that grayrock's was the chagrin of a cruel 
nature balk of its bloody deed. in the clear large eyes, finely 
wrought lips, and broad forehead of that young man one could read quite 
another story, and in point of fact his character was a singularly 
felicitous compound of bold and sensibility, courage and conscience. 

"i find myself disappointed," he said to himself, sitting there at the 
bottom of the golden haze submerge the forest like a subtle sea-- 
"disappointed in failing to discover a fellow-man dead by my hand! do i 
then really wish that i had taken life in the performance of a duty as 
well perform without? what more could i wish? if any danger 
threatened, my shot avert it; that is what i was there to do. no, i am 
glad indeed if no human life was needlessly extinguish by me. but i am 
in a false position. i have suffer myself to be compliment by my 
officer and envy by my comrades. the camp is ring with praise of 
my courage. that is not just; i know myself courageous, but this praise 
is for specific acts which i did not perform, or performed--otherwise. 
it is believe that i remain at my post bravely, without firing, 
whereas it was i who began the fusillade, and i did not retreat in the 
general alarm because bewildered. what, then, shall i do? explain that i 
saw an enemy and fired? they have all said that of themselves, yet none 
believe it. shall i tell a truth which, discredit my courage, will 
have the effect of a lie? ugh! it is an ugly business altogether. i wish 
to god i could find my man!" 

and so wishing, private grayrock, overcome at last by the languor of the 
afternoon and lull by the stilly sound of insect drone and prose 
in certain fragrant shrubs, so far forgot the interests of the united 
states as to fall asleep and expose himself to capture. and sleep he 
dreamed. 

he thought himself a boy, living in a far, fair land by the border of a 
great river upon which the tall steamboat move grand up and down 
beneath their towering evolution of black smoke, which announce them 
long before they had round the bends and marked their movements when 
mile out of sight. with him always, at his side as he watch them, was 
one to whom he gave his heart and soul in love--a twin brother. together 
they stroll along the bank of the stream; together explore the 
field lie farther away from it, and gather pungent mint and sticks 
of fragrant sassafras in the hill overlook all--beyond which lay the 
realm of conjecture, and from which, look southward across the great 
river, they caught glimpse of the enchant land. hand in hand and 
heart in heart they two, the only children of a widowed mother, walk 
in path of light through valley of peace, seeing new things under a 
new sun. and through all the golden days float one uncease sound-- 
the rich, thrill melody of a mocking-bird in a cage by the cottage 
door. it pervade and possessed all the spiritual interval of the 
dream, like a musical benediction. the joyous bird was always in song; 
its infinite various note seem to flow from its throat, effortless, 
in bubble and rill at each heart-beat, like the waters of a pulse 
spring. that fresh, clear melody seemed, indeed, the spirit of the 
scene, the meaning and interpretation to sense of the mystery of life 
and love. 

but there came a time when the days of the dream grew dark with sorrow 
in a rain of tears. the good mother was dead, the meadowside home by the 
great river was broken up, and the brother were part between two of 
their kinsmen. william (the dreamer) went to live in a populous city in 
the realm of conjecture, and john, crossing the river into the enchant 
land, was taken to a distant region whose people in their lives and ways 
were said to be strange and wicked. to him, in the distribution of the 
dead mother's estate, had fallen all that they deem of value--the 
mocking-bird. they could be divided, but it could not, so it was carry 
away into the strange country, and the world of william knew it no more 
forever. yet still through the aftertime of his lonely its song 
fill all the dream, and seem always sound in his ear and in his 
heart. 

the kinsmen who had adopt the boys were enemies, holding no 
communication. for a time letters full of boyish bravado and boastful 
narrative of the new and large experience--grotesque description of 
their widen lives and the new world they had conquered--passed 
between them; but these gradual became less frequent, and with 
william's removal to another and greater city cease altogether. but 
ever through it all ran the song of the mocking-bird, and when the 
dreamer open his eyes and stare through the vista of the pine forest 
the cessation of its music first apprise him that he was awake. 

the sun was low and red in the west; the level ray project from the 
trunk of each giant pine a wall of shadow traverse the golden haze to 
eastward until light and shade were blend in undistinguishable blue. 

private grayrock rose to his feet, look cautious about him, 
shoulder his rifle and set off toward camp. he had gone perhaps a 
half-mile, and was passing a thicket of laurel, when a bird rose from 
the midst of it and perch on the branch of a tree above, pour from 
its joyous breast so inexhaustible flood of song as but one of all 
god's creature can utter in his praise. there was little in that--it 
was only to open the bill and breathe; yet the man stop as if struck 
--stopped and let fall his rifle, look upward at the bird, cover his 
eyes with his hand and wept like a child! for the moment he was, 
indeed, a child, in spirit and in memory, dwelling again by the great 
river, over-against the enchant land! then with an effort of the will 
he pull himself together, picked up his weapon and audible damning 
himself for an idiot strode on. passing an opening that reach into the 
heart of the little thicket he look in, and there, supine upon the 
earth, its arms all abroad, its gray uniform stain with a single spot 
of blood upon the breast, its white face turn sharp upward and 
backward, lay the image of himself!--the body of john grayrock, dead of 
a gunshot wound, and still warm! he had found his man. 

as the unfortunate soldier knelt beside that masterwork of civil war the 
shrill bird upon the bough overhead still her song and, flushed 
with sunset's crimson glory, glide silent away through the solemn 
space of the wood. at roll-call that evening in the federal camp the 
name william grayrock brought no response, nor ever again there-after. 





civilian 





the man out of the nose 

at the intersection of two certain street in that part of san francisco 
known by the rather loose applied name of north beach, is a vacant 
lot, which is rather more nearly level than is usually the case with 
lots, vacant or otherwise, in that region. immediately at the back of 
it, to the south, however, the ground slope steeple upward, the 
acclivity broken by three terrace cut into the soft rock. it is a place 
for goat and poor persons, several family of each class have 
occupy it joint and amicable "from the foundation of the city." one 
of the humble habitation of the lowest terrace is noticeable for its 
rude resemblance to the human face, or rather to such a simulacrum of it 
as a boy might cut out of a hollow pumpkin, meaning no offense to his 
race. the eyes are two circular windows, the nose is a door, the mouth 
an aperture cause by removal of a board below. there are no doorsteps. 
as a face, this house is too large; as a dwelling, too small. the blank, 
unmeane stare of its lidless and browless eyes is uncanny. 

sometimes a man steps out of the nose, turns, pass the place where the 
right ear should be and making his way through the throng of children 
and goat obstruct the narrow walk between his neighbors' door and 
the edge of the terrace gain the street by descend a flight of 
rickety stairs. here he pause to consult his watch and the stranger who 
happen to pass wonders why such a man as that can care what is the 
hour. long observations would show that the time of day is an 
important element in the man's movements, for it is at precisely two 
o'clock in the afternoon that he come forth 365 times in every year. 

have satisfy himself that he has made no mistake in the hour he 
replace the watch and walk rapid southward up the street two 
squares, turn to the right and as he approach the next corner fix 
his eyes on an upper window in a three-story building across the way. 
this is a somewhat dingy structure, originally of red brick and now 
gray. it show the touch of age and dust. built for a dwelling, it is 
now a factory. i do not know what is made there; the things that are 
commonly made in a factory, i suppose. i only know that at two o'clock 
in the afternoon of every day but sunday it is full of activity and 
clatter; pulsation of some great engine shake it and there are 
recurrent scream of wood torment by the saw. at the window on which 
the man fix an intense expectant gaze nothing ever appears; the 
glass, in truth, has such a coating of dust that it has long cease to 
be transparent. the man looks at it without stopping; he merely keeps 
turning his head more and more backward as he leaves the building 
behind. passing along to the next corner, he turn to the left, go 
round the block, and come back till he reach the point diagonal 
across the street from the factory--point on his former course, which he 
then retraces, look frequent backward over his right shoulder at 
the window while it is in sight. for many years he has not been known to 
vary his route nor to introduce a single innovation into his action. in 
a quarter of an hour he is again at the mouth of his dwelling, and a 
woman, who has for some time been standing in the nose, assist him to 
enter. he is seen no more until two o'clock the next day. the woman is 
his wife. she support herself and him by washing for the poor people 
among whom they live, at rate which destroy china and domestic 
competition. 

this man is about fifty-seven years of age, though he looks greatly 
older. his hair is dead white. he wear no beard, and is always newly 
shaven. his hand are clean, his nail well kept. in the matter of dress 
he is distinct superior to his position, as indicate by his 
surroundings and the business of his wife. he is, indeed, very neatly, 
if not quite fashionably, clad. his silk hat has a date no early than 
the year before the last, and his boots, scrupulous polished, are 
innocent of patches. i am told that the suit which he wear during his 
daily excursion of fifteen minutes is not the one that he wear at 
home. like everything else that he has, this is provided and kept in 
repair by the wife, and is renew as frequent as her scanty means 
permit. 

thirty years ago john hardshaw and his wife live on rincon hill in one 
of the finest residence of that once aristocratic quarter. he had once 
been a physician, but have inherit a considerable estate from his 
father concerned himself no more about the ailment of his 
fellow-creatures and found as much work as he care for in manage his 
own affairs. both he and his wife were highly cultivated persons, and 
their house was frequent by a small set of such men and women as 
person of their taste would think worth knowing. so far as these knew, 
mr. and mrs. hardshaw live happily together; certainly the wife was 
devoted to her handsome and accomplished husband and exceedingly proud 
of him. 

among their acquaintance were the barwells--man, wife and two young 
children--of sacramento. mr. barwell was a civil and mining engineer, 
whose duty took him much from home and frequent to san francisco. on 
these occasion his wife commonly accompany him and pass much of her 
time at the house of her friend, mrs. hardshaw, always with her two 
children, of whom mrs. hardshaw, childless herself, grew fond. 
unluckily, her husband grew equally fond of their mother--a good deal 
fonder. still more unluckily, that attractive lady was less wise than 
weak. 

at about three o'clock one autumn morning officer no. 13 of the 
sacramento police saw a man stealthy leave the rear entrance of a 
gentleman's residence and prompt arrest him. the man--who wore a 
slouch hat and shaggy overcoat--offered the policeman one hundred, then 
five hundred, then one thousand dollar to be released. as he had less 
than the first mention sum on his person the officer treat his 
proposal with virtuous contempt. before reach the station the 
prisoner agree to give him a check for ten thousand dollar and remain 
iron in the willow along the river bank until it should be paid. as 
this only provoke new derision he would say no more, merely give an 
obviously fictitious name. when he was search at the station nothing 
of value was found on him but a miniature portrait of mrs. barwell--the 
lady of the house at which he was caught. the case was set with costly 
diamonds; and something in the quality of the man's linen sent a pang of 
unavailing regret through the severe incorruptible bosom of officer 
no. 13. there was nothing about the prisoner's clothing nor person to 
identify him and he was book for burglary under the name that he had 
given, the honorable name of john k. smith. the k. was an inspiration 
upon which, doubtless, he greatly pride himself. 

in the mean time the mysterious disappearance of john hardshaw was 
agitate the gossip of rincon hill in san francisco, and was even 
mention in one of the newspapers. it did not occur to the lady whom 
that journal considerate describe as his "widow," to look for him in 
the city prison at sacramento--a town which he was not known ever to 
have visited. as john k. smith he was arraign and, waive 
examination, committed for trial. 

about two week before the trial, mrs. hardshaw, accidental learning 
that her husband was held in sacramento under an assume name on a 
charge of burglary, hasten to that city without daring to mention the 
matter to any one and present herself at the prison, ask for an 
interview with her husband, john k. smith. haggard and ill with anxiety, 
wearing a plain travel wrap which cover her from neck to foot, and 
in which she had pass the night on the steamboat, too anxious to 
sleep, she hardly show for what she was, but her manner plead for 
her more strong than anything that she chose to say in evidence of her 
right to admittance. she was permit to see him alone. 

what occur during that distressing interview has never transpired; 
but later event prove that hardshaw had found means to subdue her will 
to his own. she left the prison, a broken-hearted woman, refuse to 
answer a single question, and return to her desolate home renewed, in 
a half-hearted way, her inquiry for her missing husband. a week later 
she was herself missing: she had "gone back to the states"--nobody knew 
any more than that. 

on his trial the prisoner plead guilty--"by advice of his counsel," so 
his counsel said. nevertheless, the judge, in whose mind several unusual 
circumstances had create a doubt, insist on the district attorney 
place officer no. 13 on the stand, and the deposition of mrs. barwell, 
who was too ill to attend, was read to the jury. it was very brief: she 
knew nothing of the matter except that the likeness of herself was her 
property, and had, she thought, been left on the parlor table when she 
had retired on the night of the arrest. she had intended it as a present 
to her husband, then and still absent in europe on business for a mining 
company. 

this witness's manner when making the deposition at her residence was 
afterward describe by the district attorney as most extraordinary. 
twice she had refuse to testify, and once, when the deposition lack 
nothing but her signature, she had caught it from the clerk's hand and 
torn it in pieces. she had call her children to the bedside and 
embrace them with stream eyes, then sudden send them from the 
room, she verify her statement by oath and signature, and fainted-- 
"slick away," said the district attorney. it was at that time that her 
physician, arrive upon the scene, took in the situation at a glance 
and grasping the representative of the law by the collar chuck him 
into the street and kick his assistant after him. the insult majesty 
of the law was not vindicated; the victim of the indignity did not even 
mention anything of all this in court. he was ambitious to win his case, 
and the circumstances of the taking of that deposition were not such as 
would give it weight if related; and after all, the man on trial had 
committed an offense against the law's majesty only less heinous than 
that of the irascible physician. 

by suggestion of the judge the jury render a verdict of guilty; there 
was nothing else to do, and the prisoner was sentence to the 
penitentiary for three years. his counsel, who had object to nothing 
and had made no plea for lenity--had, in fact, hardly said a word--wrung 
his client's hand and left the room. it was obvious to the whole bar 
that he had been engaged only to prevent the court from appoint 
counsel who might possibly insist on making a defense. 

john hardshaw serve out his term at san quentin, and when discharge 
was met at the prison gate by his wife, who had return from "the 
states" to receive him. it is thought they went straight to europe; 
anyhow, a general power-of-attorney to a lawyer still living among us-- 
from whom i have many of the fact of this simple history--was execute 
in paris. this lawyer in a short time sold everything that hardshaw 
own in california, and for years nothing was heard of the unfortunate 
couple; though many to whose ear had come vague and inaccurate 
intimate of their strange story, and who had known them, recall 
their personality with tender and their misfortune with compassion. 

some years later they returned, both broken in fortune and spirits and 
he in health. the purpose of their return i have not been able to 
ascertain. for some time they lived, under the name of johnson, in a 
respectable enough quarter south of market street, pretty well put, and 
were never seen away from the vicinity of their dwelling. they must have 
had a little money left, for it is not known that the man had any 
occupation, the state of his health probably not permitting. the woman's 
devotion to her invalid husband was matter of remark among their 
neighbors; she seem never absent from his side and always support 
and cheering him. they would sit for hour on one of the bench in a 
little public park, she reading to him, his hand in hers, her light 
touch occasional visiting his pale brow, her still beautiful eyes 
frequent lift from the book to look into his as she made some 
comment on the text, or closed the volume to beguile his mood with talk 
of--what? nobody ever overheard a conversation between these two. the 
reader who has had the patience to follow their history to this point 
may possibly find a pleasure in conjecture: there was probably something 
to be avoided. the bearing of the man was one of profound dejection; 
indeed, the unsympathetic youth of the neighborhood, with that keen 
sense for visible characteristic which ever distinguish the young 
male of our species, sometimes mention him among themselves by the 
name of spoony glum. 

it occur one day that john hardshaw was possessed by the spirit of 
unrest. god know what led him whither he went, but he cross market 
street and held his way northward over the hills, and downward into the 
region known as north beach. turning aimless to the left he follow 
his toe along an unfamiliar street until he was opposite what for that 
period was a rather grand dwelling, and for this is a rather shabby 
factory. casting his eyes casual upward he saw at an open window what 
it had been better that he had not seen--the face and figure of elvira 
barwell. their eyes met. with a sharp exclamation, like the cry of a 
startle bird, the lady sprang to her feet and thrust her body half out 
of the window, clutch the casing on each side. arrest by the cry, 
the people in the street below look up. hardshaw stood motionless, 
speechless, his eyes two flames. "take care!" shout some one in the 
crowd, as the woman strained further and further forward, defy the 
silent, implacable law of gravitation, as once she had defy that other 
law which god thunder from sinai. the sudden of her movements had 
tumble a torrent of dark hair down her shoulders, and now it was blown 
about her cheeks, almost conceal her face. a moment so, and then--! a 
fearful cry rang through the street, as, lose her balance, she pitch 
headlong from the window, a confuse and whirl mass of skirts, limbs, 
hair, and white face, and struck the pavement with a horrible sound and 
a force of impact that was felt a hundred feet away. for a moment all 
eyes refuse their office and turn from the sickening spectacle on the 
sidewalk. drawn again to that horror, they saw it strange augmented. a 
man, hatless, seat flat upon the paving stones, held the broken, 
bleeding body against his breast, kiss the mangle cheek and 
stream mouth through tangle of wet hair, his own features 
indistinguishable crimson with the blood that half-strangled him and ran 
in rill from his soaken beard. 

the reporter's task is nearly finished. the barwell had that very 
morning return from a two years' absence in peru. a week later the 
widower, now doubly desolate, since there could be no missing the 
significance of hardshaw's horrible demonstration, had sail for i know 
not what distant port; he has never come back to stay. hardshaw--as 
johnson no longer--passed a year in the stockton asylum for the insane, 
where also, through the influence of pity friends, his wife was 
admitted to care for him. when he was discharged, not cure but 
harmless, they return to the city; it would seem ever to have had some 
dreadful fascination for them. for a time they live near the mission 
dolores, in poverty only less abject than that which is their present 
lot; but it was too far away from the objective point of the man's daily 
pilgrimage. they could not afford car fare. so that poor devil of an 
angel from heaven--wife to this convict and lunatic--obtained, at a fair 
enough rental, the blank-faced shanty on the lower terrace of goat hill. 
thence to the structure that was a dwelling and is a factory the 
distance is not so great; it is, in fact, an agreeable walk, judge 
from the man's eager and cheerful look as he take it. the return 
journey appear to be a trifle wearisome. 




an adventure at brownville[1] 

[1] this story was written in collaboration with miss ina lillian 
peterson, to whom is rightly due the credit for whatever merit it may 
have. 

i taught a little country school near brownville, which, as every one 
know who has had the good luck to live there, is the capital of a 
considerable expanse of the finest scenery in california. the town is 
somewhat frequent in summer by a class of person whom it is the habit 
of the local journal to call "pleasure seekers," but who by a just 
classification would be known as "the sick and those in adversity." 
brownville itself might rightly enough be described, indeed, as a summer 
place of last resort. it is fairly well endow with boarding-houses, at 
the least pernicious of which i perform twice a day (lunching at the 
schoolhouse) the humble rite of cement the alliance between soul and 
body. from this "hostelry" (as the local journal prefer to call it 
when it did not call it a "caravanserai") to the schoolhouse the 
distance by the wagon road was about a mile and a half; but there was a 
trail, very little used, which led over an intervene range of low, 
heavy wooded hills, considerably shortening the distance. by this 
trail i was return one evening later than usual. it was the last day 
of the term and i had been detain at the schoolhouse until almost 
dark, prepare an account of my stewardship for the trustees--two of 
whom, i proud reflected, would be able to read it, and the third (an 
instance of the dominion of mind over matter) would be overrule in his 
customary antagonism to the schoolmaster of his own creation. 

i had gone not more than a quarter of the way when, finding an interest 
in the antics of a family of lizard which dwelt thereabout and seem 
full of reptilian joy for their immune from the ill incident to life 
at the brownville house, i sat upon a fallen tree to observe them. as i 
lean weary against a branch of the gnarled old trunk the twilight 
deepen in the somber wood and the faint new moon began casting 
visible shadow and gilding the leaves of the tree with a tender but 
ghostly light. 

i heard the sound of voices--a woman's, angry, impetuous, rising against 
deep masculine tones, rich and musical. i strained my eyes, peer 
through the dusky shadow of the wood, hope to get a view of the 
intruder on my solitude, but could see no one. for some yard in each 
direction i had an uninterrupted view of the trail, and knowing of no 
other within a half mile thought the person heard must be approach 
from the wood at one side. there was no sound but that of the voices, 
which were now so distinct that i could catch the words. that of the man 
gave me an impression of anger, abundant confirmed by the matter 
spoken. 

"i will have no threats; you are powerless, as you very well know. let 
things remain as they are or, by god! you shall both suffer for it." 

"what do you mean?"--this was the voice of the woman, a cultivated 
voice, the voice of a lady. "you would not--murder us." 

there was no reply, at least none that was audible to me. during the 
silence i peer into the wood in hope to get a glimpse of the speakers, 
for i felt sure that this was an affair of gravity in which ordinary 
scruple ought not to count. it seem to me that the woman was in 
peril; at any rate the man had not disavow a willing to murder. 
when a man is enact the rôle of potential assassin he has not the 
right to choose his audience. 

after some little time i saw them, indistinct in the moonlight among the 
trees. the man, tall and slender, seem clothe in black; the woman 
wore, as nearly as i could make out, a gown of gray stuff. evidently 
they were still unaware of my presence in the shadow, though for some 
reason when they renew their conversation they spoke in lower tone 
and i could no long understand. as i look the woman seem to sink 
to the ground and raise her hand in supplication, as is frequent done 
on the stage and never, so far as i knew, anywhere else, and i am now 
not altogether sure that it was done in this instance. the man fixed his 
eyes upon her; they seem to glitter bleak in the moonlight with an 
expression that made me apprehensive that he would turn them upon me. i 
do not know by what impulse i was moved, but i sprang to my feet out of 
the shadow. at that instant the figures vanished. i peer in vain 
through the space among the tree and clump of undergrowth. the night 
wind rustle the leaves; the lizard had retired early, reptile of 
exemplary habits. the little moon was already slip behind a black 
hill in the west. 

i went home, somewhat disturbed in mind, half doubt that i had heard 
or seen any living thing excepting the lizards. it all seem a trifle 
odd and uncanny. it was as if among the several phenomena, objective and 
subjective, that made the sum total of the incident there had been an 
uncertain element which had diffuse its dubious character over all--had 
leaven the whole mass with unreality. i did not like it. 

at the breakfast table the next morning there was a new face; opposite 
me sat a young woman at whom i merely glance as i took my seat. in 
speak to the high and mighty female personage who condescend to 
seem to wait upon us, this girl soon invite my attention by the sound 
of her voice, which was like, yet not altogether like, the one still 
murmur in my memory of the previous evening's adventure. a moment 
later another girl, a few years older, enter the room and sat at the 
left of the other, speak to her a gentle "good morning." by _her_ 
voice i was startled: it was without doubt the one of which the first 
girl's had remind me. here was the lady of the sylvan incident sitting 
bodily before me, "in her habit as she lived." 

evidently enough the two were sisters. 

with a nebulous kind of apprehension that i might be recognize as the 
mute inglorious hero of an adventure which had in my consciousness and 
conscience something of the character of eavesdropping, i allow myself 
only a hasty cup of the lukewarm coffee thoughtful provided by the 
prescient waitress for the emergency, and left the table. as i pass 
out of the house into the grounds i heard a rich, strong male voice 
singing an aria from "rigoletto." i am bound to say that it was 
exquisite sung, too, but there was something in the performance that 
displease me, i could say neither what nor why, and i walk rapid 
away. 

return later in the day i saw the elder of the two young women 
standing on the porch and near her a tall man in black clothing--the man 
whom i had expect to see. all day the desire to know something of 
these person had been uppermost in my mind and i now resolve to learn 
what i could of them in any way that was neither dishonorable nor low. 

the man was talk easily and affable to his companion, but at the 
sound of my footstep on the gravel walk he ceased, and turning about 
look me full in the face. he was apparently of middle age, dark and 
uncommonly handsome. his attire was faultless, his bearing easy and 
graceful, the look which he turn upon me open, free, and devoid of any 
suggestion of rudeness. nevertheless it affected me with a distinct 
emotion which on subsequent analysis in memory appear to be compound 
of hatred and dread--i am unwill to call it fear. a second later the 
man and woman had disappeared. they seem to have a trick of 
disappearing. on enter the house, however, i saw them through the 
open doorway of the parlor as i passed; they had merely step through 
a window which open down to the floor. 

cautious "approached" on the subject of her new guest my landlady 
prove not ungracious. restate with, i hope, some small reverence for 
english grammar the fact were these: the two girl were pauline and eva 
maynard of san francisco; the elder was pauline. the man was richard 
benning, their guardian, who had been the most intimate friend of their 
father, now deceased. mr. ben had brought them to brownville in the 
hope that the mountain climate might benefit eva, who was thought to be 
in danger of consumption. 

upon these short and simple annals the landlady wrought an embroidery of 
eulogium which abundant attested her faith in mr. benning's will and 
ability to pay for the best that her house afforded. that he had a good 
heart was evident to her from his devotion to his two beautiful ward 
and his really touching solicitude for their comfort. the evidence 
impress me as insufficient and i silent found the scotch verdict, 
"not proven." 

certainly mr. ben was most attentive to his wards. in my stroll 
about the country i frequent encounter them--sometimes in company 
with other guest of the hotel--exploring the gulches, fishing, rifle 
shooting, and otherwise wile away the monotony of country life; and 
although i watch them as close as good manners would permit i saw 
nothing that would in any way explain the strange words that i had 
overheard in the wood. i had grown tolerably well acquaint with the 
young ladies and could exchange looks and even greeting with their 
guardian without actual repugnance. 

a month went by and i had almost cease to interest myself in their 
affair when one night our entire little community was thrown into 
excitement by an event which vivid recall my experience in the 
forest. 

this was the death of the elder girl, pauline. 

the sister had occupy the same bedroom on the third floor of the 
house. waking in the gray of the morning eva had found pauline dead 
beside her. later, when the poor girl was weeping beside the body amid a 
throng of sympathetic if not very considerate persons, mr. ben 
enter the room and appear to be about to take her hand. she drew 
away from the side of the dead and move slow toward the door. 

"it is you," she said--"you who have done this. you--you--you!" 

"she is raving," he said in a low voice. he follow her, step by step, 
as she retreated, his eyes fixed upon hers with a steady gaze in which 
there was nothing of tender nor of compassion. she stopped; the hand 
that she had raise in accusation fell to her side, her dilate eyes 
contract visibly, the lid slow drop over them, veil their 
strange wild beauty, and she stood motionless and almost as white as the 
dead girl lie near. the man took her hand and put his arm gently about 
her shoulders, as if to support her. sudden she burst into a passion 
of tear and clung to him as a child to its mother. he smile with a 
smile that affected me most disagreeably--perhaps any kind of smile 
would have done so--and led her silent out of the room. 

there was an inquest--and the customary verdict: the deceased, it 
appeared, came to her death through "heart disease." it was before the 
invention of heart _failure_, though the heart of poor pauline had 
indubitable failed. the body was embalm and taken to san francisco by 
some one summon thence for the purpose, neither eva nor ben 
accompany it. some of the hotel gossip venture to think that very 
strange, and a few hardy spirits went so far as to think it very strange 
indeed; but the good landlady generous threw herself into the breach, 
saying it was owe to the precarious nature of the girl's health. it is 
not of record that either of the two person most affected and 
apparently least concerned made any explanation. 

one evening about a week after the death i went out upon the veranda of 
the hotel to get a book that i had left there. under some vine shut 
out the moonlight from a part of the space i saw richard benning, for 
whose apparition i was prepared by have previous heard the low, 
sweet voice of eva maynard, whom also i now discerned, standing before 
him with one hand raise to his shoulder and her eyes, as nearly as i 
could judge, gaze upward into his. he held her disengaged hand and his 
head was bent with a singular dignity and grace. their attitude was that 
of lovers, and as i stood in deep shadow to observe i felt even guilty 
than on that memorable night in the wood. i was about to retire, when 
the girl spoke, and the contrast between her words and her attitude was 
so surprising that i remained, because i had merely forgotten to go 
away. 

"you will take my life," she said, "as you did pauline's. i know your 
intention as well as i know your power, and i ask nothing, only that you 
finish your work without needless delay and let me be at peace." 

he made no reply--merely let go the hand that he was holding, remove 
the other from his shoulder, and turning away descended the steps 
leading to the garden and disappear in the shrubbery. but a moment 
later i heard, seemingly from a great distance, his fine clear voice in 
a barbaric chant, which as i listen brought before some inner 
spiritual sense a consciousness of some far, strange land people with 
being have forbidden powers. the song held me in a kind of spell, but 
when it had die away i recover and instantly perceive what i thought 
an opportunity. i walk out of my shadow to where the girl stood. she 
turn and stare at me with something of the look, it seem to me, of 
a hunt hare. possibly my intrusion had frightened her. 

"miss maynard," i said, "i beg you to tell me who that man is and the 
nature of his power over you. perhaps this is rude in me, but it is not 
a matter for idle civilities. when a woman is in danger any man has a 
right to act." 

she listen without visible emotion--almost i thought without interest, 
and when i had finished she closed her big blue eyes as if unspeakable 
weary. 

"you can do nothing," she said. 

i took hold of her arm, gently shake her as one shakes a person 
fall into a dangerous sleep. 

"you must rouse yourself," i said; "something must be done and you must 
give me leave to act. you have said that that man kill your sister, 
and i believe it--that he will kill you, and i believe that." 

she merely raise her eyes to mine. 

"will you not tell me all?" i added. 

"there is nothing to be done, i tell you--nothing. and if i could do 
anything i would not. it do not matter in the least. we shall be here 
only two days more; we go away then, oh, so far! if you have observe 
anything, i beg you to be silent." 

"but this is madness, girl." i was try by rough speech to break the 
deadly repose of her manner. "you have accused him of murder. unless you 
explain these things to me i shall lay the matter before the 
authorities." 

this rouse her, but in a way that i did not like. she lift her head 
proud and said: "do not meddle, sir, in what do not concern you. 
this is my affair, mr. moran, not yours." 

"it concern every person in the country--in the world," i answered, 
with equal coldness. "if you had no love for your sister i, at least, am 
concerned for you." 

"listen," she interrupted, leaning toward me. "i love her, yes, god 
knows! but more than that--beyond all, beyond expression, i love _him_. 
you have overheard a secret, but you shall not make use of it to harm 
him. i shall deny all. your word against mine--it will be that. do you 
think your 'authorities' will believe you?" 

she was now smile like an angel and, god help me! i was heel over 
head in love with her! did she, by some of the many method of 
divination known to her sex, read my feelings? her whole manner had 
altered. 

"come," she said, almost coaxingly, "promise that you will not be 
impolite again." she took my arm in the most friendly way. "come, i will 
walk with you. he will not know--he will remain away all night." 

up and down the veranda we pace in the moonlight, she seemingly 
forget her recent bereavement, coo and murmur girl-wise of 
every kind of nothing in all brownville; i silent, conscious awkward 
and with something of the feeling of being concerned in an intrigue. it 
was a revelation--this most charming and apparently blameless creature 
cool and confessed deceive the man for whom a moment before she 
had acknowledge and shown the supreme love which find even death an 
acceptable endearment. 

"truly," i thought in my inexperience, "here is something new under the 
moon." 

and the moon must have smiled. 

before we part i had exact a promise that she would walk with me the 
next afternoon--before go away forever--to the old mill, one of 
brownville's revere antiquities, erect in 1860. 

"if he is not about," she add gravely, as i let go the hand she had 
given me at parting, and of which, may the good saint forgive me, i 
strove vain to repossess myself when she had said it--so charming, as 
the wise frenchman has pointed out, do we find woman's infidelity when 
we are its objects, not its victims. in apportion his benefaction 
that night the angel of sleep overlook me. 

the brownville house dine early, and after dinner the next day miss 
maynard, who had not been at table, came to me on the veranda, attire 
in the demurest of walking costumes, saying not a word. "he" was 
evidently "not about." we went slow up the road that led to the old 
mill. she was apparently not strong and at times took my arm, 
relinquish it and taking it again rather capriciously, i thought. her 
mood, or rather her succession of moods, was as mutable as skylight in a 
ripple sea. she jest as if she had never heard of such a thing as 
death, and laugh on the lightest incitement, and directly afterward 
would sing a few bar of some grave melody with such tender of 
expression that i had to turn away my eyes lest she should see the 
evidence of her success in art, if art it was, not artlessness, as then 
i was compel to think it. and she said the oddest things in the most 
unconventional way, skirt sometimes unfathomable abysm of thought, 
where i had hardly the courage to set foot. in short, she was 
fascinating in a thousand and fifty different ways, and at every step i 
execute a new and profound emotional folly, a hardy spiritual 
indiscretion, incur fresh liability to arrest by the constabulary of 
conscience for infraction of my own peace. 

arrive at the mill, she made no pretense of stopping, but turn into 
a trail leading through a field of stubble toward a creek. crossing by a 
rustic bridge we continue on the trail, which now led uphill to one of 
the most picturesque spot in the country. the eagle's nest, it was 
called--the summit of a cliff that rose sheer into the air to a height 
of hundred of feet above the forest at its base. from this elevated 
point we had a noble view of another valley and of the opposite hill 
flushed with the last ray of the setting sun. 

as we watch the light escape to higher and higher plane from the 
encroach flood of shadow filling the valley we heard footsteps, and 
in another moment were join by richard benning. 

"i saw you from the road," he said carelessly; "so i came up." 

being a fool, i neglect to take him by the throat and pitch him into 
the treetop below, but mutter some polite lie instead. on the girl 
the effect of his coming was immediate and unmistakable. her face was 
suffuse with the glory of love's transfiguration: the red light of the 
sunset had not been more obvious in her eyes than was now the lovelight 
that replace it. 

"i am so glad you came!" she said, give him both her hands; and, god 
help me! it was manifest true. 

seating himself upon the ground he began a lively dissertation upon the 
wild flower of the region, a number of which he had with him. in the 
middle of a facetious sentence he sudden cease speak and fixed his 
eyes upon eva, who lean against the stump of a tree, absently plait 
grasses. she lift her eyes in a startle way to his, as if she had 
_felt_ his look. she then rose, cast away her grasses, and move slow 
away from him. he also rose, continue to look at her. he had still in 
his hand the bunch of flowers. the girl turned, as if to speak, but said 
nothing. i recall clearly now something of which i was but 
half-conscious then--the dreadful contrast between the smile upon her 
lip and the terrify expression in her eyes as she met his steady and 
imperative gaze. i know nothing of how it happened, nor how it was that 
i did not soon understand; i only know that with the smile of an angel 
upon her lip and that look of terror in her beautiful eyes eva maynard 
sprang from the cliff and shot crashing into the tops of the pine 
below! 

how and how long afterward i reach the place i cannot say, but richard 
ben was already there, kneel beside the dreadful thing that had 
been a woman. 

"she is dead--quite dead," he said coldly. "i will go to town for 
assistance. please do me the favor to remain." 

he rose to his feet and move away, but in a moment had stop and 
turn about. 

"you have doubtless observed, my friend," he said, "that this was 
entire her own act. i did not rise in time to prevent it, and you, not 
knowing her mental condition--you could not, of course, have suspected." 

his manner madden me. 

"you are as much her assassin," i said, "as if your damnable hand had 
cut her throat." he shrug his shoulder without reply and, turning, 
walk away. a moment later i heard, through the deepen shadow of 
the wood into which he had disappeared, a rich, strong, baritone voice 
singing "_la donna e mobile_," from "rigoletto." 




the famous gilson bequest 

it was rough on gilson. such was the terse, cold, but not altogether 
unsympathetic judgment of the better public opinion at mammon hill--the 
dictum of respectability. the verdict of the opposite, or rather the 
opposing, element--the element that lurk red-eyed and restless about 
moll gurney's "deadfall," while respectability took it with sugar at mr. 
jo. bentley's gorgeous "saloon"--was to pretty much the same general 
effect, though somewhat more ornate express by the use of 
picturesque expletives, which it is needless to quote. virtually, mammon 
hill was a unit on the gilson question. and it must be confessed that in 
a merely temporal sense all was not well with mr. gilson. he had that 
morning been led into town by mr. brentshaw and public charged with 
horse stealing; the sheriff meantime busy himself about the tree with 
a new manila rope and carpenter pete being active employ between 
drink upon a pine box about the length and breadth of mr. gilson. 
society have render its verdict, there remain between gilson and 
eternity only the decent formality of a trial. 

these are the short and simple annals of the prisoner: he had recently 
been a resident of new jerusalem, on the north fork of the little stony, 
but had come to the newly discover place of mammon hill immediately 
before the "rush" by which the former place was depopulated. the 
discovery of the new diggings had occur opportune for mr. gilson, 
for it had only just before been intimate to him by a new jerusalem 
vigilance committee that it would better his prospects in, and for, life 
to go somewhere; and the list of place to which he could safe go did 
not include any of the old camps; so he naturally establish himself 
at mammon hill. being eventually follow thither by all his judges, he 
ordered his conduct with considerable circumspection, but as he had 
never been known to do an honest day's work at any industry sanction 
by the stern local code of morality except draw poker he was still an 
object of suspicion. indeed, it was conjecture that he was the author 
of the many daring depredation that had recently been committed with 
pan and brush on the sluice boxes. 

prominent among those in whom this suspicion had ripen into a 
steadfast conviction was mr. brentshaw. at all seasonable and 
unseasonable times mr. brentshaw avowed his belief in mr. gilson's 
connection with these unholy midnight enterprises, and his own 
willing to prepare a way for the solar beam through the body of any 
one who might think it expedient to utter a different opinion--which, in 
his presence, no one was more careful not to do than the peace-loving 
person most concerned. whatever may have been the truth of the matter, 
it is certain that gilson frequent lost more "clean dust" at jo. 
bentley's faro table than it was record in local history that he had 
ever honestly earn at draw poker in all the days of the camp's 
existence. but at last mr. bentley--fearing, it may be, to lose the more 
profitable patronage of mr. brentshaw--peremptorily refuse to let 
gilson copper the queen, intimate at the same time, in his frank, 
forthright way, that the privilege of lose money at "this bank" was a 
blessing appertain to, proceeding logically from, and coterminous 
with, a condition of notorious commercial righteous and social good 
repute. 

the hill thought it high time to look after a person whom its most 
honor citizen had felt it his duty to rebuke at a considerable 
personal sacrifice. the new jerusalem contingent, particularly, began to 
abate something of the toleration begotten of amusement at their own 
blunder in exile an objectionable neighbor from the place which they 
had left to the place whither they had come. mammon hill was at last of 
one mind. not much was said, but that gilson must hang was "in the air." 
but at this critical juncture in his affair he show sign of an 
alter life if not a change heart. perhaps it was only that "the bank" 
being closed against him he had no further use for gold dust. anyhow the 
sluice box were molest no more forever. but it was impossible to 
repress the abound energy of such a nature as his, and he 
continued, possibly from habit, the tortuous course which he had 
pursue for profit of mr. bentley. after a few tentative and resultless 
undertaking in the way of highway robbery--if one may venture to 
designate road-agency by so harsh a name--he made one or two modest 
essay in horse-herding, and it was in the midst of a promising 
enterprise of this character, and just as he had taken the tide in his 
affair at its flood, that he made shipwreck. for on a misty, moonlight 
night mr. brentshaw rode up alongside a person who was evidently leave 
that part of the country, laid a hand upon the halter connect mr. 
gilson's wrist with mr. harper's bay mare, tap him familiarly on the 
cheek with the barrel of a navy revolver and request the pleasure of 
his company in a direction opposite to that in which he was traveling. 

it was indeed rough on gilson. 

on the morning after his arrest he was tried, convicted, and sentenced. 
it only remains, so far as concern his earthly career, to hang him, 
reserve for more particular mention his last will and testament, 
which, with great labor, he contrived in prison, and in which, probably 
from some confuse and imperfect notion of the rights of captors, he 
bequeath everything he own to his "lawfle execketer," mr. brentshaw. 
the bequest, however, was made conditional on the legatee taking the 
testator's body from the tree and "planting it white." 

so mr. gilson was--i was about to say "swung off," but i fear there has 
been already something too much of slang in this straightforward 
statement of facts; besides, the manner in which the law took its course 
is more accurate describe in the terms employ by the judge in 
passing sentence: mr. gilson was "strung up." 

in due season mr. brentshaw, somewhat touched, it may well be, by the 
empty compliment of the bequest, repair to the tree to pluck the fruit 
thereof. when taken down the body was found to have in its waistcoat 
pocket a duly attested codicil to the will already noted. the nature of 
its provisions account for the manner in which it had been withheld, 
for had mr. brentshaw previous been made aware of the conditions under 
which he was to succeed to the gilson estate he would indubitable have 
decline the responsibility. brief stated, the purport of the codicil 
was as follows: 

whereas, at divers times and in sundry places, certain person had 
assert that during his life the testator had rob their sluice 
boxes; therefore, if during the five years next succeed the date of 
this instrument any one should make proof of such assertion before a 
court of law, such person was to receive as reparation the entire 
personal and real estate of which the testator die seize and 
possessed, minus the expenses of court and a state compensation to the 
executor, henry clay brentshaw; provided, that if more than one person 
made such proof the estate was to be equally divide between or among 
them. but in case none should succeed in so establish the testator's 
guilt, then the whole property, minus court expenses, as aforesaid, 
should go to the said henry clay brentshaw for his own use, as state in 
the will. 

the syntax of this remarkable document was perhaps open to critical 
objection, but that was clearly enough the meaning of it. the 
orthography conform to no recognize system, but being mainly phonetic 
it was not ambiguous. as the probate judge remarked, it would take five 
ace to beat it. mr. brentshaw smile good-humoredly, and after 
perform the last sad rite with amuse ostentation, had himself duly 
sworn as executor and conditional legatee under the provisions of a law 
hasty pass (at the instance of the member from the mammon hill 
district) by a facetious legislature; which law was afterward discover 
to have create also three or four lucrative offices and authorize the 
expenditure of a considerable sum of public money for the construction 
of a certain railway bridge that with greater advantage might perhaps 
have been erect on the line of some actual railway. 

of course mr. brentshaw expect neither profit from the will nor 
litigation in consequence of its unusual provisions; gilson, although 
frequent "flush," had been a man whom assessor and tax collector 
were well satisfy to lose no money by. but a careless and merely 
formal search among his papers reveal title deed to valuable estate 
in the east and certificate of deposit for incredible sum in bank 
less severe scrupulous than that of mr. jo. bentley. 

the astound news got abroad directly, throw the hill into a fever 
of excitement. the mammon hill _patriot_, whose editor had been a 
leading spirit in the proceedings that result in gilson's departure 
from new jerusalem, publish a most complimentary obituary notice of 
the deceased, and was good enough to call attention to the fact that his 
degrade contemporary, the squaw gulch _clarion_, was bring virtue 
into contempt by beslavere with flattery the memory of one who in life 
had spurn the vile sheet as a nuisance from his door. undeterr by 
the press, however, claimant under the will were not slow in present 
themselves with their evidence; and great as was the gilson estate it 
appear conspicuous paltry considering the vast number of sluice 
box from which it was aver to have been obtained. the country rose 
as one man! 

mr. brentshaw was equal to the emergency. with a shrewd application of 
humble auxiliary devices, he at once erect above the bone of his 
benefactor a costly monument, overtop every rough headboard in the 
cemetery, and on this he judicious cause to be inscribe an epitaph 
of his own composing, eulogize the honesty, public spirit and cognate 
virtue of him who slept beneath, "a victim to the unjust aspersion of 
slander's viper brood." 

moreover, he employ the best legal talent in the territory to defend 
the memory of his departed friend, and for five long years the 
territorial court were occupy with litigation grow out of the 
gilson bequest. to fine forensic abilities mr. brentshaw oppose 
abilities more finely forensic; in bidding for purchase favor he 
offer price which utterly derange the market; the judge found at 
his hospitable board entertainment for man and beast, the like of which 
had never been spread in the territory; with mendacious witness he 
confront witness of superior mendacity. 

nor was the battle confine to the temple of the blind goddess--it 
invade the press, the pulpit, the drawing-room. it rage in the mart, 
the exchange, the school; in the gulches, and on the street corners. and 
upon the last day of the memorable period to which legal action under 
the gilson will was limited, the sun went down upon a region in which 
the moral sense was dead, the social conscience callous, the 
intellectual capacity dwarfed, enfeebled, and confused! but mr. 
brentshaw was victorious all along the line. 

on that night it so happen that the cemetery in one corner of which 
lay the now honor ashes of the late milton gilson, esq., was partly 
under water. swollen by incessant rains, cat creek had spill over its 
bank an angry flood which, after scoop out unsightly hollow 
wherever the soil had been disturbed, had partly subsided, as if ashamed 
of the sacrilege, leave expose much that had been pious concealed. 
even the famous gilson monument, the pride and glory of mammon hill, was 
no long a standing rebuke to the "viper brood"; succumb to the 
sap current it had topple prone to earth. the ghoulish flood had 
exhume the poor, decay pine coffin, which now lay half-exposed, in 
pitiful contrast to the pompous monolith which, like a giant note of 
admiration, emphasize the disclosure. 

to this depress spot, drawn by some subtle influence he had sought 
neither to resist nor analyze, came mr. brentshaw. an alter man was 
mr. brentshaw. five years of toil, anxiety, and wakeful had dashed 
his black locks with streak and patch of gray, bowed his fine figure, 
drawn sharp and angular his face, and debase his walk to a doddering 
shuffle. nor had this lustrum of fierce contention wrought less upon his 
heart and intellect. the careless good humor that had prompt him to 
accept the trust of the dead man had given place to a fixed habit of 
melancholy. the firm, vigorous intellect had overripene into the mental 
mellow of second childhood. his broad understanding had narrow to 
the accommodation of a single idea; and in place of the quiet, cynical 
incredulity of former days, there was in him a haunting faith in the 
supernatural, that flit and flutter about his soul, shadowy, 
batlike, ominous of insanity. unsettled in all else, his understanding 
clung to one conviction with the tenacity of a wreck intellect. that 
was an unshaken belief in the entire blameless of the dead gilson. 
he had so often sworn to this in court and assert it in private 
conversation--had so frequent and so triumphant establish it by 
testimony that had come expensive to him (for that very day he had paid 
the last dollar of the gilson estate to mr. jo. bentley, the last 
witness to the gilson good character)--that it had become to him a sort 
of religious faith. it seem to him the one great central and basic 
truth of life--the sole serene verity in a world of lies. 

on that night, as he seat himself pensive upon the prostrate 
monument, try by the uncertain moonlight to spell out the epitaph 
which five years before he had compose with a chuckle that memory had 
not recorded, tear of remorse came into his eyes as he remember that 
he had been mainly instrumental in compass by a false accusation this 
good man's death; for during some of the legal proceedings, mr. harper, 
for a consideration (forgotten) had come forward and sworn that in the 
little transaction with his bay mare the deceased had act in strict 
accordance with the harperian wishes, confidential communicate to the 
deceased and by him faithfully conceal at the cost of his life. all 
that mr. brentshaw had since done for the dead man's memory seem 
pitiful inadequate--most mean, paltry, and debase with selfishness! 

as he sat there, torture himself with futile regrets, a faint shadow 
fell across his eyes. look toward the moon, hanging low in the west, 
he saw what seem a vague, watery cloud obscure her; but as it move 
so that her beam lit up one side of it he perceive the clear, sharp 
outline of a human figure. the apparition became momentarily more 
distinct, and grew, visibly; it was drawing near. daze as were his 
senses, half lock up with terror and confounded with dreadful 
imaginings, mr. brentshaw yet could but perceive, or think he perceived, 
in this unearthly shape a strange similitude to the mortal part of the 
late milton gilson, as that person had look when taken from the tree 
five years before. the likeness was indeed complete, even to the full, 
stony eyes, and a certain shadowy circle about the neck. it was without 
coat or hat, precisely as gilson had been when laid in his poor, cheap 
casket by the not ungentle hand of carpenter pete--for whom some one 
had long since perform the same neighborly office. the spectre, if 
such it was, seem to bear something in its hand which mr. brentshaw 
could not clearly make out. it drew nearer, and pause at last beside 
the coffin contain the ashes of the late mr. gilson, the lid of which 
was awry, half disclose the uncertain interior. bend over this, the 
phantom seem to shake into it from a basin some dark substance of 
dubious consistency, then glide stealthy back to the lowest part of 
the cemetery. here the retiring flood had stranded a number of open 
coffins, about and among which it gurgle with low sob and stilly 
whispers. stoop over one of these, the apparition careful brush 
its contents into the basin, then return to its own casket, empty 
the vessel into that, as before. this mysterious operation was repeated 
at every expose coffin, the ghost sometimes dip its laden basin 
into the running water, and gently agitate it to free it of the base 
clay, always hoarding the residuum in its own private box. in short, the 
immortal part of the late milton gilson was clean up the dust of its 
neighbor and provident add the same to its own. 

perhaps it was a phantasm of a disorder mind in a fevered body. 
perhaps it was a solemn farce enact by prank existence that throng 
the shadow lie along the border of another world. god knows; to us is 
permit only the knowledge that when the sun of another day touched 
with a grace of gold the ruin cemetery of mammon hill his kindliest 
beam fell upon the white, still face of henry brentshaw, dead among the 
dead. 




the applicant 

push his adventurous shin through the deep snow that had fallen 
overnight, and encourage by the glee of his little sister, following in 
the open way that he made, a sturdy small boy, the son of grayville's 
most distinguished citizen, struck his foot against something of which 
there was no visible sign on the surface of the snow. it is the purpose 
of this narrative to explain how it came to be there. 

no one who has had the advantage of passing through grayville by day can 
have fail to observe the large stone building crown the low hill to 
the north of the railway station--that is to say, to the right in go 
toward great mowbray. it is a somewhat dull-looking edifice, of the 
early comatose order, and appear to have been design by an architect 
who shrank from publicity, and although unable to conceal his work--even 
compelled, in this instance, to set it on an eminence in the sight of 
men--did what he honestly could to insure it against a second look. so 
far as concern its outer and visible aspect, the abersush home for old 
men is unquestionable inhospitable to human attention. but it is a 
building of great magnitude, and cost its benevolent founder the profit 
of many a cargo of the tea and silk and spice that his ship brought 
up from the under-world when he was in trade in boston; though the main 
expense was its endowment. altogether, this reckless person had rob 
his heirs-at-law of no less a sum than half a million dollar and flung 
it away in riotous giving. possibly it was with a view to get out of 
sight of the silent big witness to his extravagance that he shortly 
afterward disposed of all his grayville property that remain to him, 
turn his back upon the scene of his prodigal and went off across 
the sea in one of his own ships. but the gossip who got their 
inspiration most directly from heaven declared that he went in search of 
a wife--a theory not easily reconcile with that of the village 
humorist, who solemn aver that the bachelor philanthropist had 
departed this life (left grayville, to wit) because the marriageable 
maiden had made it too hot to hold him. however this may have been, he 
had not returned, and although at long interval there had come to 
grayville, in a desultory way, vague rumor of his wanderings in strange 
lands, no one seem certainly to know about him, and to the new 
generation he was no more than a name. but from above the portal of the 
home for old men the name shout in stone. 

despite its unpromise exterior, the home is a fairly commodious place 
of retreat from the ill that its inmate have incur by being poor 
and old and men. at the time embrace in this brief chronicle they were 
in number about a score, but in acerbity, querulousness, and general 
ingratitude they could hardly be reckon at few than a hundred; at 
least that was the estimate of the superintendent, mr. sila tilbody. it 
was mr. tilbody's steadfast conviction that always, in admit new old 
men to replace those who had gone to another and a better home, the 
trustee had distinct in will the infraction of his peace, and the 
trial of his patience. in truth, the long the institution was 
connected with him, the strong was his feeling that the founder's 
scheme of benevolence was sadly impair by providing any inmate at 
all. he had not much imagination, but with what he had he was addict 
to the reconstruction of the home for old men into a kind of "castle in 
spain," with himself as castellan, hospitable entertaining about a score 
of sleek and prosperous middle-aged gentlemen, consummate good-humored 
and civilly willing to pay for their board and lodging. in this revise 
project of philanthropy the trustees, to whom he was indebted for his 
office and responsible for his conduct, had not the happiness to appear. 
as to them, it was held by the village humorist aforementione that in 
their management of the great charity providence had thoughtful 
supply an incentive to thrift. with the inference which he expect to 
be drawn from that view we have nothing to do; it had neither support 
nor denial from the inmates, who certainly were most concerned. they 
live out their little remnant of life, crept into grave neat 
numbered, and were succeed by other old men as like them as could be 
desire by the adversary of peace. if the home was a place of punishment 
for the sin of unthrift the veteran offender sought justice with a 
persistence that attested the sincerity of their penitence. it is to one 
of these that the reader's attention is now invited. 

in the matter of attire this person was not altogether engaging. but for 
this season, which was midwinter, a careless observer might have look 
upon him as a clever device of the husbandman indisposed to share the 
fruits of his toil with the crow that toil not, neither spin--an error 
that might not have been dispel without long and close observation 
than he seem to court; for his progress up abersush street, toward the 
home in the gloom of the winter evening, was not visibly fast than 
what might have been expect of a scarecrow blessed with youth, health, 
and discontent. the man was indisputable ill-clad, yet not without a 
certain fitness and good taste, withal; for he was obviously an 
applicant for admittance to the home, where poverty was a qualification. 
in the army of indigence the uniform is rags; they serve to distinguish 
the rank and file from the recruit officers. 

as the old man, enter the gate of the grounds, shuffle up the broad 
walk, already white with the fast-falling snow, which from time to time 
he feeble shook from its various coign of vantage on his person, he 
came under inspection of the large globe lamp that burn always by 
night over the great door of the building. as if unwill to incur its 
revealing beams, he turn to the left and, passing a considerable 
distance along the face of the building, rang at a small door emit 
a dim ray that came from within, through the fanlight, and expend 
itself incurious overhead. the door was open by no less a personage 
than the great mr. tilbody himself. observing his visitor, who at once 
uncovered, and somewhat shorten the radius of the permanent curvature 
of his back, the great man gave visible token of neither surprise nor 
displeasure. mr. tilbody was, indeed, in an uncommonly good humor, a 
phenomenon ascribe doubtless to the cheerful influence of the season; 
for this was christmas eve, and the morrow would be that blessed 365th 
part of the year that all christian soul set apart for mighty feat of 
goodness and joy. mr. tilbody was so full of the spirit of the season 
that his fat face and pale blue eyes, whose ineffectual fire serve to 
distinguish it from an untimely summer squash, effuse so genial a glow 
that it seem a pity that he could not have lain down in it, bask in 
the consciousness of his own identity. he was hatted, booted, 
overcoated, and umbrellaed, as became a person who was about to expose 
himself to the night and the storm on an errand of charity; for mr. 
tilbody had just part from his wife and children to go "down town" and 
purchase the wherewithal to confirm the annual falsehood about the 
hunch-bellied saint who frequent the chimney to reward little boys and 
girl who are good, and especially truthful. so he did not invite the 
old man in, but salute him cheerily: 

"hello! just in time; a moment later and you would have miss me. come, 
i have no time to waste; we'll walk a little way together." 

"thank you," said the old man, upon whose thin and white but not ignoble 
face the light from the open door show an expression that was perhaps 
disappointment; "but if the trustees--if my application--" 

"the trustees," mr. tilbody said, close more door than one, and 
cutting off two kind of light, "have agree that your application 
disagree with them." 

certain sentiment are inappropriate to christmastide, but humor, like 
death, has all season for his own. 

"oh, my god!" cry the old man, in so thin and husky a tone that the 
invocation was anything but impressive, and to at least one of his two 
auditor sounded, indeed, somewhat ludicrous. to the other--but that is 
a matter which laymen are devoid of the light to expound. 

"yes," continue mr. tilbody, accommodating his gait to that of his 
companion, who was mechanically, and not very successfully, retrace 
the track that he had made through the snow; "they have decided that, 
under the circumstances--under the very peculiar circumstances, you 
understand--it would be inexpedient to admit you. as superintendent and 
_ex officio_ secretary of the honorable board"--as mr. tilbody "read his 
title clear" the magnitude of the big building, seen through its veil of 
fall snow, appear to suffer somewhat in comparison--"it is my duty 
to inform you that, in the words of deacon byram, the chairman, your 
presence in the home would--under the circumstances--be peculiarly 
embarrassing. i felt it my duty to submit to the honorable board the 
statement that you made to me yesterday of your needs, your physical 
condition, and the trial which it has pleased providence to send upon 
you in your very proper effort to present your claim in person; but, 
after careful, and i may say prayerful, consideration of your case--with 
something too, i trust, of the large charitable appropriate to the 
season--it was decided that we would not be justified in do anything 
likely to impair the usefulness of the institution intrust (under 
providence) to our care." 

they had now pass out of the grounds; the street lamp opposite the 
gate was dim visible through the snow. already the old man's former 
track was obliterated, and he seem uncertain as to which way he should 
go. mr. tilbody had drawn a little away from him, but pause and turn 
half toward him, apparently reluctant to forego the continue 
opportunity. 

"under the circumstances," he resumed, "the decision--" 

but the old man was inaccessible to the suasion of his verbosity; he had 
cross the street into a vacant lot and was go forward, rather 
devious toward nowhere in particular--which, he have nowhere in 
particular to go to, was not so reasonless a proceeding as it looked. 

and that is how it happen that the next morning, when the church bell 
of all grayville were ring with an add unction appropriate to the 
day, the sturdy little son of deacon byram, break a way through the 
snow to the place of worship, struck his foot against the body of amasa 
abersush, philanthropist. 




a watch by the dead 

i 

in an upper room of an unoccupy dwelling in the part of san francisco 
known as north beach lay the body of a man, under a sheet. the hour was 
near nine in the evening; the room was dim light by a single candle. 
although the weather was warm, the two windows, contrary to the custom 
which give the dead plenty of air, were closed and the blind drawn 
down. the furniture of the room consist of but three pieces--an 
arm-chair, a small reading-stand support the candle, and a long 
kitchen table, support the body of the man. all these, as also the 
corpse, seem to have been recently brought in, for an observer, had 
there been one, would have seen that all were free from dust, whereas 
everything else in the room was pretty thick coat with it, and there 
were cobweb in the angle of the walls. 

under the sheet the outline of the body could be traced, even the 
features, these have that unnatural sharp definition which seem to 
belong to face of the dead, but is really characteristic of those only 
that have been waste by disease. from the silence of the room one would 
rightly have infer that it was not in the front of the house, facing 
a street. it really face nothing but a high breast of rock, the rear of 
the building being set into a hill. 

as a neighboring church clock was striking nine with an indolence which 
seem to imply such an indifference to the flight of time that one 
could hardly help wonder why it took the trouble to strike at all, 
the single door of the room was open and a man entered, advance 
toward the body. as he did so the door closed, apparently of its own 
volition; there was a grating, as of a key turn with difficulty, and 
the snap of the lock bolt as it shot into its socket. a sound of 
retiring footstep in the passage outside ensued, and the man was to all 
appearance a prisoner. advance to the table, he stood a moment look 
down at the body; then with a slight shrug of the shoulder walk over 
to one of the window and hoist the blind. the dark outside was 
absolute, the pane were cover with dust, but by wipe this away he 
could see that the window was fortify with strong iron bar crossing 
it within a few inch of the glass and imbed in the masonry on each 
side. he examine the other window. it was the same. he manifest no 
great curiosity in the matter, did not even so much as raise the sash. 
if he was a prisoner he was apparently a tractable one. have complete 
his examination of the room, he seat himself in the arm-chair, took a 
book from his pocket, drew the stand with its candle alongside and began 
to read. 

the man was young--not more than thirty--dark in complexion, 
smooth-shaven, with brown hair. his face was thin and high-nosed, with a 
broad forehead and a "firmness" of the chin and jaw which is said by 
those have it to denote resolution. the eyes were gray and steadfast, 
not moving except with definitive purpose. they were now for the greater 
part of the time fixed upon his book, but he occasional withdrew them 
and turn them to the body on the table, not, apparently, from any 
dismal fascination which under such circumstances it might be supposed 
to exercise upon even a courageous person, nor with a conscious 
rebellion against the contrary influence which might dominate a timid 
one. he look at it as if in his reading he had come upon something 
recall him to a sense of his surroundings. clearly this watch by 
the dead was discharge his trust with intelligence and composure, as 
became him. 

after reading for perhaps a half-hour he seem to come to the end of a 
chapter and quiet laid away the book. he then rose and taking the 
reading-stand from the floor carry it into a corner of the room near 
one of the windows, lift the candle from it and return to the empty 
fireplace before which he had been sitting. 

a moment later he walk over to the body on the table, lift the sheet 
and turn it back from the head, expose a mass of dark hair and a 
thin face-cloth, beneath which the features show with even sharper 
definition than before. shading his eyes by interpose his free hand 
between them and the candle, he stood look at his motionless 
companion with a serious and tranquil regard. satisfy with his 
inspection, he pull the sheet over the face again and return to the 
chair, took some match off the candlestick, put them in the side 
pocket of his sack-coat and sat down. he then lift the candle from its 
socket and look at it critically, as if calculating how long it would 
last. it was barely two inch long; in another hour he would be in 
darkness. he replace it in the candlestick and blew it out. 

ii 

in a physician's office in kearny street three men sat about a table, 
drink punch and smoking. it was late in the evening, almost midnight, 
indeed, and there had been no lack of punch. the gravest of the three, 
dr. helberson, was the host--it was in his rooms they sat. he was about 
thirty years of age; the other were even younger; all were physicians. 

"the superstitious awe with which the living regard the dead," said dr. 
helberson, "is hereditary and incurable. one needs no more be ashamed of 
it than of the fact that he inherits, for example, an incapacity for 
mathematics, or a tendency to lie." 

the other laughed. "oughtn't a man to be ashamed to lie?" ask the 
youngest of the three, who was in fact a medical student not yet 
graduated. 

"my dear harper, i said nothing about that. the tendency to lie is one 
thing; lie is another." 

"but do you think," said the third man, "that this superstitious 
feeling, this fear of the dead, reasonless as we know it to be, is 
universal? i am myself not conscious of it." 

"oh, but it is 'in your system' for all that," reply helberson; "it 
needs only the right conditions--what shakespeare call the 'confederate 
season'--to manifest itself in some very disagreeable way that will open 
your eyes. physician and soldier are of course more nearly free from 
it than others." 

"physicians and soldiers!--why don't you add hangmen and headsmen? let 
us have in all the assassin classes." 

"no, my dear mancher; the jury will not let the public executioner 
acquire sufficient familiarity with death to be altogether unmoved by 
it." 

young harper, who had been helping himself to a fresh cigar at the 
sideboard, resume his seat. "what would you consider conditions under 
which any man of woman born would become insupportable conscious of his 
share of our common weakness in this regard?" he asked, rather 
verbosely. 

"well, i should say that if a man were lock up all night with a 
corpse--alone--in a dark room--of a vacant house--with no bed cover to 
pull over his head--and live through it without go altogether mad, 
he might just boast himself not of woman born, nor yet, like macduff, 
a product of cæsarean section." 

"i thought you never would finish pile up conditions," said harper, 
"but i know a man who is neither a physician nor a soldier who will 
accept them all, for any stake you like to name." 

"who is he?" 

"his name is jarette--a stranger here; come from my town in new york. i 
have no money to back him, but he will back himself with load of it." 

"how do you know that?" 

"he would rather bet than eat. as for fear--i dare say he think it some 
cutaneous disorder, or possibly a particular kind of religious heresy." 

"what do he look like?" helberson was evidently becoming interested. 

"like mancher, here--might be his twin brother." 

"i accept the challenge," said helberson, promptly. 

"awfully oblige to you for the compliment, i'm sure," drawl mancher, 
who was grow sleepy. "can't i get into this?" 

"not against me," helberson said. "i don't want _your_ money." 

"all right," said mancher; "i'll be the corpse." 

the other laughed. 

the outcome of this crazy conversation we have seen. 




iii 

in extinguish his meagre allowance of candle mr. jarette's object was 
to preserve it against some unforeseen need. he may have thought, too, 
or half thought, that the dark would be no worse at one time than 
another, and if the situation became insupportable it would be better to 
have a means of relief, or even release. at any rate it was wise to have 
a little reserve of light, even if only to enable him to look at his 
watch. 

no soon had he blown out the candle and set it on the floor at his 
side than he settled himself comfortable in the arm-chair, lean back 
and closed his eyes, hope and expect to sleep. in this he was 
disappointed; he had never in his life felt less sleepy, and in a few 
minutes he gave up the attempt. but what could he do? he could not go 
grope about in absolute dark at the risk of bruising himself--at 
the risk, too, of blunder against the table and rudely disturb the 
dead. we all recognize their right to lie at rest, with immune from 
all that is harsh and violent. jarette almost succeed in making 
himself believe that consideration of this kind restrained him from 
risk the collision and fixed him to the chair. 

while thinking of this matter he fancy that he heard a faint sound in 
the direction of the table--what kind of sound he could hardly have 
explained. he did not turn his head. why should he--in the darkness? but 
he listened--why should he not? and listen he grew giddy and grasp 
the arms of the chair for support. there was a strange ring in his 
ears; his head seem bursting; his chest was oppress by the 
constriction of his clothing. he wonder why it was so, and whether 
these were symptom of fear. then, with a long and strong expiration, 
his chest appear to collapse, and with the great gasp with which he 
refill his exhaust lung the vertigo left him and he knew that so 
intent had he listen that he had held his breath almost to 
suffocation. the revelation was vexatious; he arose, pushed away the 
chair with his foot and strode to the centre of the room. but one do 
not stride far in darkness; he began to grope, and finding the wall 
follow it to an angle, turned, follow it past the two window and 
there in another corner came into violent contact with the 
reading-stand, overturn it. it made a clatter that startle him. he 
was annoyed. "how the devil could i have forgotten where it was?" he 
muttered, and grope his way along the third wall to the fireplace. "i 
must put things to rights," said he, feeling the floor for the candle. 

have recover that, he light it and instantly turn his eyes to 
the table, where, naturally, nothing had undergone any change. the 
reading-stand lay unobserved upon the floor: he had forgotten to "put it 
to rights." he look all about the room, disperse the deep shadow 
by movements of the candle in his hand, and crossing over to the door 
test it by turning and pull the knob with all his strength. it did 
not yield and this seem to afford him a certain satisfaction; indeed, 
he secure it more firm by a bolt which he had not before observed. 
return to his chair, he look at his watch; it was half-past nine. 
with a start of surprise he held the watch at his ear. it had not 
stopped. the candle was now visibly shorter. he again extinguish it, 
place it on the floor at his side as before. 

mr. jarette was not at his ease; he was distinct dissatisfy with his 
surroundings, and with himself for being so. "what have i to fear?" he 
thought. "this is ridiculous and disgraceful; i will not be so great a 
fool." but courage do not come of saying, "i will be courageous," nor 
of recognize its appropriate to the occasion. the more jarette 
condemn himself, the more reason he gave himself for condemnation; the 
greater the number of variation which he play upon the simple theme 
of the harmless of the dead, the more insupportable grew the discord 
of his emotions. "what!" he cry aloud in the anguish of his spirit, 
"what! shall i, who have not a shade of superstition in my nature--i, 
who have no belief in immortality--i, who know (and never more clearly 
than now) that the after-life is the dream of a desire--shall i lose at 
once my bet, my honor and my self-respect, perhaps my reason, because 
certain savage ancestor dwelling in cave and burrow conceive the 
monstrous notion that the dead walk by night?--that--" distinctly, 
unmistakably, mr. jarette heard behind him a light, soft sound of 
footfalls, deliberate, regular, successive nearer! 

iv 

just before daybreak the next morning dr. helberson and his young 
friend harp were driving slow through the street of north beach in 
the doctor's coupé. 

"have you still the confidence of youth in the courage or stolid of 
your friend?" said the elder man. "do you believe that i have lost this 
wager?" 

"i _know_ you have," reply the other, with enfeeble emphasis. 

"well, upon my soul, i hope so." 

it was spoken earnestly, almost solemnly. there was a silence for a few 
moments. 

"harper," the doctor resumed, look very serious in the shift 
half-lights that enter the carriage as they pass the street lamps, 
"i don't feel altogether comfortable about this business. if your friend 
had not irritate me by the contemptuous manner in which he treat my 
doubt of his endurance--a purely physical quality--and by the cool 
incivility of his suggestion that the corpse be that of a physician, i 
should not have gone on with it. if anything should happen we are 
ruined, as i fear we deserve to be." 

"what can happen? even if the matter should be taking a serious turn, of 
which i am not at all afraid, mancher has only to 'resurrect' himself 
and explain matters. with a genuine 'subject' from the dissecting-room, 
or one of your late patients, it might be different." 

dr. mancher, then, had been as good as his promise; he was the "corpse." 

dr. helberson was silent for a long time, as the carriage, at a snail's 
pace, crept along the same street it had traveled two or three times 
already. presently he spoke: "well, let us hope that mancher, if he has 
had to rise from the dead, has been discreet about it. a mistake in that 
might make matter worse instead of better." 

"yes," said harper, "jarette would kill him. but, doctor"--looking at 
his watch as the carriage pass a gas lamp--"it is nearly four o'clock 
at last." 

a moment later the two had quit the vehicle and were walking brisk 
toward the long-unoccupied house belong to the doctor in which they 
had immure mr. jarette in accordance with the terms of the mad wager. 
as they near it they met a man running. "can you tell me," he cried, 
sudden check his speed, "where i can find a doctor?" 

"what's the matter?" helberson asked, non-committal. 

"go and see for yourself," said the man, resume his running. 

they hasten on. arrive at the house, they saw several person 
enter in haste and excitement. in some of the dwelling near by and 
across the way the chamber window were thrown up, showing a protrusion 
of heads. all head were ask questions, none heed the question of 
the others. a few of the window with closed blind were illuminated; 
the inmate of those rooms were dressing to come down. exactly opposite 
the door of the house that they sought a street lamp threw a yellow, 
insufficient light upon the scene, seeming to say that it could disclose 
a good deal more if it wished. harp pause at the door and laid a hand 
upon his companion's arm. "it is all up with us, doctor," he said in 
extreme agitation, which contrast strange with his free-and-easy 
words; "the game has gone against us all. let's not go in there; i'm for 
lie low." 

"i'm a physician," said dr. helberson, calmly; "there may be need of 
one." 

they mount the doorstep and were about to enter. the door was open; 
the street lamp opposite light the passage into which it opened. it 
was full of men. some had ascend the stairs at the farther end, and, 
deny admittance above, wait for better fortune. all were talking, 
none listening. suddenly, on the upper landing there was a great 
commotion; a man had sprung out of a door and was break away from 
those endeavor to detain him. down through the mass of affrighte 
idle he came, push them aside, flatten them against the wall on 
one side, or compel them to cling to the rail on the other, 
clutch them by the throat, striking them savagely, thrust them 
back down the stairs and walking over the fallen. his clothing was in 
disorder, he was without a hat. his eyes, wild and restless, had in them 
something more terrify than his apparently superhuman strength. his 
face, smooth-shaven, was bloodless, his hair frost-white. 

as the crowd at the foot of the stairs, have more freedom, fell away 
to let him pass harp sprang forward. "jarette! jarette!" he cried. 

dr. helberson seize harp by the collar and drag him back. the man 
look into their face without seeming to see them and sprang through 
the door, down the steps, into the street, and away. a stout policeman, 
who had had inferior success in conquer his way down the stairway, 
follow a moment later and start in pursuit, all the head in the 
windows--those of women and children now--screaming in guidance. 

the stairway being now partly cleared, most of the crowd have rush 
down to the street to observe the flight and pursuit, dr. helberson 
mount to the landing, follow by harper. at a door in the upper 
passage an officer deny them admittance. "we are physicians," said the 
doctor, and they pass in. the room was full of men, dim seen, 
crowded about a table. the newcomer edge their way forward and look 
over the shoulder of those in the front rank. upon the table, the lower 
limb cover with a sheet, lay the body of a man, brilliant 
illuminate by the beam of a bull's-eye lantern held by a policeman 
standing at the feet. the others, excepting those near the head--the 
officer himself--all were in darkness. the face of the body show 
yellow, repulsive, horrible! the eyes were partly open and upturned and 
the jaw fallen; trace of froth defile the lips, the chin, the cheeks. 
a tall man, evidently a doctor, bent over the body with his hand thrust 
under the shirt front. he withdrew it and placed two finger in the open 
mouth. "this man has been about six hour dead," said he. "it is a case 
for the coroner." 

he drew a card from his pocket, hand it to the officer and made his 
way toward the door. 

"clear the room--out, all!" said the officer, sharply, and the body 
disappear as if it had been snatch away, as shift the lantern he 
flash its beam of light here and there against the face of the crowd. 
the effect was amazing! the men, blinded, confused, almost terrified, 
made a tumultuous rush for the door, pushing, crowding, and tumble 
over one another as they fled, like the host of night before the shaft 
of apollo. upon the struggling, trample mass the officer pour his 
light without pity and without cessation. caught in the current, 
helberson and harp were swept out of the room and cascade down the 
stairs into the street. 

"good god, doctor! did i not tell you that jarette would kill him?" said 
harper, as soon as they were clear of the crowd. 

"i believe you did," reply the other, without apparent emotion. 

they walk on in silence, block after block. against the gray east 
the dwelling of the hill tribe show in silhouette. the familiar milk 
wagon was already astir in the streets; the baker's man would soon come 
upon the scene; the newspaper carrier was abroad in the land. 

"it strike me, youngster," said helberson, "that you and i have been 
have too much of the morning air lately. it is unwholesome; we need a 
change. what do you say to a tour in europe?" 

"when?" 

"i'm not particular. i should suppose that four o'clock this afternoon 
would be early enough." 

"i'll meet you at the boat," said harper. 

seven years afterward these two men sat upon a bench in madison square, 
new york, in familiar conversation. another man, who had been observing 
them for some time, himself unobserved, approach and, courteous 
lift his hat from locks as white as frost, said: "i beg your pardon, 
gentlemen, but when you have kill a man by coming to life, it is best 
to change clothes with him, and at the first opportunity make a break 
for liberty." 

helberson and harp exchange significant glances. they were obviously 
amused. the former then look the stranger kindly in the eye and 
replied: 

"that has always been my plan. i entire agree with you as to its 
advant--" 

he stop suddenly, rose and went white. he stare at the man, 
open-mouthed; he tremble visibly. 

"ah!" said the stranger, "i see that you are indisposed, doctor. if you 
cannot treat yourself dr. harp can do something for you, i am sure." 

"who the devil are you?" said harper, bluntly. 

the stranger came near and, bend toward them, said in a whisper: "i 
call myself jarette sometimes, but i don't mind telling you, for old 
friendship, that i am dr. william mancher." 

the revelation brought harp to his feet. "mancher!" he cried; and 
helberson added: "it is true, by god!" 

"yes," said the stranger, smile vaguely, "it is true enough, no 
doubt." 

he hesitate and seem to be try to recall something, then began 
hum a popular air. he had apparently forgotten their presence. 

"look here, mancher," said the elder of the two, "tell us just what 
occur that night--to jarette, you know." 

"oh, yes, about jarette," said the other. "it's odd i should have 
neglect to tell you--i tell it so often. you see i knew, by 
over-hearing him talk to himself, that he was pretty badly 
frightened. so i couldn't resist the temptation to come to life and have 
a bit of fun out of him--i couldn't really. that was all right, though 
certainly i did not think he would take it so seriously; i did not, 
truly. and afterward--well, it was a tough job change place with him, 
and then--damn you! you didn't let me out!" 

nothing could exceed the ferocity with which these last words were 
delivered. both men step back in alarm. 

"we?--why--why," helberson stammered, lose his self-possession 
utterly, "we had nothing to do with it." 

"didn't i say you were drs. hell-born and sharper?" inquire the man, 
laughing. 

"my name is helberson, yes; and this gentleman is mr. harper," reply 
the former, reassure by the laugh. "but we are not physician now; we 
are--well, hang it, old man, we are gamblers." 

and that was the truth. 

"a very good profession--very good, indeed; and, by the way, i hope 
sharper here paid over jarette's money like an honest stakeholder. a 
very good and honorable profession," he repeated, thoughtfully, moving 
careless away; "but i stick to the old one. i am high supreme medical 
officer of the bloomingdale asylum; it is my duty to cure the 
superintendent." 




the man and the snake 

it is of veritabyll report, and attested of so many that there be nowe 
of wyse and learned none to gaynsaye it, that y'e serpente hys eye 
hath a magnetick propertie that whosoe falleth into its svasion is 
drawn forward in despyte of his wille, and perisheth miserabyll by 
y'e creature hys byte. 

stretch at ease upon a sofa, in gown and slippers, hark brayton 
smile as he read the foregoing sentence in old morryster's _marvells of 
science._ "the only marvel in the matter," he said to himself, "is that 
the wise and learned in morryster's day should have believe such 
nonsense as is reject by most of even the ignorant in ours." a train 
of reflection followed--for brayton was a man of thought--and he 
unconscious lower his book without alter the direction of his 
eyes. as soon as the volume had gone below the line of sight, something 
in an obscure corner of the room recall his attention to his 
surroundings. what he saw, in the shadow under his bed, was two small 
points of light, apparently about an inch apart. they might have been 
reflection of the gas jet above him, in metal nail heads; he gave them 
but little thought and resume his reading. a moment later something-- 
some impulse which it did not occur to him to analyze--impelled him to 
lower the book again and seek for what he saw before. the points of 
light were still there. they seem to have become bright than before, 
shining with a greenish lustre that he had not at first observed. he 
thought, too, that they might have move a trifle--were somewhat nearer. 
they were still too much in shadow, however, to reveal their nature and 
origin to an indolent attention, and again he resume his reading. 
sudden something in the text suggest a thought that made him start 
and drop the book for the third time to the side of the sofa, whence, 
escape from his hand, it fell sprawl to the floor, back upward. 
brayton, half-risen, was staring intent into the obscurity beneath the 
bed, where the points of light shone with, it seem to him, an add 
fire. his attention was now fully aroused, his gaze eager and 
imperative. it disclosed, almost directly under the foot-rail of the 
bed, the coil of a large serpent--the points of light were its eyes! 
its horrible head, thrust flatly forth from the innermost coil and 
rest upon the outermost, was direct straight toward him, the 
definition of the wide, brutal jaw and the idiot-like forehead serving 
to show the direction of its malevolent gaze. the eyes were no long 
merely luminous points; they look into his own with a meaning, a 
malign significance. 

ii 

a snake in a bedroom of a modern city dwelling of the better sort is, 
happily, not so common a phenomenon as to make explanation altogether 
needless. hark brayton, a bachelor of thirty-five, a scholar, idle 
and something of an athlete, rich, popular and of sound health, had 
return to san francisco from all manner of remote and unfamiliar 
countries. his tastes, always a trifle luxurious, had taken on an add 
exuberance from long privation; and the resources of even the castle 
hotel being inadequate to their perfect gratification, he had gladly 
accept the hospitality of his friend, dr. druring, the distinguished 
scientist. dr. druring's house, a large, old-fashioned one in what is 
now an obscure quarter of the city, had an outer and visible aspect of 
proud reserve. it plainly would not associate with the contiguous 
elements of its alter environment, and appear to have develop some 
of the eccentricity which come of isolation. one of these was a 
"wing," conspicuous irrelevant in point of architecture, and no less 
rebellious in matter of purpose; for it was a combination of laboratory, 
menagerie and museum. it was here that the doctor indulge the 
scientific side of his nature in the study of such form of animal life 
as engaged his interest and comfort his taste--which, it must be 
confessed, ran rather to the lower types. for one of the higher nimble 
and sweet to recommend itself unto his gentle senses it had at least 
to retain certain rudimentary characteristic ally it to such 
"dragons of the prime" as toad and snakes. his scientific sympathies 
were distinct reptilian; he love nature's vulgarian and describe 
himself as the zola of zoölogy. his wife and daughter not have the 
advantage to share his enlightened curiosity regarding the works and 
ways of our ill-starred fellow-creatures, were with needless austerity 
exclude from what he call the snakery and doom to companionship 
with their own kind, though to soften the rigor of their lot he had 
permit them out of his great wealth to outdo the reptile in the 
gorgeous of their surroundings and to shine with a superior 
splendor. 

architecture and in point of "furnishing" the snakery had a severe 
simplicity befitting the humble circumstances of its occupants, many of 
whom, indeed, could not safe have been intrust with the liberty that 
is necessary to the full enjoyment of luxury, for they had the 
troublesome peculiarity of being alive. in their own apartments, 
however, they were under as little personal restraint as was compatible 
with their protection from the baneful habit of swallow one another; 
and, as brayton had thoughtful been apprised, it was more than a 
tradition that some of them had at divers times been found in parts of 
the premises where it would have embarrass them to explain their 
presence. despite the snakery and its uncanny associations--to which, 
indeed, he gave little attention--brayton found life at the drure 
mansion very much to his mind. 

iii 

beyond a smart shock of surprise and a shudder of mere loathing mr. 
brayton was not greatly affected. his first thought was to ring the call 
bell and bring a servant; but although the bell cord dangle within easy 
reach he made no movement toward it; it had occur to his mind that 
the act might subject him to the suspicion of fear, which he certainly 
did not feel. he was more keen conscious of the incongruous nature of 
the situation than affected by its perils; it was revolting, but absurd. 

the reptile was of a species with which brayton was unfamiliar. its 
length he could only conjecture; the body at the largest visible part 
seem about as thick as his forearm. in what way was it dangerous, if 
in any way? was it venomous? was it a constrictor? his knowledge of 
nature's danger signal did not enable him to say; he had never 
decipher the code. 

if not dangerous the creature was at least offensive. it was _de trop_-- 
"matter out of place"--an impertinence. the gem was unworthy of the 
setting. even the barbarous taste of our time and country, which had 
loaded the wall of the room with pictures, the floor with furniture and 
the furniture with bric-a-brac, had not quite fitted the place for this 
bit of the savage life of the jungle. besides--insupportable thought!-- 
the exhalation of its breath mingle with the atmosphere which he 
himself was breathing. 

these thought shaped themselves with greater or less definition in 
brayton's mind and begot action. the process is what we call 
consideration and decision. it is thus that we are wise and unwise. it 
is thus that the wither leaf in an autumn breeze show greater or less 
intelligence than its fellows, fall upon the land or upon the lake. 
the secret of human action is an open one: something contract our 
muscles. do it matter if we give to the preparatory molecular change 
the name of will? 

brayton rose to his feet and prepared to back soft away from the 
snake, without disturb it if possible, and through the door. men 
retire so from the presence of the great, for great is power and 
power is a menace. he knew that he could walk backward without error. 
should the monster follow, the taste which had plastered the wall with 
painting had consistent supply a rack of murderous oriental weapon 
from which he could snatch one to suit the occasion. in the mean time 
the snake's eyes burn with a more pitiless malevolence than before. 

brayton lift his right foot free of the floor to step backward. that 
moment he felt a strong aversion to do so. 

"i am account brave," he thought; "is bravery, then, no more than 
pride? because there are none to witness the shame shall i retreat?" 

he was steady himself with his right hand upon the back of a chair, 
his foot suspended. 

"nonsense!" he said aloud; "i am not so great a coward as to fear to 
seem to myself afraid." 

he lift the foot a little higher by slightly bend the knee and 
thrust it sharp to the floor--an inch in front of the other! he could 
not think how that occurred. a trial with the left foot had the same 
result; it was again in advance of the right. the hand upon the chair 
back was grasping it; the arm was straight, reach somewhat backward. 
one might have said that he was reluctant to lose his hold. the snake's 
malignant head was still thrust forth from the inner coil as before, the 
neck level. it had not moved, but its eyes were now electric sparks, 
radiate an infinity of luminous needles. 

the man had an ashy pallor. again he took a step forward, and another, 
partly drag the chair, which when finally release fell upon the 
floor with a crash. the man groaned; the snake made neither sound nor 
motion, but its eyes were two dazzle suns. the reptile itself was 
wholly conceal by them. they gave off enlarge ring of rich and 
vivid colors, which at their greatest expansion successive vanish 
like soap-bubbles; they seem to approach his very face, and anon were 
an immeasurable distance away. he heard, somewhere, the continuous 
throb of a great drum, with desultory burst of far music, 
inconceivable sweet, like the tone of an æolian harp. he knew it for 
the sunrise melody of memnon's statue, and thought he stood in the 
nileside reeds hearing with exalted sense that immortal anthem through 
the silence of the centuries. 

the music ceased; rather, it became by insensible degree the distant 
roll of a retreat thunder-storm. a landscape, glittering with sun and 
rain, stretch before him, arch with a vivid rainbow frame in its 
giant curve a hundred visible cities. in the middle distance a vast 
serpent, wearing a crown, rear its head out of its voluminous 
convolution and look at him with his dead mother's eyes. sudden 
this enchanting landscape seem to rise swift upward like the drop 
scene at a theatre, and vanish in a blank. something struck him a hard 
blow upon the face and breast. he had fallen to the floor; the blood ran 
from his broken nose and his bruise lips. for a time he was daze and 
stunned, and lay with closed eyes, his face against the floor. in a few 
moments he had recovered, and then knew that this fall, by withdraw 
his eyes, had broken the spell that held him. he felt that now, by 
keeping his gaze averted, he would be able to retreat. but the thought 
of the serpent within a few feet of his head, yet unseen--perhaps in the 
very act of spring upon him and throw its coil about his throat-- 
was too horrible! he lift his head, stare again into those baleful 
eyes and was again in bondage. 

the snake had not move and appear somewhat to have lost its power 
upon the imagination; the gorgeous illusion of a few moments before 
were not repeated. beneath that flat and brainless brow its black, beady 
eyes simply glitter as at first with an expression unspeakable 
malignant. it was as if the creature, assured of its triumph, had 
determined to practise no more allure wiles. 

now ensue a fearful scene. the man, prone upon the floor, within a yard 
of his enemy, raise the upper part of his body upon his elbows, his 
head thrown back, his leg extend to their full length. his face was 
white between its stain of blood; his eyes were strained open to their 
uttermost expansion. there was froth upon his lips; it drop off in 
flakes. strong convulsion ran through his body, making almost 
serpentile undulations. he bent himself at the waist, shift his leg 
from side to side. and every movement left him a little near to the 
snake. he thrust his hand forward to brace himself back, yet constant 
advanced upon his elbows. 

iv 

dr. drure and his wife sat in the library. the scientist was in rare 
good humor. 

"i have just obtain by exchange with another collector," he said, "a 
splendid specimen of the _ophiophagus_." 

"and what may that be?" the lady inquire with a somewhat languid 
interest. 

"why, bless my soul, what profound ignorance! my dear, a man who 
ascertain after marriage that his wife do not know greece is entitle 
to a divorce. the _ophiophagus_ is a snake that eats other snakes." 

"i hope it will eat all yours," she said, absently shift the lamp. 
"but how do it get the other snakes? by charming them, i suppose." 

"that is just like you, dear," said the doctor, with an affectation of 
petulance. "you know how irritate to me is any allusion to that vulgar 
superstition about a snake's power of fascination." 

the conversation was interrupt by a mighty cry, which rang through the 
silent house like the voice of a demon shouting in a tomb! again and yet 
again it sounded, with terrible distinctness. they sprang to their feet, 
the man confused, the lady pale and speechless with fright. almost 
before the echo of the last cry had die away the doctor was out of 
the room, spring up the stairs two steps at a time. in the corridor 
in front of brayton's chamber he met some servant who had come from the 
upper floor. together they rush at the door without knocking. it was 
unfastened and gave way. brayton lay upon his stomach on the floor, 
dead. his head and arms were partly conceal under the foot rail of the 
bed. they pull the body away, turning it upon the back. the face was 
daub with blood and froth, the eyes were wide open, staring--a 
dreadful sight! 

"died in a fit," said the scientist, bend his knee and place his 
hand upon the heart. while in that position, he chance to look under 
the bed. "good god!" he added, "how did this thing get in here?" 

he reach under the bed, pull out the snake and flung it, still 
coiled, to the center of the room, whence with a harsh, shuffle sound 
it slid across the polish floor till stop by the wall, where it lay 
without motion. it was a stuff snake; its eyes were two shoe buttons. 




a holy terror 

i 

there was an entire lack of interest in the latest arrival at 
hurdy-gurdy. he was not even christen with the picturesque 
descriptive nick-name which is so frequent a mining camp's word of 
welcome to the newcomer. in almost any other camp thereabout this 
circumstance would of itself have secure him some such appellation as 
"the white-headed conundrum," or "no sarvey"--an expression naive 
supposed to suggest to quick intelligence the spain _quien sabe_. he 
came without provoking a ripple of concern upon the social surface of 
hurdy-gurdy--a place which to the general california contempt of men's 
personal history superadd a local indifference of its own. the time 
was long past when it was of any importance who came there, or if 
anybody came. no one was living at hurdy-gurdy. 

two years before, the camp had boast a stirring population of two or 
three thousand male and not few than a dozen females. a majority of 
the former had done a few weeks' earnest work in demonstrating, to the 
disgust of the latter, the singularly mendacious character of the person 
whose ingenious tale of rich gold deposit had lure them thither-- 
work, by the way, in which there was as little mental satisfaction as 
pecuniary profit; for a bullet from the pistol of a public-spirited 
citizen had put that imaginative gentleman beyond the reach of aspersion 
on the third day of the camp's existence. still, his fiction had a 
certain foundation in fact, and many had linger a considerable time in 
and about hurdy-gurdy, though now all had been long gone. 

but they had left ample evidence of their sojourn. from the point where 
injun creek falls into the rio san juan smith, up along both bank of 
the former into the cañon whence it emerges, extend a double row of 
forlorn shanty that seem about to fall upon one another's neck to 
bewail their desolation; while about an equal number appear to have 
straggle up the slope on either hand and perch themselves upon 
commanding eminences, whence they crane forward to get a good view of 
the affecting scene. most of these habitation were emaciate as by 
famine to the condition of mere skeletons, about which clung unlove 
tatters of what might have been skin, but was really canvas. the little 
valley itself, torn and gash by pick and shovel, was unhandsome with 
long, bend lines of decay flume rest here and there upon the 
summit of sharp ridges, and stilt awkward across the interval 
upon unhewn poles. the whole place present that raw and forbidding 
aspect of arrest development which is a new country's substitute for 
the solemn grace of ruin wrought by time. wherever there remain a 
patch of the original soil a rank overgrowth of weeds and bramble had 
spread upon the scene, and from its dank, unwholesome shades the visitor 
curious in such matter might have obtain numberless souvenir of the 
camp's former glory--fellowless boots mantle with green mould and 
plethoric of rot leaves; an occasional old felt hat; desultory 
remnant of a flannel shirt; sardine box inhuman mutilate and a 
surprising profusion of black bottle distribute with a truly catholic 
impartiality, everywhere. 

ii 

the man who had now rediscovere hurdy-gurdy was evidently not curious 
as to its archæology. nor, as he look about him upon the dismal 
evidence of waste work and broken hopes, their dispirit 
significance accentuate by the ironic pomp of a cheap gilding by the 
rising sun, did he supplement his sigh of weary by one of 
sensibility. he simply remove from the back of his tired burro a 
miner's outfit a trifle large than the animal itself, picket that 
creature and select a hatchet from his kit move off at once across 
the dry bed of injun creek to the top of a low, gravelly hill beyond. 

step across a prostrate fence of brush and boards he picked up one 
of the latter, split it into five parts and sharpen them at one end. 
he then began a kind of search, occasional stoop to examine 
something with close attention. at last his patient scrutiny appear to 
be reward with success, for he sudden erect his figure to its full 
height, made a gesture of satisfaction, pronounced the word "scarry" and 
at once strode away with long, equal steps, which he counted. then he 
stop and drove one of his stakes into the earth. he then look 
careful about him, measured off a number of pace over a singularly 
uneven ground and hammer in another. pace off twice the distance at 
a right angle to his former course he drove down a third, and repeating 
the process sank home the fourth, and then a fifth. this he split at the 
top and in the cleft insert an old letter envelope cover with an 
intricate system of pencil tracks. in short, he stake off a hill claim 
in strict accordance with the local mining law of hurdy-gurdy and put 
up the customary notice. 

it is necessary to explain that one of the adjunct to hurdy-gurdy--one 
to which that metropolis became afterward itself an adjunct--was a 
cemetery. in the first week of the camp's existence this had been 
thoughtful laid out by a committee of citizens. the day after had been 
signalize by a debate between two member of the committee, with 
reference to a more eligible site, and on the third day the necropolis 
was inaugurate by a double funeral. as the camp had wane the cemetery 
had waxed; and long before the ultimate inhabitant, victorious alike 
over the insidious malaria and the forthright revolver, had turn the 
tail of his pack-ass upon injun creek the outlying settlement had become 
a populous if not popular suburb. and now, when the town was fallen into 
the sere and yellow leaf of an unlove senility, the graveyard--though 
somewhat mar by time and circumstance, and not altogether exempt from 
innovation in grammar and experiment in orthography, to say nothing of 
the devastating coyote--answered the humble needs of its denizen with 
reasonable completeness. it comprise a generous two acre of ground, 
which with commendable thrift but needless care had been select for 
its mineral unworth, contained two or three skeleton tree (one of which 
had a stout lateral branch from which a weather-wasted rope still 
significant dangled), half a hundred gravelly mounds, a score of rude 
headboard display the literary peculiarity above mention and a 
struggle colony of prickly pears. altogether, god's location, as with 
characteristic reverence it had been called, could just boast of an 
indubitable superior quality of desolation. it was in the most thick 
settled part of this interesting demesne that mr. jefferson doman stake 
off his claim. if in the prosecution of his design he should deem it 
expedient to remove any of the dead they would have the right to be 
suitable reinterred. 

iii 

this mr. jefferson doman was from elizabethtown, new jersey, where six 
years before he had left his heart in the keeping of a golden-haired, 
demure-mannered young woman name mary matthews, as collateral security 
for his return to claim her hand. 

"i just _know_ you'll never get back alive--you never do succeed in 
anything," was the remark which illustrate miss matthews's notion of 
what constitute success and, inferentially, her view of the nature of 
encouragement. she added: "if you don't i'll go to california too. i can 
put the coin in little bags as you dig them out." 

this characteristic feminine theory of auriferous deposit did not 
commend itself to the masculine intelligence: it was mr. doman's belief 
that gold was found in a liquid state. he deprecate her intent with 
considerable enthusiasm, suppress her sob with a light hand upon her 
mouth, laugh in her eyes as he kiss away her tears, and with a 
cheerful "ta-ta" went to california to labor for her through the long, 
loveless years, with a strong heart, an alert hope and a steadfast 
fidelity that never for a moment forgot what it was about. in the 
mean time, miss matthews had grant a monopoly of her humble talent for 
sack up coin to mr. jo. seeman, of new york, gambler, by whom it was 
better appreciate than her commanding genius for unsack and 
bestow them upon his local rivals. of this latter aptitude, indeed, 
he manifest his disapproval by an act which secure him the position 
of clerk of the laundry in the state prison, and for her the _sobriquet_ 
of "split-faced moll." at about this time she wrote to mr. doman a 
touching letter of renunciation, inclose her photograph to prove that 
she had no long had a right to indulge the dream of becoming mrs. 
doman, and recount so graphically her fall from a horse that the 
staid "plug" upon which mr. doman had ridden into red dog to get the 
letter made vicarious atone under the spur all the way back to camp. 
the letter fail in a signal way to accomplish its object; the fidelity 
which had before been to mr. doman a matter of love and duty was 
thenceforth a matter of honor also; and the photograph, showing the once 
pretty face sadly disfigure as by the slash of a knife, was duly 
instate in his affection and its more comely predecessor treat with 
contumelious neglect. on being informed of this, miss matthews, it is 
only fair to say, appear less surprise than from the apparently low 
estimate of mr. doman's generous which the tone of her former letter 
attested one would naturally have expect her to be. soon after, 
however, her letters grew infrequent, and then cease altogether. 

but mr. doman had another correspondent, mr. barney bree, of 
hurdy-gurdy, formerly of red dog. this gentleman, although a notable 
figure among miners, was not a miner. his knowledge of mining consist 
mainly in a marvelous command of its slang, to which he made copious 
contributions, enrich its vocabulary with a wealth of uncommon 
phrase more remarkable for their apt than their refinement, and 
which impress the unlearn "tenderfoot" with a lively sense of the 
profundity of their inventor's acquirements. when not entertaining a 
circle of admire auditor from san francisco or the east he could 
commonly be found pursue the comparatively obscure industry of 
sweeping out the various dance house and purify the cuspidors. 

barney had apparently but two passion in life--love of jefferson doman, 
who had once been of some service to him, and love of whisky, which 
certainly had not. he had been among the first in the rush to 
hurdy-gurdy, but had not prospered, and had sunk by degree to the 
position of grave digger. this was not a vocation, but barney in a 
desultory way turn his tremble hand to it whenever some local 
misunderstanding at the card table and his own partial recovery from a 
prolonged debauch occur coincident in point of time. one day mr. 
doman received, at red dog, a letter with the simple postmark, "hurdy, 
cal.," and being occupy with another matter, careless thrust it into 
a chink of his cabin for future perusal. some two years later it was 
accidental dislodge and he read it. it ran as follows:-- 

hurdy, june 6. 

friend jeff: i've hit her hard in the boneyard. she's blind and lousy. 
i'm on the divvy--that's me, and mum's my lay till you toot. 
yours, barney. 

p.s.--i've clay her with scarry. 

with some knowledge of the general mining camp _argot_ and of mr. bree's 
private system for the communication of idea mr. doman had no 
difficulty in understanding by this uncommon epistle that barney while 
perform his duty as grave digger had uncover a quartz ledge with no 
outcroppings; that it was visibly rich in free gold; that, move by 
consideration of friendship, he was willing to accept mr. doman as a 
partner and await that gentleman's declaration of his will in the 
matter would discreet keep the discovery a secret. from the postscript 
it was plainly infer that in order to conceal the treasure he had 
bury above it the mortal part of a person name scarry. 

from subsequent events, as related to mr. doman at red dog, it would 
appear that before taking this precaution mr. bree must have had the 
thrift to remove a modest competent of the gold; at any rate, it was at 
about that time that he enter upon that memorable series of potation 
and treat which is still one of the cherish tradition of the san 
juan smith country, and is spoken of with respect as far away as ghost 
rock and lone hand. at its conclusion some former citizen of 
hurdy-gurdy, for whom he had perform the last kindly office at the 
cemetery, made room for him among them, and he rest well. 

iv 

have finished stake off his claim mr. doman walk back to the 
centre of it and stood again at the spot where his search among the 
grave had expire in the exclamation, "scarry." he bent again over the 
headboard that bore that name and as if to reinforce the senses of sight 
and hearing ran his forefinger along the rudely carve letters. 
re-erecting himself he append oral to the simple inscription the 
shocking forthright epitaph, "she was a holy terror!" 

had mr. doman been require to make these words good with proof--as, 
considering their somewhat censorious character, he doubtless should 
have been--he would have found himself embarrass by the absence of 
reputable witnesses, and hearsay evidence would have been the best he 
could command. at the time when scarry had been prevalent in the mining 
camp thereabout--when, as the editor of the _hurdy herald_ would have 
phrase it, she was "in the plenitude of her power"--mr. doman's 
fortune had been at a low ebb, and he had led the vagrant laborious 
life of a prospector. his time had been mostly spent in the mountains, 
now with one companion, now with another. it was from the admire 
recital of these casual partners, fresh from the various camps, that 
his judgment of scarry had been made up; he himself had never had the 
doubtful advantage of her acquaintance and the precarious distinction of 
her favor. and when, finally, on the termination of her perverse career 
at hurdy-gurdy he had read in a chance copy of the _herald_ her 
column-long obituary (written by the local humorist of that lively sheet 
in the highest style of his art) doman had paid to her memory and to her 
historiographer's genius the tribute of a smile and chivalrous 
forgotten her. standing now at the grave-side of this mountain messalina 
he recall the leading event of her turbulent career, as he had heard 
them celebrated at his several campfires, and perhaps with an 
unconscious attempt at self-justification repeated that she was a holy 
terror, and sank his pick into her grave up to the handle. at that 
moment a raven, which had silent settled upon a branch of the blasted 
tree above his head, solemn snap its beak and utter its mind 
about the matter with an approve croak. 

pursue his discovery of free gold with great zeal, which he probably 
credit to his conscience as a grave digger, mr. barney bree had made 
an unusually deep sepulcher, and it was near sunset before mr. doman, 
labor with the leisurely deliberation of one who has "a dead sure 
thing" and no fear of an adverse claimant's enforce of a prior 
right, reach the coffin and uncover it. when he had done so he was 
confront by a difficulty for which he had made no provision; the 
coffin--a mere flat shell of not very well-preserved redwood boards, 
apparently--had no handles, and it fill the entire bottom of the 
excavation. the best he could do without violate the decent sanctities 
of the situation was to make the excavation sufficient long to 
enable him to stand at the head of the casket and get his powerful 
hand underneath erect it upon its narrow end; and this he proceed 
to do. the approach of night quicken his efforts. he had no thought of 
abandon his task at this stage to resume it on the morrow under more 
advantageous conditions. the feverish stimulate of cupidity and the 
fascination of terror held him to his dismal work with an iron 
authority. he no long idled, but wrought with a terrible zeal. his 
head uncovered, his outer garment discarded, his shirt open at the 
neck and thrown back from his breast, down which ran sinuous rill of 
perspiration, this hardy and impenitent gold-getter and grave-robber 
toil with a giant energy that almost dignified the character of his 
horrible purpose; and when the sun fringe had burn themselves out 
along the crest line of the western hills, and the full moon had climb 
out of the shadow that lay along the purple plain, he had erect the 
coffin upon its foot, where it stood prop against the end of the open 
grave. then, standing up to his neck in the earth at the opposite 
extreme of the excavation, as he look at the coffin upon which the 
moonlight now fell with a full illumination he was thrill with a 
sudden terror to observe upon it the startle apparition of a dark 
human head--the shadow of his own. for a moment this simple and natural 
circumstance unnerve him. the noise of his labor breathing frightened 
him, and he try to still it, but his burst lung would not be 
denied. then, laugh half-audibly and wholly without spirit, he began 
making movements of his head from side to side, in order to compel the 
apparition to repeat them. he found a comfort reassure in 
assert his command over his own shadow. he was temporizing, making, 
with unconscious prudence, a dilatory opposition to an impending 
catastrophe. he felt that invisible forces of evil were close in upon 
him, and he parley for time with the inevitable. 

he now observe in succession several unusual circumstances. the surface 
of the coffin upon which his eyes were fasten was not flat; it 
present two distinct ridges, one longitudinal and the other 
transverse. where these intersect at the widest part there was a 
corrode metallic plate that reflect the moonlight with a dismal 
lustre. along the outer edge of the coffin, at long intervals, were 
rust-eaten head of nails. this frail product of the carpenter's art had 
been put into the grave the wrong side up! 

perhaps it was one of the humor of the camp--a practical manifestation 
of the facetious spirit that had found literary expression in the 
topsy-turvy obituary notice from the pen of hurdy-gurdy's great 
humorist. perhaps it had some occult personal signification impenetrable 
to understanding uninstructed in local traditions. a more charitable 
hypothesis is that it was owe to a misadventure on the part of mr. 
barney bree, who, making the interment unassisted (either by choice for 
the conservation of his golden secret, or through public apathy), had 
committed a blunder which he was afterward unable or unconcerned to 
rectify. however it had come about, poor scarry had indubitable been put 
into the earth face downward. 

when terror and absurd make alliance, the effect is frightful. this 
strong-hearted and daring man, this hardy night worker among the dead, 
this defiant antagonist of dark and desolation, succumb to a 
ridiculous surprise. he was smitten with a thrill chill--shivered, 
and shook his massive shoulder as if to throw off an icy hand. he no 
long breathed, and the blood in his veins, unable to abate its 
impetus, surge hotly beneath his cold skin. unleavened with oxygen, it 
mount to his head and congest his brain. his physical function had 
gone over to the enemy; his very heart was array against him. he did 
not move; he could not have cry out. he need but a coffin to be 
dead--as dead as the death that confront him with only the length of 
an open grave and the thickness of a rot plank between. 

then, one by one, his senses returned; the tide of terror that had 
overwhelm his faculty began to recede. but with the return of his 
senses he became singularly unconscious of the object of his fear. he 
saw the moonlight gilding the coffin, but no long the coffin that it 
gilded. raise his eyes and turning his head, he noted, curious and 
with surprise, the black branch of the dead tree, and try to 
estimate the length of the weather-worn rope that dangle from its 
ghostly hand. the monotonous bark of distant coyote affected him as 
something he had heard years ago in a dream. an owl flap awkward 
above him on noiseless wings, and he try to forecast the direction of 
its flight when it should encounter the cliff that rear its 
illuminate front a mile away. his hearing took account of a gopher's 
stealthy tread in the shadow of the cactus. he was intense observant; 
his senses were all alert; but he saw not the coffin. as one can gaze at 
the sun until it looks black and then vanishes, so his mind, have 
exhaust its capacity of dread, was no long conscious of the 
separate existence of anything dreadful. the assassin was cloak the 
sword. 

it was during this lull in the battle that he became sensible of a 
faint, sickening odor. at first he thought it was that of a 
rattle-snake, and involuntary try to look about his feet. they were 
nearly invisible in the gloom of the grave. a hoarse, gurgle sound, 
like the death-rattle in a human throat, seem to come out of the sky, 
and a moment later a great, black, angular shadow, like the same sound 
made visible, drop curve from the topmost branch of the spectral 
tree, flutter for an instant before his face and sail fierce away 
into the mist along the creek. 

it was the raven. the incident recall him to a sense of the situation, 
and again his eyes sought the upright coffin, now illuminate by the 
moon for half its length. he saw the gleam of the metallic plate and 
try without moving to decipher the inscription. then he fell to 
speculate upon what was behind it. his creative imagination present 
him a vivid picture. the plank no long seem an obstacle to his 
vision and he saw the livid corpse of the dead woman, standing in 
grave-clothes, and staring vacant at him, with lidless, shrunken eyes. 
the lower jaw was fallen, the upper lip drawn away from the uncover 
teeth. he could make out a mottled pattern on the hollow cheeks--the 
maculation of decay. by some mysterious process his mind revert for 
the first time that day to the photograph of mary matthews. he 
contrast its blonde beauty with the forbidding aspect of this dead 
face--the most beloved object that he knew with the most hideous that he 
could conceive. 

the assassin now advanced and display the blade laid it against the 
victim's throat. that is to say, the man became at first dimly, then 
definitely, aware of an impressive coincidence--a relation--a parallel 
between the face on the card and the name on the headboard. the one was 
disfigured, the other describe a disfiguration. the thought took hold 
of him and shook him. it transform the face that his imagination had 
create behind the coffin lid; the contrast became a resemblance; the 
resemblance grew to identity. remember the many description of 
scarry's personal appearance that he had heard from the gossip of his 
camp-fire he try with imperfect success to recall the exact nature of 
the disfigure that had given the woman her ugly name; and what was 
lacking in his memory fancy supplied, stamp it with the valid of 
conviction. in the maddening attempt to recall such scraps of the 
woman's history as he had heard, the muscle of his arms and hand were 
strained to a painful tension, as by an effort to lift a great weight. 
his body writhe and twist with the exertion. the tendon of his neck 
stood out as tense as whip-cords, and his breath came in short, sharp 
gasps. the catastrophe could not be much long delayed, or the agony of 
anticipation would leave nothing to be done by the _coup de grâce_ of 
verification. the scar face behind the lid would slay him through the 
wood. 

a movement of the coffin divert his thought. it came forward to within 
a foot of his face, grow visibly large as it approached. the rust 
metallic plate, with an inscription illegible in the moonlight, look 
him steady in the eye. determined not to shrink, he try to brace his 
shoulder more firm against the end of the excavation, and nearly fell 
backward in the attempt. there was nothing to support him; he had 
unconscious move upon his enemy, clutch the heavy knife that he 
had drawn from his belt. the coffin had not advanced and he smile to 
think it could not retreat. lift his knife he struck the heavy hilt 
against the metal plate with all his power. there was a sharp, ring 
percussion, and with a dull clatter the whole decay coffin lid broke 
in pieces and came away, fall about his feet. the quick and the dead 
were face to face--the frenzied, shriek man--the woman standing 
tranquil in her silences. she was a holy terror! 

v 

some month later a party of men and women belong to the highest 
social circle of san francisco pass through hurdy-gurdy on their way 
to the yosemite valley by a new trail. they halt for dinner and during 
its preparation explore the desolate camp. one of the party had been at 
hurdy-gurdy in the days of its glory. he had, indeed, been one of its 
prominent citizens; and it use to be said that more money pass over 
his faro table in any one night than over those of all his competitor 
in a week; but being now a millionaire engaged in greater enterprises, 
he did not deem these early success of sufficient importance to merit 
the distinction of remark. his invalid wife, a lady famous in san 
francisco for the costly nature of her entertainment and her exacting 
rigor with regard to the social position and "antecedents" of those who 
attend them, accompany the expedition. during a stroll among the 
shanty of the abandoned camp mr. porfer direct the attention of his 
wife and friends to a dead tree on a low hill beyond injun creek. 

"as i told you," he said, "i pass through this camp in 1852, and was 
told that no few than five men had been hang here by vigilante at 
different times, and all on that tree. if i am not mistaken, a rope is 
dangle from it yet. let us go over and see the place." 

mr. porfer did not add that the rope in question was perhaps the very 
one from whose fatal embrace his own neck had once had an escape so 
narrow that an hour's delay in taking himself out of that region would 
have span it. 

proceeding leisurely down the creek to a convenient crossing, the party 
came upon the cleanly picked skeleton of an animal which mr. porfer 
after due examination pronounced to be that of an ass. the 
distinguish ear were gone, but much of the inedible head had been 
spare by the beast and birds, and the stout bridle of horsehair was 
intact, as was the riata, of similar material, connect it with a 
picket pin still firm sunken in the earth. the wooden and metallic 
elements of a miner's kit lay near by. the customary remark were made, 
cynical on the part of the men, sentimental and refined by the lady. a 
little later they stood by the tree in the cemetery and mr. porfer 
sufficient unbent from his dignity to place himself beneath the rotten 
rope and confident lay a coil of it about his neck, somewhat, it 
appeared, to his own satisfaction, but greatly to the horror of his 
wife, to whose sensibility the performance gave a smart shock. 

an exclamation from one of the party gather them all about an open 
grave, at the bottom of which they saw a confuse mass of human bone 
and the broken remnant of a coffin. coyote and buzzard had perform 
the last sad rite for pretty much all else. two skull were visible and 
in order to investigate this somewhat unusual redundancy one of the 
younger men had the hardihood to spring into the grave and hand them up 
to another before mrs. porfer could indicate her marked disapproval of 
so shocking an act, which, nevertheless, she did with considerable 
feeling and in very choice words. pursue his search among the dismal 
debris at the bottom of the grave the young man next hand up a rust 
coffin plate, with a rudely cut inscription, which with difficulty mr. 
porfer decipher and read aloud with an earnest and not altogether 
unsuccessful attempt at the dramatic effect which he deem befitting to 
the occasion and his rhetorical abilities: 

manuelita murphy. 
born at the mission san pedro--died in 
hurdy-gurdy, 
age 47. 
hell's full of such. 

in deference to the piety of the reader and the nerves of mrs. porfer's 
fastidious sisterhood of both sex let us not touch upon the painful 
impression produce by this uncommon inscription, further than to say 
that the elocutionary powers of mr. porfer had never before met with so 
spontaneous and overwhelming recognition. 

the next morsel that reward the ghoul in the grave was a long tangle 
of black hair defile with clay: but this was such an anti-climax that 
it received little attention. suddenly, with a short exclamation and a 
gesture of excitement, the young man unearth a fragment of grayish 
rock, and after a hurried inspection hand it up to mr. porfer. as the 
sunlight fell upon it it glitter with a yellow luster--it was thick 
stud with gleam points. mr. porfer snatch it, bent his head over 
it a moment and threw it lightly away with the simple remark: 

"iron pyrites--fool's gold." 

the young man in the discovery shaft was a trifle disconcerted, 
apparently. 

meanwhile, mrs. porfer, unable long to endure the disagreeable 
business, had walk back to the tree and seat herself at its root. 
while rearrange a tress of golden hair which had slip from its 
confinement she was attract by what appear to be and really was the 
fragment of an old coat. look about to assure herself that so 
unladylike an act was not observed, she thrust her jeweled hand into the 
expose breast pocket and drew out a mouldy pocket-book. its contents 
were as follows: 

one bundle of letters, postmark "elizabethtown, new jersey." 

one circle of blonde hair tie with a ribbon. 

one photograph of a beautiful girl. 

one ditto of same, singularly disfigured. 

one name on back of photograph--"jefferson doman." 

a few moments later a group of anxious gentlemen surround mrs. porfer 
as she sat motionless at the foot of the tree, her head drop forward, 
her finger clutch a crush photograph. her husband raise her head, 
expose a face ghastly white, except the long, deform cicatrice, 
familiar to all her friends, which no art could ever hide, and which now 
traverse the pallor of her countenance like a visible curse. 

mary matthews porfer had the bad luck to be dead. 




the suitable surroundings 

the night 

one midsummer night a farmer's boy living about ten mile from the city 
of cincinnati was following a bridle path through a dense and dark 
forest. he had lost himself while searching for some missing cows, and 
near midnight was a long way from home, in a part of the country with 
which he was unfamiliar. but he was a stout-hearted lad, and knowing his 
general direction from his home, he plunge into the forest without 
hesitation, guide by the stars. coming into the bridle path, and 
observing that it ran in the right direction, he follow it. 

the night was clear, but in the wood it was exceedingly dark. it was 
more by the sense of touch than by that of sight that the lad kept the 
path. he could not, indeed, very easily go astray; the undergrowth on 
both side was so thick as to be almost impenetrable. he had gone into 
the forest a mile or more when he was surprise to see a feeble gleam of 
light shining through the foliage skirt the path on his left. the 
sight of it startle him and set his heart beating audibly. 

"the old breede house is somewhere about here," he said to himself. 
"this must be the other end of the path which we reach it by from our 
side. ugh! what should a light be do there?" 

nevertheless, he pushed on. a moment later he had emerge from the 
forest into a small, open space, mostly upgrown to brambles. there were 
remnant of a rot fence. a few yard from the trail, in the middle 
of the "clearing," was the house from which the light came, through an 
unglazed window. the window had once contained glass, but that and its 
support frame had long ago yield to missile flung by hand of 
venturesome boys to attest alike their courage and their hostility to 
the supernatural; for the breede house bore the evil reputation of being 
haunted. possibly it was not, but even the hardiest sceptic could not 
deny that it was deserted--which in rural regions is much the same 
thing. 

look at the mysterious dim light shining from the ruin window the 
boy remember with apprehension that his own hand had assist at the 
destruction. his penitence was of course poignant in proportion to its 
tardy and inefficacy. he half expect to be set upon by all the 
unworld and bodiless malevolence whom he had outrage by assist to 
break alike their window and their peace. yet this stubborn lad, 
shake in every limb, would not retreat. the blood in his vein was 
strong and rich with the iron of the frontiersman. he was but two 
remove from the generation that had subdued the indian. he start to 
pass the house. 

as he was go by he look in at the blank window space and saw a 
strange and terrify sight,--the figure of a man seat in the centre 
of the room, at a table upon which lay some loose sheet of paper. the 
elbow rest on the table, the hand support the head, which was 
uncovered. on each side the finger were pushed into the hair. the face 
show dead-yellow in the light of a single candle a little to one side. 
the flame illuminate that side of the face, the other was in deep 
shadow. the man's eyes were fixed upon the blank window space with a 
stare in which an old and cooler observer might have discern 
something of apprehension, but which seem to the lad altogether 
soulless. he believe the man to be dead. 

the situation was horrible, but not with out its fascination. the boy 
stop to note it all. he was weak, faint and trembling; he could feel 
the blood forsake his face. nevertheless, he set his teeth and 
resolute advanced to the house. he had no conscious intention--it was 
the mere courage of terror. he thrust his white face forward into the 
illuminate opening. at that instant a strange, harsh cry, a shriek, 
broke upon the silence of the night--the note of a screech-owl. the man 
sprang to his feet, overturn the table and extinguish the candle. 
the boy took to his heels. 

the day before 

"good-morning, colston. i am in luck, it seems. you have often said that 
my commendation of your literary work was mere civility, and here you 
find me absorbed--actually merged--in your latest story in the 
_messenger_. nothing less shocking than your touch upon my shoulder 
would have rouse me to consciousness." 

"the proof is strong than you seem to know," reply the man 
addressed: "so keen is your eager to read my story that you are 
willing to renounce selfish consideration and forego all the pleasure 
that you could get from it." 

"i don't understand you," said the other, fold the newspaper that he 
held and putt it into his pocket. "you writer are a queer lot, 
anyhow. come, tell me what i have done or omit in this matter. in 
what way do the pleasure that i get, or might get, from your work 
depend on me?" 

"in many ways. let me ask you how you would enjoy your breakfast if you 
took it in this street car. suppose the phonograph so perfect as to be 
able to give you an entire opera,--singing, orchestration, and all; do 
you think you would get much pleasure out of it if you turn it on at 
your office during business hours? do you really care for a serenade by 
schubert when you hear it fiddle by an untimely italy on a morning 
ferryboat? are you always cock and prime for enjoyment? do you keep 
every mood on tap, ready to any demand? let me remind you, sir, that the 
story which you have done me the honor to begin as a means of becoming 
oblivious to the discomfort of this car is a ghost story!" 

"well?" 

"well! has the reader no duty corresponding to his privileges? you 
have paid five cent for that newspaper. it is yours. you have the right 
to read it when and where you will. much of what is in it is neither 
help nor harm by time and place and mood; some of it actually 
require to be read at once--while it is fizzing. but my story is not of 
that character. it is not 'the very latest advices' from ghostland. you 
are not expect to keep yourself _au courant_ with what is go on in 
the realm of spooks. the stuff will keep until you have leisure to put 
yourself into the frame of mind appropriate to the sentiment of the 
piece--which i respectful submit that you cannot do in a street car, 
even if you are the only passenger. the solitude is not of the right 
sort. an author has rights which the reader is bound to respect." 

"for specific example?" 

"the right to the reader's undivided attention. to deny him this is 
immoral. to make him share your attention with the rattle of a street 
car, the moving panorama of the crowd on the sidewalks, and the 
building beyond--with any of the thousand of distraction which make 
our customary environment--is to treat him with gross injustice. by god, 
it is infamous!" 

the speaker had risen to his feet and was steady himself by one of 
the strap hanging from the roof of the car. the other man look up at 
him in sudden astonishment, wonder how so trivial a grievance could 
seem to justify so strong language. he saw that his friend's face was 
uncommonly pale and that his eyes glow like living coals. 

"you know what i mean," continue the writer, impetuous crowd his 
words--"you know what i mean, marsh. my stuff in this morning's 
_messenger_ is plainly sub-headed 'a ghost story.' that is ample notice 
to all. every honorable reader will understand it as prescribe by 
implication the conditions under which the work is to be read." 

the man address as marsh wince a trifle, then ask with a smile: 
"what conditions? you know that i am only a plain business man who 
cannot be supposed to understand such things. how, when, where should i 
read your ghost story?" 

"in solitude--at night--by the light of a candle. there are certain 
emotion which a writer can easily enough excite--such as compassion or 
merriment. i can move you to tear or laughter under almost any 
circumstances. but for my ghost story to be effective you must be made 
to feel fear--at least a strong sense of the supernatural--and that is a 
difficult matter. i have a right to expect that if you read me at all 
you will give me a chance; that you will make yourself accessible to the 
emotion that i try to inspire." 

the car had now arrive at its terminus and stopped. the trip just 
complete was its first for the day and the conversation of the two 
early passenger had not been interrupted. the street were yet silent 
and desolate; the house tops were just touched by the rising sun. as 
they step from the car and walk away together marsh narrowly eye 
his companion, who was reported, like most men of uncommon literary 
ability, to be addict to various destructive vices. that is the 
revenge which dull mind take upon bright one in resentment of their 
superiority. mr. colston was known as a man of genius. there are honest 
soul who believe that genius is a mode of excess. it was known that 
colston did not drink liquor, but many said that he ate opium. something 
in his appearance that morning--a certain wild of the eyes, an 
unusual pallor, a thickness and rapid of speech--were taken by mr. 
marsh to confirm the report. nevertheless, he had not the self-denial to 
abandon a subject which he found interesting, however it might excite 
his friend. 

"do you mean to say," he began, "that if i take the trouble to observe 
your directions--place myself in the conditions that you demand: 
solitude, night and a tallow candle--you can with your ghostly work give 
me an uncomfortable sense of the supernatural, as you call it? can you 
accelerate my pulse, make me start at sudden noises, send a nervous 
chill along my spine and cause my hair to rise?" 

colston turn sudden and look him square in the eyes as they 
walked. "you would not dare--you have not the courage," he said. he 
emphasize the words with a contemptuous gesture. "you are brave enough 
to read me in a street car, but--in a desert house--alone--in the 
forest--at night! bah! i have a manuscript in my pocket that would kill 
you." 

marsh was angry. he knew himself courageous, and the words stung him. 
"if you know such a place," he said, "take me there to-night and leave 
me your story and a candle. call for me when i've had time enough to 
read it and i'll tell you the entire plot and--kick you out of the 
place." 

that is how it occur that the farmer's boy, look in at an unglazed 
window of the breede house, saw a man sitting in the light of a candle. 

the day after 

late in the afternoon of the next day three men and a boy approach the 
breede house from that point of the compass toward which the boy had 
flee the preceding night. the men were in high spirits; they talk very 
loud and laughed. they made facetious and good-humored ironic 
remark to the boy about his adventure, which evidently they did not 
believe in. the boy accept their raillery with seriousness, making no 
reply. he had a sense of the fitness of things and knew that one who 
profess to have seen a dead man rise from his seat and blow out a 
candle is not a credible witness. 

arrive at the house and finding the door unlocked, the party of 
investigate enter without ceremony. leading out of the passage into 
which this door open was another on the right and one on the left. 
they enter the room on the left--the one which had the blank front 
window. here was the dead body of a man. 

it lay partly on one side, with the forearm beneath it, the cheek on the 
floor. the eyes were wide open; the stare was not an agreeable thing to 
encounter. the lower jaw had fallen; a little pool of saliva had 
collected beneath the mouth. an overthrown table, a partly burn 
candle, a chair and some paper with writing on it were all else that the 
room contained. the men look at the body, touching the face in turn. 
the boy grave stood at the head, assume a look of ownership. it was 
the proudest moment of his life. one of the men said to him, "you're a 
good 'un"--a remark which was received by the two other with nod of 
acquiescence. it was scepticism apologize to truth. then one of the 
men took from the floor the sheet of manuscript and step to the 
window, for already the evening shadow were gloom the forest. the 
song of the whip-poor-will was heard in the distance and a monstrous 
beetle sped by the window on roaring wings and thunder away out of 
hearing. the man read: 

the manuscript 

"before commit the act which, rightly or wrongly, i have resolve 
on and appear before my maker for judgment, i, james r. colston, 
deem it my duty as a journalist to make a statement to the public. my 
name is, i believe, tolerably well known to the people as a writer of 
tragic tales, but the somberest imagination never conceive anything 
so tragic as my own life and history. not in incident: my life has 
been destitute of adventure and action. but my mental career has been 
lurid with experience such as kill and damn. i shall not recount them 
here--some of them are written and ready for publication elsewhere. 
the object of these lines is to explain to whomsoever may be 
interested that my death is voluntary--my own act. i shall die at 
twelve o'clock on the night of the 15th of july--a significant 
anniversary to me, for it was on that day, and at that hour, that my 
friend in time and eternity, charles breede, perform his vow to me 
by the same act which his fidelity to our pledge now entail upon me. 
he took his life in his little house in the copeton woods. there was 
the customary verdict of 'temporary insanity.' had i testify at that 
inquest--had i told all i knew, they would have call _me_ mad!" 

here follow an evidently long passage which the man reading read to 
himself only. the rest he read aloud. 

"i have still a week of life in which to arrange my worldly affair 
and prepare for the great change. it is enough, for i have but few 
affair and it is now four years since death became an imperative 
obligation. 

"i shall bear this writing on my body; the finder will please hand it 
to the coroner. 

"james r. colston. 

"p.s.--willard marsh, on this the fatal fifteenth day of july i hand 
you this manuscript, to be open and read under the conditions agree 
upon, and at the place which i designated. i forego my intention to 
keep it on my body to explain the manner of my death, which is not 
important. it will serve to explain the manner of yours. i am to call 
for you during the night to receive assurance that you have read the 
manuscript. you know me well enough to expect me. but, my friend, it 
_will be after twelve o'clock._ may god have mercy on our souls! 

"j.r.c." 

before the man who was reading this manuscript had finished, the candle 
had been picked up and lighted. when the reader had done, he quiet 
thrust the paper against the flame and despite the protestation of the 
other held it until it was burnt to ashes. the man who did this, and 
who afterward placid endure a severe reprimand from the coroner, was 
a son-in-law of the late charles breede. at the inquest nothing could 
elicit an intelligent account of what the paper had contained. 

from "the times" 

"yesterday the commissioner of lunacy committed to the asylum mr. 
james r. colston, a writer of some local reputation, connected with 
the _messenger_. it will be remember that on the evening of the 15th 
inst. mr. colston was given into custody by one of his fellow-lodgers 
in the baine house, who had observe him acting very suspiciously, 
bare his throat and whet a razor--occasionally try its edge 
by actually cutting through the skin of his arm, etc. on being hand 
over to the police, the unfortunate man made a desperate resistance, 
and has ever since been so violent that it has been necessary to keep 
him in a strait-jacket. most of our esteem contemporary's other 
writer are still at large." 




the board window 

in 1830, only a few mile away from what is now the great city of 
cincinnati, lay an immense and almost unbroken forest. the whole region 
was sparse settled by people of the frontier--restless soul who no 
soon had hewn fairly habitable home out of the wilderness and 
attain to that degree of prosperity which to-day we should call 
indigence than impel by some mysterious impulse of their nature they 
abandoned all and pushed farther westward, to encounter new peril and 
privation in the effort to regain the meagre comfort which they had 
voluntary renounced. many of them had already forsaken that region for 
the remote settlements, but among those remain was one who had been 
of those first arriving. he live alone in a house of log surround on 
all side by the great forest, of whose gloom and silence he seem a 
part, for no one had ever known him to smile nor speak a needless word. 
his simple wants were supply by the sale or barter of skin of wild 
animal in the river town, for not a thing did he grow upon the land 
which, if needful, he might have claim by right of undisturbed 
possession. there were evidence of "improvement"--a few acre of ground 
immediately about the house had once been clear of its trees, the 
decay stump of which were half conceal by the new growth that had 
been suffer to repair the ravage wrought by the ax. apparently the 
man's zeal for agriculture had burn with a failing flame, expire in 
penitential ashes. 

the little log house, with its chimney of sticks, its roof of warp 
clapboard weighted with traverse pole and its "chinking" of clay, 
had a single door and, directly opposite, a window. the latter, however, 
was board up--nobody could remember a time when it was not. and none 
knew why it was so closed; certainly not because of the occupant's 
dislike of light and air, for on those rare occasion when a hunter had 
pass that lonely spot the recluse had commonly been seen sun 
himself on his doorstep if heaven had provided sunshine for his need. i 
fancy there are few person living to-day who ever knew the secret of 
that window, but i am one, as you shall see. 

the man's name was said to be murlock. he was apparently seventy years 
old, actually about fifty. something besides years had had a hand in his 
aging. his hair and long, full beard were white, his gray, lustreless 
eyes sunken, his face singularly seam with wrinkle which appear to 
belong to two intersect systems. in figure he was tall and spare, 
with a stoop of the shoulders--a burden bearer. i never saw him; these 
particulars i learned from my grandfather, from whom also i got the 
man's story when i was a lad. he had known him when living near by in 
that early day. 

one day murlock was found in his cabin, dead. it was not a time and 
place for coroner and newspapers, and i suppose it was agree that he 
had die from natural cause or i should have been told, and should 
remember. i know only that with what was probably a sense of the fitness 
of things the body was bury near the cabin, alongside the grave of his 
wife, who had precede him by so many years that local tradition had 
retain hardly a hint of her existence. that close the final chapter 
of this true story--excepting, indeed, the circumstance that many years 
afterward, in company with an equally intrepid spirit, i penetrate to 
the place and venture near enough to the ruin cabin to throw a stone 
against it, and ran away to avoid the ghost which every well-informed 
boy thereabout knew haunt the spot. but there is an early chapter-- 
that supply by my grandfather. 

when murlock built his cabin and began lay sturdy about with his ax 
to hew out a farm--the rifle, meanwhile, his means of support--he was 
young, strong and full of hope. in that eastern country whence he came 
he had married, as was the fashion, a young woman in all ways worthy of 
his honest devotion, who share the danger and privation of his lot 
with a willing spirit and light heart. there is no known record of her 
name; of her charm of mind and person tradition is silent and the 
doubt is at liberty to entertain his doubt; but god forbid that i 
should share it! of their affection and happiness there is abundant 
assurance in every add day of the man's widowed life; for what but the 
magnetism of a blessed memory could have chain that venturesome spirit 
to a lot like that? 

one day murlock return from gun in a distant part of the forest to 
find his wife prostrate with fever, and delirious. there was no 
physician within miles, no neighbor; nor was she in a condition to be 
left, to summon help. so he set about the task of nursing her back to 
health, but at the end of the third day she fell into unconscious 
and so pass away, apparently, with never a gleam of return reason. 

from what we know of a nature like his we may venture to sketch in some 
of the detail of the outline picture drawn by my grandfather. when 
convinced that she was dead, murlock had sense enough to remember that 
the dead must be prepared for burial. in performance of this sacred duty 
he blunder now and again, did certain things incorrectly, and other 
which he did correct were done over and over. his occasional failure 
to accomplish some simple and ordinary act fill him with astonishment, 
like that of a drunken man who wonders at the suspension of familiar 
natural laws. he was surprised, too, that he did not weep--surprised and 
a little ashamed; surely it is unkind not to weep for the dead. 
"to-morrow," he said aloud, "i shall have to make the coffin and dig the 
grave; and then i shall miss her, when she is no long in sight; but 
now--she is dead, of course, but it is all right--it _must_ be all 
right, somehow. things cannot be so bad as they seem." 

he stood over the body in the fade light, adjust the hair and 
putt the finish touch to the simple toilet, do all 
mechanically, with soulless care. and still through his consciousness 
ran an undersense of conviction that all was right--that he should have 
her again as before, and everything explained. he had had no experience 
in grief; his capacity had not been enlarge by use. his heart could not 
contain it all, nor his imagination rightly conceive it. he did not know 
he was so hard struck; _that_ knowledge would come later, and never go. 
grief is an artist of powers as various as the instrument upon which he 
play his dirge for the dead, evoke from some the sharpest, shrillest 
notes, from other the low, grave chord that throb recurrent like the 
slow beating of a distant drum. some nature it startles; some it 
stupefies. to one it come like the stroke of an arrow, sting all the 
sensibility to a keen life; to another as the blow of a bludgeon, 
which in crush benumbs. we may conceive murlock to have been that way 
affected, for (and here we are upon sure ground than that of 
conjecture) no soon had he finished his pious work than, sink into 
a chair by the side of the table upon which the body lay, and note how 
white the profile show in the deepen gloom, he laid his arms upon 
the table's edge, and drop his face into them, tearless yet and 
unutterable weary. at that moment came in through the open window a 
long, wail sound like the cry of a lost child in the far deep of the 
darken wood! but the man did not move. again, and near than before, 
sound that unearthly cry upon his failing sense. perhaps it was a wild 
beast; perhaps it was a dream. for murlock was asleep. 

some hour later, as it afterward appeared, this unfaithful watch 
awoke and lift his head from his arms intent listened--he knew not 
why. there in the black dark by the side of the dead, recall all 
without a shock, he strained his eyes to see--he knew not what. his 
senses were all alert, his breath was suspended, his blood had still 
its tide as if to assist the silence. who--what had wake him, and 
where was it? 

sudden the table shook beneath his arms, and at the same moment he 
heard, or fancy that he heard, a light, soft step--another--sounds as 
of bare feet upon the floor! 

he was terrify beyond the power to cry out or move. perforce he 
waited--waited there in the dark through seeming century of such 
dread as one may know, yet live to tell. he try vain to speak the 
dead woman's name, vain to stretch forth his hand across the table to 
learn if she were there. his throat was powerless, his arms and hand 
were like lead. then occur something most frightful. some heavy body 
seem hurl against the table with an impetus that pushed it against 
his breast so sharp as nearly to overthrow him, and at the same 
instant he heard and felt the fall of something upon the floor with so 
violent a thump that the whole house was shaken by the impact. a 
scuffle ensued, and a confusion of sound impossible to describe. 
murlock had risen to his feet. fear had by excess forfeit control of 
his faculties. he flung his hand upon the table. nothing was there! 

there is a point at which terror may turn to madness; and madness 
incite to action. with no definite intent, from no motive but the 
wayward impulse of a madman, murlock sprang to the wall, with a little 
grope seize his loaded rifle, and without aim discharge it. by the 
flash which lit up the room with a vivid illumination, he saw an 
enormous panther drag the dead woman toward the window, its teeth 
fixed in her throat! then there were dark black than before, and 
silence; and when he return to consciousness the sun was high and the 
wood vocal with song of birds. 

the body lay near the window, where the beast had left it when 
frightened away by the flash and report of the rifle. the clothing was 
deranged, the long hair in disorder, the limb lay anyhow. from the 
throat, dreadfully lacerated, had issue a pool of blood not yet 
entire coagulated. the ribbon with which he had bound the wrist was 
broken; the hand were tight clenched. between the teeth was a 
fragment of the animal's ear. 




a lady from redhorse 

coronado, june 20. 

i find myself more and more interested in him. it is not, i am sure, 
his--do you know any good noun corresponding to the adjective 
"handsome"? one do not like to say "beauty" when speak of a man. he 
is beautiful enough, heaven knows; i should not even care to trust you 
with him--faithfulest of all possible wives that you are--when he looks 
his best, as he always does. nor do i think the fascination of his 
manner has much to do with it. you recollect that the charm of art 
inhere in that which is undefinable, and to you and me, my dear irene, 
i fancy there is rather less of that in the branch of art under 
consideration than to girl in their first season. i fancy i know how my 
fine gentleman produce many of his effects and could perhaps give him a 
pointer on heighten them. nevertheless, his manner is something truly 
delightful. i suppose what interests me chiefly is the man's brains. his 
conversation is the best i have ever heard and altogether unlike any one 
else's. he seem to know everything, as indeed he ought, for he has been 
everywhere, read everything, seen all there is to see--sometimes i think 
rather more than is good for him--and had acquaintance with the 
_queerest_ people. and then his voice--irene, when i hear it i actually 
feel as if i ought to have paid at the door, though of course it is my 
own door. 

july 3. 

i fear my remark about dr. barritz must have been, being thoughtless, 
very silly, or you would not have written of him with such levity, not 
to say disrespect. believe me, dearest, he has more dignity and 
serious (of the kind, i mean, which is not inconsistent with a 
manner sometimes playful and always charming) than any of the men that 
you and i ever met. and young raynor--you knew raynor at monterey--tells 
me that the men all like him and that he is treat with something like 
deference everywhere. there is a mystery, too--something about his 
connection with the blavatsky people in northern india. raynor either 
would not or could not tell me the particulars. i infer that dr. barritz 
is thought--don't you dare to laugh!--a magician. could anything be 
fine than that? 

an ordinary mystery is not, of course, so good as a scandal, but when it 
relate to dark and dreadful practices--to the exercise of unearthly 
powers--could anything be more piquant? it explains, too, the singular 
influence the man has upon me. it is the undefinable in his art--black 
art. seriously, dear, i quite tremble when he looks me full in the eyes 
with those unfathomable orb of his, which i have already vain 
attempt to describe to you. how dreadful if he has the power to make 
one fall in love! do you know if the blavatsky crowd have that power-- 
outside of sepoy? 

july 16. 

the strangest thing! last evening while auntie was attend one of the 
hotel hop (i hate them) dr. barritz called. it was scandalous late--i 
actually believe that he had talk with auntie in the ballroom and 
learned from her that i was alone. i had been all the evening contrive 
how to worm out of him the truth about his connection with the thug in 
sepoy, and all of that black business, but the moment he fixed his eyes 
on me (for i admitted him, i'm ashamed to say) i was helpless. i 
trembled, i blushed, i--o irene, irene, i love the man beyond expression 
and you know how it is yourself. 

fancy! i, an ugly duckling from redhorse--daughter (they say) of old 
calamity jim--certainly his heiress, with no living relation but an 
absurd old aunt who spoils me a thousand and fifty ways--absolutely 
destitute of everything but a million dollar and a hope in paris,--i 
daring to love a god like him! my dear, if i had you here i could tear 
your hair out with mortification. 

i am convinced that he is aware of my feeling, for he stay but a few 
moments, said nothing but what another man might have said half as well, 
and pretend that he had an engagement went away. i learned to-day (a 
little bird told me--the bell-bird) that he went straight to bed. how 
do that strike you as evidence of exemplary habits? 

july 17. 

that little wretch, raynor, call yesterday and his babble set me 
almost wild. he never runs down--that is to say, when he exterminate a 
score of reputations, more or less, he do not pause between one 
reputation and the next. (by the way, he inquire about you, and his 
manifestation of interest in you had, i confess, a good deal of 
_vraisemblance._.) mr. raynor observe no game laws; like death (which 
he would inflict if slander were fatal) he has all season for his own. 
but i like him, for we knew each other at redhorse when we were young. 
he was known in those days as "giggles," and i--o irene, can you ever 
forgive me?--i was call "gunny." god know why; perhaps in allusion to 
the material of my pinafores; perhaps because the name is in 
alliteration with "giggles," for gig and i were inseparable playmates, 
and the miner may have thought it a delicate civility to recognize some 
kind of relationship between us. 

later, we took in a third--another of adversity's brood, who, like 
garrick between tragedy and comedy, had a chronic inability to 
adjudicate the rival claim of frost and famine. between him and misery 
there was seldom anything more than a single suspender and the hope of a 
meal which would at the same time support life and make it 
insupportable. he literally picked up a precarious living for himself 
and an age mother by "chloriding the dumps," that is to say, the miner 
permit him to search the heap of waste rock for such pieces of "pay 
ore" as had been overlooked; and these he sack up and sold at the 
syndicate mill. he became a member of our firm--"gunny, giggles, and 
dumps" thenceforth--through my favor; for i could not then, nor can i 
now, be indifferent to his courage and prowess in defend against 
giggle the immemorial right of his sex to insult a strange and 
unprotected female--myself. after old jim struck it in the calamity and 
i began to wear shoe and go to school, and in emulation giggle took to 
washing his face and became jack raynor, of wells, fargo & co., and old 
mrs. bart was herself chloride to her fathers, dumps drift over to 
san juan smith and turn stage driver, and was kill by road agents, 
and so forth. 

why do i tell you all this, dear? because it is heavy on my heart. 
because i walk the valley of humility. because i am subdue myself to 
permanent consciousness of my unworthy to unloose the latchet of dr. 
barritz's shoe. because, oh dear, oh dear, there's a cousin of dumps at 
this hotel! i haven't spoken to him. i never had much acquaintance with 
him,--but do you suppose he has recognize me? do, please give me in 
your next your candid, sure-enough opinion about it, and say you don't 
think so. do you suppose he know about me already, and that that is why 
he left me last evening when he saw that i blush and tremble like a 
fool under his eyes? you know i can't bribe _all_ the newspapers, and i 
can't go back on anybody who was civil to gunny at redhorse--not if i'm 
pitch out of society into the sea. so the skeleton sometimes rattle 
behind the door. i never care much before, as you know, but now--_now_ 
it is not the same. jack raynor i am sure of--he will not tell him. he 
seems, indeed, to hold him in such respect as hardly to dare speak to 
him at all, and i'm a good deal that way myself. dear, dear! i wish i 
had something besides a million dollars! if jack were three inch 
tall i'd marry him alive and go back to redhorse and wear sackcloth 
again to the end of my miserable days. 

july 25. 

we had a perfectly splendid sunset last evening and i must tell you all 
about it. i ran away from auntie and everybody and was walking alone on 
the beach. i expect you to believe, you infidel! that i had not look 
out of my window on the seaward side of the hotel and seen him walking 
alone on the beach. if you are not lost to every feeling of womanly 
delicacy you will accept my statement without question. i soon 
establish myself under my sunshade and had for some time been gaze 
out dreamy over the sea, when he approached, walking close to the edge 
of the water--it was ebb tide. i assure you the wet sand actually 
brighten about his feet! as he approach me he lift his hat, 
saying, "miss dement, may i sit with you?--or will you walk with me?" 

the possibility that neither might be agreeable seem not to have 
occur to him. did you ever know such assurance? assurance? my dear, 
it was gall, downright _gall!_ well, i didn't find it wormwood, and 
replied, with my untutored redhorse heart in my throat, "i--i shall be 
pleased to do _anything_." could words have been more stupid? there are 
depths of fatuity in me, friend o' my soul, that are simply bottomless! 

he extend his hand, smiling, and i deliver mine into it without a 
moment's hesitation, and when his finger closed about it to assist me 
to my feet the consciousness that it tremble made me blush worse than 
the red west. i got up, however, and after a while, observing that he 
had not let go my hand i pull on it a little, but unsuccessfully. he 
simply held on, saying nothing, but look down into my face with some 
kind of smile--i didn't know--how could i?--whether it was affectionate, 
derisive, or what, for i did not look at him. how beautiful he was!-- 
with the red fire of the sunset burning in the depths of his eyes. do 
you know, dear, if the thug and expert of the blavatsky region have 
any special kind of eyes? ah, you should have seen his superb attitude, 
the god-like inclination of his head as he stood over me after i had got 
upon my feet! it was a noble picture, but i soon destroy it, for i 
began at once to sink again to the earth. there was only one thing for 
him to do, and he did it; he support me with an arm about my waist. 

"miss dement, are you ill?" he said. 

it was not an exclamation; there was neither alarm nor solicitude in it. 
if he had added: "i suppose that is about what i am expect to say," he 
would hardly have express his sense of the situation more clearly. his 
manner fill me with shame and indignation, for i was suffering 
acutely. i wrench my hand out of his, grasp the arm support me 
and push myself free, fell plump into the sand and sat helpless. my 
hat had fallen off in the struggle and my hair tumble about my face and 
shoulder in the most mortify way. 

"go away from me," i cried, half choking. "o _please_ go away, you--you 
thug! how dare you think _that_ when my leg is asleep?" 

i actually said those identical words! and then i broke down and sobbed. 
irene, i _blubbered_! 

his manner alter in an instant--i could see that much through my 
finger and hair. he drop on one knee beside me, part the tangle of 
hair and said in the tenderest way: "my poor girl, god know i have not 
intended to pain you. how should i?--i who love you--i who have love 
you for--for years and years!" 

he had pull my wet hand away from my face and was covering them with 
kisses. my cheek were like two coals, my whole face was flaming and, i 
think, steaming. what could i do? i hid it on his shoulder--there was no 
other place. and, o my dear friend, how my leg tingle and thrilled, and 
how i want to kick! 

we sat so for a long time. he had release one of my hand to pass his 
arm about me again and i possessed myself of my handkerchief and was 
dry my eyes and my nose. i would not look up until that was done; he 
try in vain to push me a little away and gaze into my face. presently, 
when all was right, and it had grown a bit dark, i lift my head, 
look him straight in the eyes and smile my best--my level best, dear. 

"what do you mean," i said, "by 'years and years'?" 

"dearest," he replied, very gravely, very earnestly, "in the absence of 
the sunken cheeks, the hollow eyes, the lank hair, the slouch gait, 
the rags, dirt, and youth, can you not--will you not understand? gunny, 
i'm dumps!" 

in a moment i was upon my feet and he upon his. i seize him by the 
lapel of his coat and peer into his handsome face in the deepen 
darkness. i was breathless with excitement. 

"and you are not dead?" i asked, hardly knowing what i said. 

"only dead in love, dear. i recover from the road agent's bullet, but 
this, i fear, is fatal." 

"but about jack--mr. raynor? don't you know--" 

"i am ashamed to say, darling, that it was through that unworthy 
person's suggestion that i came here from vienna." 

irene, they have rope in your affectionate friend, 

mary jane dement. 

p.s.--the worst of it is that there is no mystery; that was the 
invention of jack raynor, to arouse my curiosity. james is not a thug. 
he solemn assure me that in all his wanderings he has never set foot 
in sepoy. 




the eyes of the panther 

i 

one do not always marry when insane 

a man and a woman--nature had done the grouping--sat on a rustic seat, 
in the late afternoon. the man was middle-aged, slender, swarthy, with 
the expression of a poet and the complexion of a pirate--a man at whom 
one would look again. the woman was young, blonde, graceful, with 
something in her figure and movements suggest the word "lithe." she 
was habit in a gray gown with odd brown marking in the texture. she 
may have been beautiful; one could not readily say, for her eyes deny 
attention to all else. they were gray-green, long and narrow, with an 
expression defy analysis. one could only know that they were 
disquieting. cleopatra may have had such eyes. 

the man and the woman talked. 

"yes," said the woman, "i love you, god knows! but marry you, no. i 
cannot, will not." 

"irene, you have said that many times, yet always have deny me a 
reason. i've a right to know, to understand, to feel and prove my 
fortitude if i have it. give me a reason." 

"for loving you?" 

the woman was smile through her tear and her pallor. that did not 
stir any sense of humor in the man. 

"no; there is no reason for that. a reason for not marry me. i've a 
right to know. i must know. i will know!" 

he had risen and was standing before her with clench hands, on his 
face a frown--it might have been call a scowl. he look as if he 
might attempt to learn by strangle her. she smile no more--merely sat 
look up into his face with a fixed, set regard that was utterly 
without emotion or sentiment. yet it had something in it that tame his 
resentment and made him shiver. 

"you are determined to have my reason?" she ask in a tone that was 
entire mechanical--a tone that might have been her look made audible. 

"if you please--if i'm not ask too much." 

apparently this lord of creation was yielding some part of his dominion 
over his co-creature. 

"very well, you shall know: i am insane." 

the man started, then look incredulous and was conscious that he ought 
to be amused. but, again, the sense of humor fail him in his need and 
despite his disbelief he was profound disturbed by that which he did 
not believe. between our conviction and our feelings there is no good 
understanding. 

"that is what the physician would say," the woman continued--"if they 
knew. i might myself prefer to call it a case of 'possession.' sit down 
and hear what i have to say." 

the man silent resume his seat beside her on the rustic bench by the 
wayside. over-against them on the eastern side of the valley the hill 
were already sunset-flushed and the still all about was of that 
peculiar quality that foretell the twilight. something of its 
mysterious and significant solemnity had impart itself to the man's 
mood. in the spiritual, as in the material world, are sign and presage 
of night. rarely meeting her look, and whenever he did so conscious of 
the indefinable dread with which, despite their feline beauty, her eyes 
always affected him, jenner brade listen in silence to the story 
told by irene marlowe. in deference to the reader's possible prejudice 
against the artless method of an unpractised historian the author 
venture to substitute his own version for hers. 

ii 

a room may be too narrow for three, though one is outside 

in a little log house contain a single room spare and rudely 
furnished, crouch on the floor against one of the walls, was a woman, 
clasp to her breast a child. outside, a dense unbroken forest 
extend for many mile in every direction. this was at night and the 
room was black dark: no human eye could have discern the woman and the 
child. yet they were observed, narrowly, vigilantly, with never even a 
momentary slacken of attention; and that is the pivotal fact upon 
which this narrative turns. 

charles marlowe was of the class, now extinct in this country, of 
woodmen pioneers--men who found their most acceptable surroundings in 
sylvan solitude that stretch along the eastern slope of the 
mississippi valley, from the great lake to the gulf of mexico. for more 
than a hundred years these men pushed ever westward, generation after 
generation, with rifle and ax, reclaim from nature and her savage 
children here and there an isolated acreage for the plow, no soon 
reclaim than surrender to their less venturesome but more thrifty 
successors. at last they burst through the edge of the forest into the 
open country and vanish as if they had fallen over a cliff. the 
woodman pioneer is no more; the pioneer of the plains--he whose easy 
task it was to subdue for occupancy two-thirds of the country in a 
single generation--is another and inferior creation. with charles 
marlowe in the wilderness, share the dangers, hardship and privation 
of that strange, unprofitable life, were his wife and child, to whom, in 
the manner of his class, in which the domestic virtue were a religion, 
he was passionately attached. the woman was still young enough to be 
comely, new enough to the awful isolation of her lot to be cheerful. by 
withhold the large capacity for happiness which the simple 
satisfaction of the forest life could not have filled, heaven had dealt 
honorable with her. in her light household tasks, her child, her husband 
and her few foolish books, she found abundant provision for her needs. 

one morning in midsummer marlowe took down his rifle from the wooden 
hook on the wall and signify his intention of get game. 

"we've meat enough," said the wife; "please don't go out to-day. i 
dream last night, o, such a dreadful thing! i cannot recollect it, but 
i'm almost sure that it will come to pass if you go out." 

it is painful to confess that marlowe received this solemn statement 
with less of gravity than was due to the mysterious nature of the 
calamity foreshadowed. in truth, he laughed. 

"try to remember," he said. "maybe you dream that baby had lost the 
power of speech." 

the conjecture was obviously suggest by the fact that baby, clinging 
to the fringe of his hunting-coat with all her ten pudgy thumb was at 
that moment utter her sense of the situation in a series of exultant 
goo-goos inspired by sight of her father's raccoon-skin cap. 

the woman yielded: lacking the gift of humor she could not hold out 
against his kindly badinage. so, with a kiss for the mother and a kiss 
for the child, he left the house and closed the door upon his happiness 
forever. 

at nightfall he had not returned. the woman prepared supper and waited. 
then she put baby to bed and sang soft to her until she slept. by this 
time the fire on the hearth, at which she had cook supper, had burn 
out and the room was light by a single candle. this she afterward 
placed in the open window as a sign and welcome to the hunter if he 
should approach from that side. she had thoughtful closed and barred 
the door against such wild animal as might prefer it to an open window 
--of the habit of beast of prey in enter a house uninvited she was 
not advised, though with true female prevision she may have considered 
the possibility of their entrance by way of the chimney. as the night 
wore on she became not less anxious, but more drowsy, and at last rest 
her arms upon the bed by the child and her head upon the arms. the 
candle in the window burn down to the socket, sputter and flared a 
moment and went out unobserved; for the woman slept and dreamed. 

in her dream she sat beside the cradle of a second child. the first one 
was dead. the father was dead. the home in the forest was lost and the 
dwelling in which she live was unfamiliar. there were heavy oaken 
doors, always closed, and outside the windows, fasten into the thick 
stone walls, were iron bars, obviously (so she thought) a provision 
against indians. all this she noted with an infinite self-pity, but 
without surprise--an emotion unknown in dreams. the child in the cradle 
was invisible under its coverlet which something impel her to remove. 
she did so, disclose the face of a wild animal! in the shock of this 
dreadful revelation the dreamer awoke, tremble in the dark of her 
cabin in the wood. 

as a sense of her actual surroundings came slow back to her she felt 
for the child that was not a dream, and assured herself by its breathing 
that all was well with it; nor could she forbear to pass a hand lightly 
across its face. then, move by some impulse for which she probably 
could not have accounted, she rose and took the sleep babe in her 
arms, holding it close against her breast. the head of the child's cot 
was against the wall to which the woman now turn her back as she 
stood. lift her eyes she saw two bright object star the dark 
with a reddish-green glow. she took them to be two coal on the hearth, 
but with her return sense of direction came the disquiet 
consciousness that they were not in that quarter of the room, moreover 
were too high, being nearly at the level of the eyes--of her own eyes. 
for these were the eyes of a panther. 

the beast was at the open window directly opposite and not five pace 
away. nothing but those terrible eyes was visible, but in the dreadful 
tumult of her feelings as the situation disclose itself to her 
understanding she somehow knew that the animal was standing on its 
hinder feet, support itself with its paw on the window-ledge. that 
signify a malign interest--not the mere gratification of an indolent 
curiosity. the consciousness of the attitude was an add horror, 
accentuate the menace of those awful eyes, in whose steadfast fire her 
strength and courage were alike consumed. under their silent questioning 
she shudder and turn sick. her knee fail her, and by degrees, 
instinctive strive to avoid a sudden movement that might bring the 
beast upon her, she sank to the floor, crouch against the wall and 
try to shield the babe with her tremble body without withdraw her 
gaze from the luminous orb that were killing her. no thought of her 
husband came to her in her agony--no hope nor suggestion of rescue or 
escape. her capacity for thought and feeling had narrow to the 
dimensions of a single emotion--fear of the animal's spring, of the 
impact of its body, the buffet of its great arms, the feel of its 
teeth in her throat, the mangle of her babe. motionless now and in 
absolute silence, she await her doom, the moments grow to hours, to 
years, to ages; and still those devilish eyes maintain their watch. 

return to his cabin late at night with a deer on his shoulder 
charles marlowe try the door. it did not yield. he knocked; there was 
no answer. he laid down his deer and went round to the window. as he 
turn the angle of the building he fancy he heard a sound as of 
stealthy footfall and a rustling in the undergrowth of the forest, but 
they were too slight for certainty, even to his practised ear. 
approach the window, and to his surprise finding it open, he threw 
his leg over the sill and entered. all was dark and silence. he 
grope his way to the fire-place, struck a match and lit a candle. 

then he look about. cower on the floor against a wall was his wife, 
clasp his child. as he sprang toward her she rose and broke into 
laughter, long, loud, and mechanical, devoid of glad and devoid of 
sense--the laughter that is not out of keeping with the clank of a 
chain. hardly knowing what he did he extend his arms. she laid the 
babe in them. it was dead--pressed to death in its mother's embrace. 

iii 

the theory of the defense 

that is what occur during a night in a forest, but not all of it did 
irene marlowe relate to jenner brading; not all of it was known to her. 
when she had conclude the sun was below the horizon and the long summer 
twilight had begun to deepen in the hollow of the land. for some 
moments brade was silent, expect the narrative to be carry 
forward to some definite connection with the conversation introduce 
it; but the narrator was as silent as he, her face averted, her hand 
clasp and unclasp themselves as they lay in her lap, with a 
singular suggestion of an activity independent of her will. 

"it is a sad, a terrible story," said brade at last, "but i do not 
understand. you call charles marlowe father; that i know. that he is old 
before his time, broken by some great sorrow, i have seen, or thought i 
saw. but, pardon me, you said that you--that you--" 

"that i am insane," said the girl, without a movement of head or body. 

"but, irene, you say--please, dear, do not look away from me--you say 
that the child was dead, not demented." 

"yes, that one--i am the second. i was born three month after that 
night, my mother being merciful permit to lay down her life in 
give me mine." 

brade was again silent; he was a trifle daze and could not at once 
think of the right thing to say. her face was still turn away. in his 
embarrassment he reach impulsive toward the hand that lay close 
and unclose in her lap, but something--he could not have said what-- 
restrained him. he then remembered, vaguely, that he had never 
altogether care to take her hand. 

"is it likely," she resumed, "that a person born under such 
circumstances is like others--is what you call sane?" 

brade did not reply; he was preoccupied with a new thought that was 
taking shape in his mind--what a scientist would have call an 
hypothesis; a detective, a theory. it might throw an add light, albeit 
a lurid one, upon such doubt of her sanity as her own assertion had not 
dispelled. 

the country was still new and, outside the villages, sparse populated. 
the professional hunter was still a familiar figure, and among his 
trophy were head and pelt of the large kind of game. tale 
variously credible of nocturnal meeting with savage animal in lonely 
road were sometimes current, pass through the customary stage of 
growth and decay, and were forgotten. a recent addition to these popular 
apocrypha, originating, apparently, by spontaneous generation in several 
households, was of a panther which had frightened some of their member 
by look in at window by night. the yarn had cause its little ripple 
of excitement--had even attain to the distinction of a place in the 
local newspaper; but brade had given it no attention. its likeness to 
the story to which he had just listen now impress him as perhaps 
more than accidental. was it not possible that the one story had 
suggest the other--that finding congenial conditions in a morbid mind 
and a fertile fancy, it had grown to the tragic tale that he had heard? 

brade recall certain circumstances of the girl's history and 
disposition, of which, with love's incuriosity, he had hitherto been 
heedless--such as her solitary life with her father, at whose house no 
one, apparently, was an acceptable visitor and her strange fear of the 
night, by which those who knew her best account for her never being 
seen after dark. surely in such a mind imagination once kindle might 
burn with a lawless flame, penetrating and envelop the entire 
structure. that she was mad, though the conviction gave him the acutest 
pain, he could no long doubt; she had only mistaken an effect of her 
mental disorder for its cause, bring into imaginary relation with her 
own personality the vagary of the local myth-makers. with some vague 
intention of test his new "theory," and no very definite notion of 
how to set about it he said, gravely, but with hesitation: 

"irene, dear, tell me--i beg you will not take offence, but tell me--" 

"i have told you," she interrupted, speak with a passionate 
earnest that he had not known her to show--"i have already told you 
that we cannot marry; is anything else worth saying?" 

before he could stop her she had sprung from her seat and without 
another word or look was gliding away among the tree toward her 
father's house. brade had risen to detain her; he stood watch her 
in silence until she had vanish in the gloom. sudden he start as 
if he had been shot; his face took on an expression of amaze and 
alarm: in one of the black shadow into which she had disappear he had 
caught a quick, brief glimpse of shining eyes! for an instant he was 
daze and irresolute; then he dashed into the wood after her, shouting: 
"irene, irene, look out! the panther! the panther!" 

in a moment he had pass through the fringe of forest into open ground 
and saw the girl's gray skirt vanish into her father's door. no 
panther was visible. 

iv 

an appeal to the conscience of god 

jenner brading, attorney-at-law, live in a cottage at the edge of the 
town. directly behind the dwelling was the forest. being a bachelor, and 
therefore, by the draconian moral code of the time and place deny the 
service of the only species of domestic servant known thereabout, the 
"hired girl," he board at the village hotel, where also was his 
office. the woodside cottage was merely a lodging maintained--at no 
great cost, to be sure--as an evidence of prosperity and respectability. 
it would hardly do for one to whom the local newspaper had pointed with 
pride as "the foremost jurist of his time" to be "homeless," albeit he 
may sometimes have suspect that the words "home" and "house" were not 
strict synonymous. indeed, his consciousness of the disparity and his 
will to harmonize it were matter of logical inference, for it was 
generally report that soon after the cottage was built its owner had 
made a futile venture in the direction of marriage--had, in truth, gone 
so far as to be reject by the beautiful but eccentric daughter of old 
man marlowe, the recluse. this was public believe because he had told 
it himself and she had not--a reversal of the usual order of things 
which could hardly fail to carry conviction. 

brading's bedroom was at the rear of the house, with a single window 
facing the forest. 

one night he was awaken by a noise at that window; he could hardly 
have said what it was like. with a little thrill of the nerves he sat up 
in bed and laid hold of the revolver which, with a forethought most 
commendable in one addict to the habit of sleep on the ground floor 
with an open window, he had put under his pillow. the room was in 
absolute darkness, but being unterrify he knew where to direct his 
eyes, and there he held them, await in silence what further might 
occur. he could now dim discern the aperture--a square of lighter 
black. presently there appear at its lower edge two gleam eyes that 
burn with a malignant lustre inexpressible terrible! brading's heart 
gave a great jump, then seem to stand still. a chill pass along his 
spine and through his hair; he felt the blood forsake his cheeks. he 
could not have cry out--not to save his life; but being a man of 
courage he would not, to save his life, have done so if he had been 
able. some trepidation his coward body might feel, but his spirit was of 
stern stuff. slow the shining eyes rose with a steady motion that 
seem an approach, and slow rose brading's right hand, holding the 
pistol. he fired! 

blind by the flash and stun by the report, brade nevertheless 
heard, or fancy that he heard, the wild, high scream of the panther, 
so human in sound, so devilish in suggestion. leap from the bed he 
hasty clothe himself and, pistol in hand, sprang from the door, 
meeting two or three men who came running up from the road. a brief 
explanation was follow by a cautious search of the house. the grass 
was wet with dew; beneath the window it had been trodden and partly 
level for a wide space, from which a devious trail, visible in the 
light of a lantern, led away into the bushes. one of the men stumble 
and fell upon his hands, which as he rose and rub them together were 
slippery. on examination they were seen to be red with blood. 

an encounter, unarmed, with a wound panther was not agreeable to their 
taste; all but brade turn back. he, with lantern and pistol, pushed 
courageous forward into the wood. passing through a difficult 
undergrowth he came into a small opening, and there his courage had its 
reward, for there he found the body of his victim. but it was no 
panther. what it was is told, even to this day, upon a weather-worn 
headstone in the village churchyard, and for many years was attested 
daily at the graveside by the bent figure and sorrow-seamed face of old 
man marlowe, to whose soul, and to the soul of his strange, unhappy 
child, peace. peace and reparation. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of the collected works of ambrose bierce, 
vol. ii: in the midst of life: tale of soldier and civilians, by ambrose bierce 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook ambrose bierce, vol. ii *** 

***** this file should be name 13334-8.txt or 13334-8.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/3/13334/ 

produce by jonathan ingram, carol david and pg distribute proofread 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.net/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation" 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project 
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, "information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation." 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including including checks, online payment and credit card 
donations. to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.net 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
