project gutenberg’s the works of edgar allan poe, by edgar allan poe 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: the works of edgar allan poe 
volume 3 (of 5) of the raven edition 

author: edgar allan poe 

release date: may 19, 2008 [ebook #2149] 
last updated: march 20, 2017 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the works of edgar allan poe *** 




produce by david widger 





the works of edgar allan poe 

in five volumes 

volume 3 

the raven edition 


contents: 

narrative of a. gordon pym 
ligeia 
morella 
a tale of the ragged mountain 
the spectacles 
king pest 
three sunday in a week 





narrative of a. gordon pym 

introductory note 
preface 
upon my return to the united states a few month ago, after the 
extraordinary series of adventure in the south sea and elsewhere, of 
which an account is given in the following pages, accident threw me 
into the society of several gentlemen in richmond, va., who felt deep 
interest in all matter relate to the regions i had visited, and who 
were constant urge it upon me, as a duty, to give my narrative to 
the public. i had several reasons, however, for decline to do so, some 
of which were of a nature altogether private, and concern no person but 
myself; other not so much so. one consideration which deter me was 
that, have kept no journal during a greater portion of the time in 
which i was absent, i fear i should not be able to write, from mere 
memory, a statement so minute and connected as to have the _appearance 
_of that truth it would really possess, barring only the natural and 
unavoidable exaggeration to which all of us are prone when detail 
event which have had powerful influence in exciting the imaginative 
faculties. another reason was, that the incident to be narrate were 
of a nature so positively marvellous that, unsupported as my assertion 
must necessarily be (except by the evidence of a single individual, and 
he a half-breed indian), i could only hope for belief among my family, 
and those of my friends who have had reason, through life, to put faith 
in my veracity--the probability being that the public at large would 
regard what i should put forth as merely an impudent and ingenious 
fiction. a distrust in my own abilities as a writer was, nevertheless, 
one of the principal cause which prevent me from comply with the 
suggestion of my advisers. 

among those gentlemen in virginia who express the greatest interest 
in my statement, more particularly in regard to that portion of it 
which related to the antarctic ocean, was mr. poe, lately editor of 
the “southern literary messenger,” a monthly magazine, publish by mr. 
thomas w. white, in the city of richmond. he strong advise me, 
among others, to prepare at once a full account of what i had seen 
and undergone, and trust to the shrewd and common-sense of the 
public--insisting, with great plausibility, that however roughly, as 
regards mere authorship, my book should be got up, its very uncouthness, 
if there were any, would give it all the better chance of being received 
as truth. 

notwithstanding this representation, i did not make up my mind to do as 
he suggested. he afterward propose (finding that i would not stir in 
the matter) that i should allow him to draw up, in his own words, a 
narrative of the early portion of my adventures, from fact afford 
by myself, publishing it in the “southern messenger” _under the garb 
of fiction. _to this, perceive no objection, i consented, stipulate 
only that my real name should be retained. two numbers of the pretended 
fiction appeared, consequently, in the “messenger” for january and 
february (1837), and, in order that it might certainly be regard as 
fiction, the name of mr. poe was affix to the articles in the table of 
contents of the magazine. 

the manner in which this ruse was received has induce me at length to 
undertake a regular compilation and publication of the adventure in 
question; for i found that, in spite of the air of fable which had been 
so ingenious thrown around that portion of my statement which appear 
in the “messenger” (without alter or distort a single fact), 
the public were still not at all disposed to receive it as fable, and 
several letters were sent to mr. p.’s address, distinct express 
a conviction to the contrary. i thence conclude that the fact of my 
narrative would prove of such a nature as to carry with them sufficient 
evidence of their own authenticity, and that i had consequently little 
to fear on the score of popular incredulity. 

this_ exposé _being made, it will be seen at once how much of what 
follow i claim to be my own writing; and it will also be understood 
that no fact is misrepresent in the first few page which were written 
by mr. poe. even to those reader who have not seen the “messenger,” 
it will be unnecessary to point out where his portion end and my own 
commences; the difference in point of style will be readily perceived. 

a. g. pym. 




chapter 1 

my name is arthur gordon pym. my father was a respectable trader in 
sea-stores at nantucket, where i was born. my maternal grandfather was 
an attorney in good practice. he was fortunate in every thing, and had 
speculate very successful in stocks of the edgarton new bank, as it 
was formerly called. by these and other means he had manage to lay by a 
tolerable sum of money. he was more attach to myself, i believe, than 
to any other person in the world, and i expect to inherit the most 
of his property at his death. he sent me, at six years of age, to 
the school of old mr. ricketts, a gentleman with only one arm and of 
eccentric manners--he is well known to almost every person who has 
visit new bedford. i stay at his school until i was sixteen, when i 
left him for mr. e. ronald’s academy on the hill. here i became intimate 
with the son of mr. barnard, a sea-captain, who generally sail in the 
employ of lloyd and vredenburgh--mr. barnard is also very well known in 
new bedford, and has many relations, i am certain, in edgarton. his son 
was name augustus, and he was nearly two years old than myself. he 
had been on a whaling voyage with his father in the john donaldson, and 
was always talk to me of his adventure in the south pacific ocean. 
i use frequent to go home with him, and remain all day, and sometimes 
all night. we occupy the same bed, and he would be sure to keep me 
awake until almost light, telling me story of the native of the 
island of tinian, and other place he had visit in his travels. at 
last i could not help being interested in what he said, and by degree 
i felt the greatest desire to go to sea. i own a sailboat call the 
ariel, and worth about seventy-five dollars. she had a half-deck or 
cuddy, and was rig sloop-fashion--i forget her tonnage, but she would 
hold ten person without much crowding. in this boat we were in the 
habit of go on some of the maddest freak in the world; and, when i 
now think of them, it appear to me a thousand wonders that i am alive 
to-day. 

i will relate one of these adventure by way of introduction to a 
long and more momentous narrative. one night there was a party at mr. 
barnard’s, and both augustus and myself were not a little intoxicate 
toward the close of it. as usual, in such cases, i took part of his 
bed in preference to go home. he went to sleep, as i thought, very 
quiet (it being near one when the party broke up), and without saying 
a word on his favorite topic. it might have been half an hour from the 
time of our get in bed, and i was just about fall into a doze, 
when he sudden start up, and swore with a terrible oath that he 
would not go to sleep for any arthur pym in christendom, when there was 
so glorious a breeze from the southwest. i never was so astonish in 
my life, not knowing what he intended, and thinking that the wine and 
liquor he had drunk had set him entire beside himself. he proceed 
to talk very coolly, however, saying he knew that i supposed him 
intoxicated, but that he was never more sober in his life. he was only 
tired, he added, of lie in bed on such a fine night like a dog, and 
was determined to get up and dress, and go out on a frolic with the 
boat. i can hardly tell what possessed me, but the words were no soon 
out of his mouth than i felt a thrill of the greatest excitement and 
pleasure, and thought his mad idea one of the most delightful and most 
reasonable things in the world. it was blow almost a gale, and the 
weather was very cold--it being late in october. i sprang out of bed, 
nevertheless, in a kind of ecstasy, and told him i was quite as brave 
as himself, and quite as tired as he was of lie in bed like a dog, 
and quite as ready for any fun or frolic as any augustus barnard in 
nantucket. 

we lost no time in get on our clothes and hurry down to the boat. 
she was lie at the old decay wharf by the lumber-yard of pankey & 
co., and almost thumping her side out against the rough logs. augustus 
got into her and bail her, for she was nearly half full of water. this 
being done, we hoist jib and mainsail, kept full, and start bold 
out to sea. 

the wind, as i before said, blew freshly from the southwest. the night 
was very clear and cold. augustus had taken the helm, and i station 
myself by the mast, on the deck of the cuddy. we flew along at a great 
rate--neither of us have said a word since casting loose from the 
wharf. i now ask my companion what course he intended to steer, and 
what time he thought it probable we should get back. he whistle for a 
few minutes, and then said crustily: “_i_ am go to sea--_you_ may go 
home if you think proper.” turning my eyes upon him, i perceive at once 
that, in spite of his assume _nonchalance_, he was greatly agitated. 
i could see him distinct by the light of the moon--his face was 
pale than any marble, and his hand shook so excessive that he could 
scarcely retain hold of the tiller. i found that something had gone 
wrong, and became seriously alarmed. at this period i knew little 
about the management of a boat, and was now depend entire upon the 
nautical skill of my friend. the wind, too, had sudden increased, as 
we were fast get out of the lee of the land--still i was ashamed 
to betray any trepidation, and for almost half an hour maintain a 
resolute silence. i could stand it no longer, however, and spoke to 
augustus about the propriety of turning back. as before, it was nearly 
a minute before he made answer, or took any notice of my suggestion. 
“by-and-by,” said he at length--“time enough--home by-and-by.” i had 
expect a similar reply, but there was something in the tone of these 
words which fill me with an indescribable feeling of dread. i again 
look at the speaker attentively. his lip were perfectly livid, and 
his knee shook so violent together that he seem scarcely able to 
stand. “for god’s sake, augustus,” i screamed, now heartily frightened, 
“what ail you?--what is the matter?--what _are_ you go to do?” 
“matter!” he stammered, in the greatest apparent surprise, letting go 
the tiller at the same moment, and fall forward into the bottom of 
the boat--“matter--why, nothing is the--matter--going home--d--d--don’t 
you see?” the whole truth now flash upon me. i flew to him and raise 
him up. he was drunk--beastly drunk--he could no long either stand, 
speak, or see. his eyes were perfectly glazed; and as i let him go 
in the extremity of my despair, he roll like a mere log into the 
bilge-water, from which i had lift him. it was evident that, during 
the evening, he had drunk far more than i suspected, and that his 
conduct in bed had been the result of a highly-concentrated state of 
intoxication--a state which, like madness, frequent enable the victim 
to imitate the outward demeanour of one in perfect possession of his 
senses. the cool of the night air, however, had had its usual 
effect--the mental energy began to yield before its influence--and the 
confuse perception which he no doubt then had of his perilous situation 
had assist in hasten the catastrophe. he was now thorough 
insensible, and there was no probability that he would be otherwise for 
many hours. 

it is hardly possible to conceive the extremity of my terror. the fumes 
of the wine lately taken had evaporated, leave me doubly timid and 
irresolute. i knew that i was altogether incapable of manage the 
boat, and that a fierce wind and strong ebb tide were hurry us to 
destruction. a storm was evidently gathering behind us; we had neither 
compass nor provisions; and it was clear that, if we held our present 
course, we should be out of sight of land before daybreak. these 
thoughts, with a crowd of other equally fearful, flash through my 
mind with a bewilder rapidity, and for some moments paralyze me 
beyond the possibility of making any exertion. the boat was go 
through the water at a terrible rate--full before the wind--no reef in 
either jib or mainsail--running her bow completely under the foam. it 
was a thousand wonders she did not broach to--augustus have let go 
the tiller, as i said before, and i being too much agitate to think of 
taking it myself. by good luck, however, she kept steady, and gradual 
i recover some degree of presence of mind. still the wind was 
increase fearfully, and whenever we rose from a plunge forward, the 
sea behind fell comb over our counter, and deluge us with water. i 
was so utterly benumbed, too, in every limb, as to be nearly unconscious 
of sensation. at length i summon up the resolution of despair, 
and rush to the mainsail let it go by the run. as might have been 
expected, it flew over the bows, and, get drench with water, 
carry away the mast short off by the board. this latter accident alone 
save me from instant destruction. under the jib only, i now boom 
along before the wind, shipping heavy sea occasional over the 
counter, but relieved from the terror of immediate death. i took the 
helm, and breathe with greater freedom as i found that there yet 
remain to us a chance of ultimate escape. augustus still lay senseless 
in the bottom of the boat; and as there was imminent danger of his 
drown (the water being nearly a foot deep just where he fell), i 
contrived to raise him partially up, and keep him in a sitting position, 
by passing a rope round his waist, and lashing it to a ringbolt in the 
deck of the cuddy. have thus arrange every thing as well as i could 
in my chill and agitate condition, i recommend myself to god, and 
made up my mind to bear whatever might happen with all the fortitude in 
my power. 

hardly had i come to this resolution, when, suddenly, a loud and long 
scream or yell, as if from the throat of a thousand demons, seem to 
pervade the whole atmosphere around and above the boat. never while i 
live shall i forget the intense agony of terror i experienced at that 
moment. my hair stood erect on my head--i felt the blood congeal 
in my veins--my heart cease utterly to beat, and without have once 
raise my eyes to learn the source of my alarm, i tumble headlong and 
insensible upon the body of my fallen companion. 

i found myself, upon reviving, in the cabin of a large whaling-ship (the 
penguin) bound to nantucket. several person were standing over me, and 
augustus, pale than death, was busy occupy in chafe my hands. 
upon seeing me open my eyes, his exclamation of gratitude and joy 
excited alternate laughter and tear from the rough-looking personage 
who were present. the mystery of our being in existence was now 
soon explained. we had been run down by the whaling-ship, which was 
close-hauled, beating up to nantucket with every sail she could venture 
to set, and consequently running almost at right angle to our own 
course. several men were on the look-out forward, but did not perceive 
our boat until it was an impossible to avoid coming in contact--their 
shout of warning upon seeing us were what so terribly alarm me. the 
huge ship, i was told, rode immediately over us with as much ease as 
our own little vessel would have pass over a feather, and without the 
least perceptible impediment to her progress. not a scream arose from 
the deck of the victim--there was a slight grating sound to be heard 
mingle with the roar of wind and water, as the frail bark which was 
swallow up rub for a moment along the keel of her destroyer--but 
this was all. thinking our boat (which it will be remember was 
dismasted) some mere shell cut adrift as useless, the captain (captain 
e. t. v. block, of new london) was for proceeding on his course without 
trouble himself further about the matter. luckily, there were two 
of the look-out who swore positively to have seen some person at our 
helm, and represent the possibility of yet saving him. a discussion 
ensued, when block grew angry, and, after a while, said that “it was no 
business of his to be eternal watch for egg-shells; that the ship 
should not put about for any such nonsense; and if there was a man run 
down, it was nobody’s fault but his own, he might drown and be dammed” 
or some language to that effect. henderson, the first mate, now took the 
matter up, being just indignant, as well as the whole ship’s crew, 
at a speech evince so base a degree of heartless atrocity. he 
spoke plainly, seeing himself upheld by the men, told the captain he 
considered him a fit subject for the gallows, and that he would disobey 
his orders if he were hang for it the moment he set his foot on shore. 
he strode aft, jostle block (who turn pale and made no answer) 
on one side, and seize the helm, gave the word, in a firm voice, 
hard-a-lee! the men flew to their posts, and the ship went clever 
about. all this had occupy nearly five minutes, and it was supposed to 
be hardly within the bounds of possibility that any individual could be 
saved--allowing any to have been on board the boat. yet, as the reader 
has seen, both augustus and myself were rescued; and our deliverance 
seem to have been brought about by two of those almost inconceivable 
pieces of good fortune which are attribute by the wise and pious to the 
special interference of providence. 

while the ship was yet in stays, the mate lower the jolly-boat and 
jump into her with the very two men, i believe, who spoke up as have 
seen me at the helm. they had just left the lee of the vessel (the moon 
still shining brightly) when she made a long and heavy roll to windward, 
and henderson, at the same moment, start up in his seat bawl out 
to his crew to back water. he would say nothing else--repeating his cry 
impatiently, back water! back water! the men put back as speedy as 
possible, but by this time the ship had gone round, and gotten fully 
under headway, although all hand on board were making great exertion 
to take in sail. in despite of the danger of the attempt, the mate clung 
to the main-chains as soon as they came within his reach. another huge 
lurch now brought the starboard side of the vessel out of water nearly 
as far as her keel, when the cause of his anxiety was render obvious 
enough. the body of a man was seen to be affix in the most singular 
manner to the smooth and shining bottom (the penguin was copper and 
copper-fastened), and beating violent against it with every movement 
of the hull. after several ineffectual efforts, made during the lurch 
of the ship, and at the imminent risk of swamp the boat i was finally 
disengaged from my perilous situation and taken on board--for the body 
prove to be my own. it appear that one of the timber-bolts have 
start and broken a passage through the copper, it had arrest my 
progress as i pass under the ship, and fasten me in so extraordinary 
a manner to her bottom. the head of the bolt had made its way through 
the collar of the green baize jacket i had on, and through the back part 
of my neck, force itself out between two sinew and just below the 
right ear. i was immediately put to bed--although life seem to be 
total extinct. there was no surgeon on board. the captain, however, 
treat me with every attention--to make amends, i presume, in the eyes 
of his crew, for his atrocious behaviour in the previous portion of the 
adventure. 

in the meantime, henderson had again put off from the ship, although 
the wind was now blow almost a hurricane. he had not been gone many 
minutes when he fell in with some fragment of our boat, and shortly 
afterward one of the men with him assert that he could distinguish a 
cry for help at interval amid the roaring of the tempest. this induce 
the hardy seamen to persevere in their search for more than half an 
hour, although repeated signal to return were made them by captain 
block, and although every moment on the water in so frail a boat was 
fraught to them with the most imminent and deadly peril. indeed, it is 
nearly impossible to conceive how the small jolly they were in could 
have escape destruction for a single instant. she was built, however, 
for the whaling service, and was fitted, as i have since had reason to 
believe, with air-boxes, in the manner of some life-boats use on the 
coast of wales. 

after searching in vain for about the period of time just mentioned, 
it was determined to get back to the ship. they had scarcely made this 
resolve when a feeble cry arose from a dark object that float rapid 
by. they pursue and soon overtook it. it prove to be the entire deck 
of the ariel’s cuddy. augustus was struggle near it, apparently in the 
last agonies. upon get hold of him it was found that he was attach 
by a rope to the floating timber. this rope, it will be remembered, i 
had myself tie around his waist, and made fast to a ringbolt, for 
the purpose of keeping him in an upright position, and my so doing, 
it appeared, had been ultimately the means of preserve his life. the 
ariel was slightly put together, and in go down her frame naturally 
went to pieces; the deck of the cuddy, as might have been expected, was 
lifted, by the force of the water rush in, entire from the 
main timbers, and float (with other fragments, no doubt) to the 
surface--augustus was buoy up with it, and thus escape a terrible 
death. 

it was more than an hour after being taken on board the penguin before 
he could give any account of himself, or be made to comprehend the 
nature of the accident which had befallen our boat. at length he became 
thorough aroused, and spoke much of his sensation while in the water. 
upon his first attain any degree of consciousness, he found himself 
beneath the surface, whirl round and round with inconceivable 
rapidity, and with a rope wrap in three or four fold tight about 
his neck. in an instant afterward he felt himself go rapid upward, 
when, his head striking violent against a hard substance, he again 
relapse into insensibility. upon once more revive he was in fuller 
possession of his reason--this was still, however, in the greatest 
degree cloud and confused. he now knew that some accident had 
occurred, and that he was in the water, although his mouth was above 
the surface, and he could breathe with some freedom. possibly, at this 
period the deck was drift rapid before the wind, and drawing him 
after it, as he float upon his back. of course, as long as he could 
have retain this position, it would have been nearly impossible that 
he should be drowned. presently a surge threw him directly athwart the 
deck, and this post he endeavor to maintain, scream at interval 
for help. just before he was discover by mr. henderson, he had been 
oblige to relax his hold through exhaustion, and, fall into the sea, 
had given himself up for lost. during the whole period of his struggle 
he had not the faintest recollection of the ariel, nor of the matter in 
connexion with the source of his disaster. a vague feeling of terror 
and despair had taken entire possession of his faculties. when he was 
finally picked up, every power of his mind had fail him; and, as 
before said, it was nearly an hour after get on board the penguin 
before he became fully aware of his condition. in regard to myself--i 
was resuscitate from a state border very nearly upon death (and 
after every other means had been try in vain for three hour and a 
half) by vigorous friction with flannels bath in hot oil--a proceeding 
suggest by augustus. the wound in my neck, although of an ugly 
appearance, prove of little real consequence, and i soon recover from 
its effects. 

the penguin got into port about nine o’clock in the morning, after 
encounter one of the severest gale ever experienced off nantucket. 
both augustus and myself manage to appear at mr. barnard’s in time for 
breakfast--which, luckily, was somewhat late, owe to the party over 
night. i suppose all at the table were too much fatigue themselves to 
notice our jaded appearance--of course, it would not have borne a very 
rigid scrutiny. schoolboys, however, can accomplish wonders in the way 
of deception, and i verily believe not one of our friends in nantucket 
had the slightest suspicion that the terrible story told by some sailor 
in town of their have run down a vessel at sea and drown some thirty 
or forty poor devils, had reference either to the ariel, my companion, 
or myself. we two have since very frequent talk the matter over--but 
never without a shudder. in one of our conversation augustus frankly 
confessed to me, that in his whole life he had at no time experienced 
so excruciating a sense of dismay, as when on board our little boat 
he first discover the extent of his intoxication, and felt himself 
sink beneath its influence. 




chapter 2 

in no affair of mere prejudice, pro or con, do we deduce inference 
with entire certainty, even from the most simple data. it might be 
supposed that a catastrophe such as i have just related would have 
effectually cool my incipient passion for the sea. on the contrary, i 
never experienced a more ardent longing for the wild adventure incident 
to the life of a navigator than within a week after our miraculous 
deliverance. this short period prove ample long enough to erase from 
my memory the shadows, and bring out in vivid light all the pleasurable 
exciting points of color, all the picturesqueness, of the late perilous 
accident. my conversation with augustus grew daily more frequent and 
more intense full of interest. he had a manner of relate his story 
of the ocean (more than one half of which i now suspect to have 
been sheer fabrications) well adapt to have weight with one of 
my enthusiast temperament and somewhat gloomy although glowing 
imagination. it is strange, too, that he most strong enlist my 
feelings in behalf of the life of a seaman, when he depict his more 
terrible moments of suffering and despair. for the bright side of the 
painting i had a limited sympathy. my vision were of shipwreck and 
famine; of death or captivity among barbarian hordes; of a lifetime 
drag out in sorrow and tears, upon some gray and desolate rock, in 
an ocean unapproachable and unknown. such vision or desires--for they 
amount to desires--are common, i have since been assured, to the whole 
numerous race of the melancholy among men--at the time of which i speak 
i regard them only as prophetic glimpse of a destiny which i felt 
myself in a measure bound to fulfil. augustus thorough enter into my 
state of mind. it is probable, indeed, that our intimate communion had 
result in a partial interchange of character. 

about eighteen month after the period of the ariel’s disaster, the 
firm of lloyd and vredenburgh (a house connected in some manner with the 
messieurs enderby, i believe, of liverpool) were engaged in repair 
and fitting out the brig grampus for a whaling voyage. she was an old 
hulk, and scarcely seaworthy when all was done to her that could be 
done. i hardly know why she was chosen in preference to other good 
vessel belong to the same owners--but so it was. mr. barnard was 
appoint to command her, and augustus was go with him. while the 
brig was get ready, he frequent urge upon me the excellency of 
the opportunity now offer for indulge my desire of travel. he found 
me by no means an unwill listener--yet the matter could not be so 
easily arranged. my father made no direct opposition; but my mother went 
into hysterics at the bare mention of the design; and, more than all, 
my grandfather, from whom i expect much, vow to cut me off with 
a shilling if i should ever broach the subject to him again. these 
difficulties, however, so far from abate my desire, only add fuel to 
the flame. i determined to go at all hazards; and, have made known my 
intentions to augustus, we set about arrange a plan by which it 
might be accomplished. in the meantime i forbore speak to any of my 
relations in regard to the voyage, and, as i busy myself ostensible 
with my usual studies, it was supposed that i had abandoned the design. 
i have since frequent examine my conduct on this occasion with 
sentiment of displeasure as well as of surprise. the intense hypocrisy 
i made use of for the furtherance of my project--an hypocrisy pervade 
every word and action of my life for so long a period of time--could 
only have been render tolerable to myself by the wild and burning 
expectation with which i look forward to the fulfilment of my 
long-cherished vision of travel. 

in pursuance of my scheme of deception, i was necessarily oblige to 
leave much to the management of augustus, who was employ for the 
greater part of every day on board the grampus, attend to some 
arrangement for his father in the cabin and cabin hold. at night, 
however, we were sure to have a conference and talk over our hopes. 
after nearly a month pass in this manner, without our hit upon 
any plan we thought likely to succeed, he told me at last that he had 
determined upon everything necessary. i had a relation living in new 
bedford, a mr. ross, at whose house i was in the habit of spend 
occasional two or three week at a time. the brig was to sail about 
the middle of june (june, 1827), and it was agree that, a day or two 
before her putt to sea, my father was to receive a note, as usual, 
from mr. ross, ask me to come over and spend a fortnight with robert 
and emmet (his sons). augustus charged himself with the indite of 
this note and get it delivered. have set out as supposed, for new 
bedford, i was then to report myself to my companion, who would contrive 
a hiding-place for me in the grampus. this hiding-place, he assured me, 
would be render sufficient comfortable for a residence of many 
days, during which i was not to make my appearance. when the brig had 
proceed so far on her course as to make any turning back a matter out 
of question, i should then, he said, be formal install in all 
the comfort of the cabin; and as to his father, he would only laugh 
heartily at the joke. vessel enough would be met with by which a letter 
might be sent home explain the adventure to my parents. 

the middle of june at length arrived, and every thing had been matured. 
the note was written and delivered, and on a monday morning i left the 
house for the new bedford packet, as supposed. i went, however, straight 
to augustus, who was wait for me at the corner of a street. it had 
been our original plan that i should keep out of the way until dark, and 
then slip on board the brig; but, as there was now a thick fog in our 
favor, it was agree to lose no time in secrete me. augustus led the 
way to the wharf, and i follow at a little distance, envelop in a 
thick seaman’s cloak, which he had brought with him, so that my person 
might not be easily recognized. just as we turn the second corner, 
after passing mr. edmund’s well, who should appear, standing right in 
front of me, and look me full in the face, but old mr. peterson, my 
grandfather. “why, bless my soul, gordon,” said he, after a long pause, 
“why, why,--whose dirty cloak is that you have on?” “sir!” i replied, 
assuming, as well as i could, in the exigency of the moment, an air 
of offend surprise, and talk in the gruffest of all imaginable 
tones--“sir! you are a sum’mat mistaken--my name, in the first place, 
bee’nt nothing at all like goddin, and i’d want you for to know better, 
you blackguard, than to call my new obercoat a darty one.” for my life 
i could hardly refrain from scream with laughter at the odd manner in 
which the old gentleman received this handsome rebuke. he start back 
two or three steps, turn first pale and then excessive red, threw up 
his spectacles, then, putt them down, ran full tilt at me, with 
his umbrella uplifted. he stop short, however, in his career, as if 
struck with a sudden recollection; and presently, turning round, hobble 
off down the street, shake all the while with rage, and mutter 
between his teeth: “won’t do--new glasses--thought it was gordon--d--d 
good-for-nothing salt water long tom.” 

after this narrow escape we proceed with greater caution, and arrive 
at our point of destination in safety. there were only one or two of 
the hand on board, and these were busy forward, do something to the 
forecastle combings. captain barnard, we knew very well, was engaged 
at lloyd and vredenburgh’s, and would remain there until late in the 
evening, so we had little to apprehend on his account. augustus went 
first up the vessel’s side, and in a short while i follow him, without 
being notice by the men at work. we proceed at once into the cabin, 
and found no person there. it was fitted up in the most comfortable 
style--a thing somewhat unusual in a whaling-vessel. there were four 
very excellent staterooms, with wide and convenient berths. there was 
also a large stove, i took notice, and a remarkably thick and valuable 
carpet covering the floor of both the cabin and staterooms. the ceiling 
was full seven feet high, and, in short, every thing appear of a more 
roomy and agreeable nature than i had anticipated. augustus, however, 
would allow me but little time for observation, insist upon the 
necessity of my conceal myself as soon as possible. he led the way 
into his own stateroom, which was on the starboard side of the brig, and 
next to the bulkheads. upon entering, he closed the door and bolt it. 
i thought i had never seen a nice little room than the one in which i 
now found myself. it was about ten feet long, and had only one berth, 
which, as i said before, was wide and convenient. in that portion of 
the closet nearest the bulkhead there was a space of four feet square, 
contain a table, a chair, and a set of hanging shelves full of books, 
chiefly books of voyages and travels. there were many other little 
comfort in the room, among which i ought not to forget a kind of 
safe or refrigerator, in which augustus pointed out to me a host of 
delicacies, both in the eat and drink department. 

he now pressed with his knuckle upon a certain spot of the carpet in 
one corner of the space just mentioned, letting me know that a portion 
of the flooring, about sixteen inch square, had been neat cut out 
and again adjusted. as he pressed, this portion rose up at one end 
sufficient to allow the passage of his finger beneath. in this manner 
he raise the mouth of the trap (to which the carpet was still fasten 
by tacks), and i found that it led into the after hold. he next lit a 
small taper by means of a phosphorous match, and, place the light in a 
dark lantern, descended with it through the opening, bidding me follow. 
i did so, and he then pull the cover upon the hole, by means of a nail 
driven into the under side--the carpet, of course, resume its original 
position on the floor of the stateroom, and all trace of the aperture 
being concealed. 

the taper gave out so feeble a ray that it was with the greatest 
difficulty i could grope my way through the confuse mass of lumber 
among which i now found myself. by degrees, however, my eyes became 
accustomed to the gloom, and i proceed with less trouble, holding 
on to the skirt of my friend’s coat. he brought me, at length, 
after creep and winding through innumerable narrow passages, to an 
iron-bound box, such as is use sometimes for packing fine earthenware. 
it was nearly four feet high, and full six long, but very narrow. two 
large empty oil-casks lay on the top of it, and above these, again, a 
vast quantity of straw matting, pile up as high as the floor of 
the cabin. in every other direction around was wedged as close as 
possible, even up to the ceiling, a complete chaos of almost every 
species of ship-furniture, together with a heterogeneous medley of 
crates, hampers, barrels, and bales, so that it seem a matter no less 
than miraculous that we had discover any passage at all to the box. i 
afterward found that augustus had purposely arrange the stowage in this 
hold with a view to afford me a thorough concealment, have had only 
one assistant in the labour, a man not go out in the brig. 

my companion now show me that one of the end of the box could be 
remove at pleasure. he slip it aside and display the interior, at 
which i was excessive amused. a mattress from one of the cabin berth 
cover the whole of its bottom, and it contained almost every article 
of mere comfort which could be crowded into so small a space, allow 
me, at the same time, sufficient room for my accommodation, either in a 
sitting position or lie at full length. among other things, there were 
some books, pen, ink, and paper, three blankets, a large jug full of 
water, a keg of sea-biscuit, three or four immense bologna sausages, an 
enormous ham, a cold leg of roast mutton, and half a dozen bottle of 
cordial and liqueurs. i proceed immediately to take possession of my 
little apartment, and this with feelings of higher satisfaction, i am 
sure, than any monarch ever experienced upon enter a new palace. 
augustus now pointed out to me the method of fastening the open end 
of the box, and then, holding the taper close to the deck, show me a 
piece of dark whipcord lie along it. this, he said, extend from my 
hiding-place throughout all the necessary winding among the lumber, to a 
nail which was driven into the deck of the hold, immediately beneath the 
trap-door leading into his stateroom. by means of this cord i should be 
enable readily to trace my way out without his guidance, provided any 
unlooked-for accident should render such a step necessary. he now took 
his departure, leave with me the lantern, together with a copious 
supply of taper and phosphorous, and promising to pay me a visit as 
often as he could contrive to do so without observation. this was on the 
seventeenth of june. 

i remain three days and nights (as nearly as i could guess) in my 
hiding-place without get out of it at all, except twice for the 
purpose of stretch my limb by standing erect between two crate just 
opposite the opening. during the whole period i saw nothing of augustus; 
but this occasion me little uneasiness, as i knew the brig was 
expect to put to sea every hour, and in the bustle he would not easily 
find opportunity of coming down to me. at length i heard the trap 
open and shut, and presently he call in a low voice, ask if all was 
well, and if there was any thing i wanted. “nothing,” i replied; “i am 
as comfortable as can be; when will the brig sail?” “she will be under 
weigh in less than half an hour,” he answered. “i came to let you know, 
and for fear you should be uneasy at my absence. i shall not have a 
chance of coming down again for some time--perhaps for three or four 
days more. all is go on right aboveboard. after i go up and close the 
trap, do you creep along by the whipcord to where the nail is driven in. 
you will find my watch there--it may be useful to you, as you have no 
daylight to keep time by. i suppose you can’t tell how long you have 
been buried--only three days--this is the twentieth. i would bring the 
watch to your box, but am afraid of being missed.” with this he went up. 

in about an hour after he had gone i distinct felt the brig in motion, 
and congratulate myself upon have at length fairly commence a 
voyage. satisfy with this idea, i determined to make my mind as easy 
as possible, and await the course of event until i should be 
permit to exchange the box for the more roomy, although hardly more 
comfortable, accommodations of the cabin. my first care was to get the 
watch. leave the taper burning, i grope along in the dark, following 
the cord through winding innumerable, in some of which i discover 
that, after toil a long distance, i was brought back within a foot or 
two of a former position. at length i reach the nail, and secure the 
object of my journey, return with it in safety. i now look over 
the books which had been so thoughtful provided, and select the 
expedition of lewis and clarke to the mouth of the columbia. with this 
i amuse myself for some time, when, grow sleepy, i extinguish the 
light with great care, and soon fell into a sound slumber. 

upon awakening i felt strange confuse in mind, and some time elapse 
before i could bring to recollection all the various circumstances of 
my situation. by degrees, however, i remember all. striking a light, i 
look at the watch; but it was run down, and there were, consequently, 
no means of determine how long i slept. my limb were greatly cramped, 
and i was forced to relieve them by standing between the crates. 
presently feeling an almost ravenous appetite, i bethought myself of the 
cold mutton, some of which i had eaten just before go to sleep, and 
found excellent. what was my astonishment in discover it to be in a 
state of absolute putrefaction! this circumstance occasion me great 
disquietude; for, connect it with the disorder of mind i experienced 
upon awakening, i began to suppose that i must have slept for an 
inordinate long period of time. the close atmosphere of the hold might 
have had something to do with this, and might, in the end, be productive 
of the most serious results. my head ache excessively; i fancy that i 
drew every breath with difficulty; and, in short, i was oppress with 
a multitude of gloomy feelings. still i could not venture to make any 
disturbance by opening the trap or otherwise, and, have wound up the 
watch, contented myself as well as possible. 

throughout the whole of the next tedious twenty-four hour no person 
came to my relief, and i could not help accuse augustus of the 
grossest inattention. what alarm me chiefly was, that the water in 
my jug was reduce to about half a pint, and i was suffering much from 
thirst, have eaten freely of the bologna sausage after the loss of my 
mutton. i became very uneasy, and could no long take any interest in 
my books. i was overpowered, too, with a desire to sleep, yet tremble 
at the thought of indulge it, lest there might exist some pernicious 
influence, like that of burning charcoal, in the confine air of the 
hold. in the meantime the roll of the brig told me that we were far in 
the main ocean, and a dull hum sound, which reach my ear as if 
from an immense distance, convinced me no ordinary gale was blowing. i 
could not imagine a reason for the absence of augustus. we were surely 
far enough advanced on our voyage to allow of my go up. some accident 
might have happen to him--but i could think of none which would 
account for his suffering me to remain so long a prisoner, except, 
indeed, his have sudden die or fallen overboard, and upon this idea 
i could not dwell with any degree of patience. it was possible that we 
had been baffle by head winds, and were still in the near vicinity of 
nantucket. this notion, however, i was forced to abandon; for such being 
the case, the brig must have frequent gone about; and i was entire 
satisfied, from her continual inclination to the larboard, that she had 
been sailing all along with a steady breeze on her starboard quarter. 
besides, grant that we were still in the neighborhood of the 
island, why should not augustus have visit me and informed me of 
the circumstance? ponder in this manner upon the difficulty of 
my solitary and cheerless condition, i resolve to wait yet another 
twenty-four hours, when, if no relief were obtained, i would make my way 
to the trap, and endeavour either to hold a parley with my friend, 
or get at least a little fresh air through the opening, and a further 
supply of water from the stateroom. while occupy with this thought, 
however, i fell in spite of every exertion to the contrary, into a state 
of profound sleep, or rather stupor. my dream were of the most terrific 
description. every species of calamity and horror befell me. among other 
misery i was smother to death between huge pillows, by demon of 
the most ghastly and ferocious aspect. immense serpent held me in their 
embrace, and look earnest in my face with their fearful shining 
eyes. then deserts, limitless, and of the most forlorn and awe-inspiring 
character, spread themselves out before me. immensely tall trunks of 
trees, gray and leafless, rose up in endless succession as far as the 
eye could reach. their roots were conceal in wide-spreading morasses, 
whose dreary water lay intense black, still, and altogether terrible, 
beneath. and the strange tree seem endow with a human vitality, and 
wave to and fro their skeleton arms, were crying to the silent waters 
for mercy, in the shrill and piercing accent of the most acute agony 
and despair. the scene changed; and i stood, naked and alone, amidst the 
burning sand-plains of sahara. at my feet lay crouch a fierce lion 
of the tropics. sudden his wild eyes open and fell upon me. with 
a conclusive bound he sprang to his feet, and laid bare his horrible 
teeth. in another instant there burst from his red throat a roar like 
the thunder of the firmament, and i fell impetuous to the earth. 
stifle in a paroxysm of terror, i at last found myself partially 
awake. my dream, then, was not all a dream. now, at least, i was in 
possession of my senses. the paw of some huge and real monster were 
pressing heavy upon my bosom--his hot breath was in my ear--and his 
white and ghastly fang were gleam upon me through the gloom. 

had a thousand lives hung upon the movement of a limb or the utterance 
of a syllable, i could have neither stir nor spoken. the beast, 
whatever it was, retain his position without attempt any immediate 
violence, while i lay in an utterly helpless, and, i fancied, a die 
condition beneath him. i felt that my powers of body and mind were fast 
leave me--in a word, that i was perishing, and perishing of sheer 
fright. my brain swam--i grew deadly sick--my vision failed--even the 
glaring eyeball above me grew dim. making a last strong effort, i at 
length breathe a faint ejaculation to god, and resigned myself to 
die. the sound of my voice seem to arouse all the latent fury of the 
animal. he precipitate himself at full length upon my body; but what 
was my astonishment, when, with a long and low whine, he commence 
licking my face and hand with the greatest eagerness, and with the 
most extravagant demonstration of affection and joy! i was bewildered, 
utterly lost in amazement--but i could not forget the peculiar whine 
of my newfoundland dog tiger, and the odd manner of his caress i well 
knew. it was he. i experienced a sudden rush of blood to my temples--a 
giddy and overpowering sense of deliverance and reanimation. i rose 
hurried from the mattress upon which i had been lying, and, throw 
myself upon the neck of my faithful follower and friend, relieved the 
long oppression of my bosom in a flood of the most passionate tears. 

as upon a former occasion my conception were in a state of the greatest 
indistinct and confusion after leave the mattress. for a long time 
i found it nearly impossible to connect any ideas; but, by very slow 
degrees, my thinking faculty returned, and i again call to memory 
the several incident of my condition. for the presence of tiger i try 
in vain to account; and after busy myself with a thousand different 
conjecture respecting him, was forced to content myself with rejoicing 
that he was with me to share my dreary solitude, and render me comfort 
by his caresses. most people love their dogs--but for tiger i had an 
affection far more ardent than common; and never, certainly, did 
any creature more truly deserve it. for seven years he had been my 
inseparable companion, and in a multitude of instance had given 
evidence of all the noble quality for which we value the animal. i 
had rescue him, when a puppy, from the clutches of a malignant little 
villain in nantucket who was leading him, with a rope around his neck, 
to the water; and the grown dog repaid the obligation, about three years 
afterward, by saving me from the bludgeon of a street robber. 

get now hold of the watch, i found, upon apply it to my ear, that 
it had again run down; but at this i was not at all surprised, being 
convinced, from the peculiar state of my feelings, that i had slept, 
as before, for a very long period of time, how long, it was of course 
impossible to say. i was burning up with fever, and my thirst was almost 
intolerable. i felt about the box for my little remain supply of 
water, for i had no light, the taper have burnt to the socket of the 
lantern, and the phosphorus-box not coming readily to hand. upon finding 
the jug, however, i discover it to be empty--tiger, no doubt, have 
been tempt to drink it, as well as to devour the remnant of mutton, 
the bone of which lay, well picked, by the opening of the box. the 
spoil meat i could well spare, but my heart sank as i thought of the 
water. i was feeble in the extreme--so much so that i shook all over, 
as with an ague, at the slightest movement or exertion. to add to my 
troubles, the brig was pitch and rolling with great violence, and 
the oil-casks which lay upon my box were in momentary danger of fall 
down, so as to block up the only way of ingress or egress. i felt, also, 
terrible suffering from sea-sickness. these consideration determined 
me to make my way, at all hazards, to the trap, and obtain immediate 
relief, before i should be incapacitate from do so altogether. 
have come to this resolve, i again felt about for the phosphorus-box 
and tapers. the former i found after some little trouble; but, not 
discover the taper as soon as i had expect (for i remember very 
nearly the spot in which i had placed them), i gave up the search for 
the present, and bidding tiger lie quiet, began at once my journey 
toward the trap. 

in this attempt my great feeble became more than ever apparent. 
it was with the utmost difficulty i could crawl along at all, and 
very frequent my limb sank sudden from beneath me; when, fall 
prostrate on my face, i would remain for some minutes in a state 
border on insensibility. still i struggle forward by slow degrees, 
dread every moment that i should swoon amid the narrow and intricate 
winding of the lumber, in which event i had nothing but death to expect 
as the result. at length, upon making a push forward with all the energy 
i could command, i struck my forehead violent against the sharp corner 
of an iron-bound crate. the accident only stun me for a few moments; 
but i found, to my inexpressible grief, that the quick and violent 
roll of the vessel had thrown the crate entire across my path, so as 
effectually to block up the passage. with my utmost exertion i could 
not move it a single inch from its position, it being close wedged 
in among the surrounding box and ship-furniture. it became necessary, 
therefore, enfeeble as i was, either to leave the guidance of the 
whipcord and seek out a new passage, or to climb over the obstacle, and 
resume the path on the other side. the former alternative present too 
many difficulty and danger to be thought of without a shudder. in my 
present weak state of both mind and body, i should infallibly lose 
my way if i attempt it, and perish miserably amid the dismal and 
disgust labyrinth of the hold. i proceeded, therefore, without 
hesitation, to summon up all my remain strength and fortitude, and 
endeavour, as i best might, to clamber over the crate. 

upon standing erect, with this end in view, i found the undertaking even 
a more serious task than my fear had led me to imagine. on each side of 
the narrow passage arose a complete wall of various heavy lumber, which 
the least blunder on my part might be the means of bring down upon my 
head; or, if this accident did not occur, the path might be effectually 
block up against my return by the descend mass, as it was in front 
by the obstacle there. the crate itself was a long and unwieldy box, 
upon which no foothold could be obtained. in vain i attempted, by every 
means in my power, to reach the top, with the hope of being thus enable 
to draw myself up. had i succeed in reach it, it is certain that 
my strength would have prove utterly inadequate to the task of get 
over, and it was better in every respect that i failed. at length, in 
a desperate effort to force the crate from its ground, i felt a strong 
vibration in the side next me. i thrust my hand eager to the edge 
of the planks, and found that a very large one was loose. with my 
pocket-knife, which, luckily, i had with me, i succeeded, after great 
labour, in pry it entire off; and get it through the aperture, 
discovered, to my exceed joy, that there were no boards on the 
opposite side--in other words, that the top was wanting, it being the 
bottom through which i had forced my way. i now met with no important 
difficulty in proceeding along the line until i finally reach the 
nail. with a beating heart i stood erect, and with a gentle touch 
pressed against the cover of the trap. it did not rise as soon as i 
had expected, and i pressed it with somewhat more determination, 
still dread lest some other person than augustus might be in his 
state-room. the door, however, to my astonishment, remain steady, and 
i became somewhat uneasy, for i knew that it had formerly require 
but little or no effort to remove it. i pushed it strongly--it was 
nevertheless firm: with all my strength--it still did not give way: with 
rage, with fury, with despair--it set at defiance my utmost efforts; and 
it was evident, from the unyield nature of the resistance, that the 
hole had either been discover and effectually nail up, or that some 
immense weight had been placed upon it, which it was useless to think of 
removing. 

my sensation were those of extreme horror and dismay. in vain i 
attempt to reason on the probable cause of my being thus entombed. i 
could summon up no connected chain of reflection, and, sink on the 
floor, gave way, unresistingly, to the most gloomy imaginings, in 
which the dreadful death of thirst, famine, suffocation, and premature 
interment crowded upon me as the prominent disaster to be encountered. 
at length there return to me some portion of presence of mind. i 
arose, and felt with my finger for the seam or crack of the aperture. 
have found them, i examine them close to ascertain if they emit 
any light from the state-room; but none was visible. i then forced the 
blade of my pen-knife through them, until i met with some hard obstacle. 
scrape against it, i discover it to be a solid mass of iron, which, 
from its peculiar wavy feel as i pass the blade along it, i conclude 
to be a chain-cable. the only course now left me was to retrace my 
way to the box, and there either yield to my sad fate, or try so to 
tranquil my mind as to admit of my arrange some plan of escape. 
i immediately set about the attempt, and succeeded, after innumerable 
difficulties, in get back. as i sank, utterly exhausted, upon the 
mattress, tiger threw himself at full length by my side, and seem as 
if desirous, by his caresses, of console me in my troubles, and urge 
me to bear them with fortitude. 

the singular of his behavior at length forcibly arrest my 
attention. after licking my face and hand for some minutes, he would 
sudden cease do so, and utter a low whine. upon reach out my 
hand toward him, i then invariable found him lie on his back, with his 
paw uplifted. this conduct, so frequent repeated, appear strange, 
and i could in no manner account for it. as the dog seem distressed, 
i conclude that he had received some injury; and, taking his paw in my 
hands, i examine them one by one, but found no sign of any hurt. i 
then supposed him hungry, and gave him a large piece of ham, which he 
devour with avidity--afterward, however, resume his extraordinary 
manoeuvres. i now imagine that he was suffering, like myself, the 
torment of thirst, and was about adopt this conclusion as the true 
one, when the idea occur to me that i had as yet only examine his 
paws, and that there might possibly be a wound upon some portion of his 
body or head. the latter i felt careful over, but found nothing. on 
passing my hand, however, along his back, i perceive a slight erection 
of the hair extend completely across it. probe this with my finger, 
i discover a string, and tracing it up, found that it encircle the 
whole body. upon a close scrutiny, i came across a small slip of what 
had the feeling of letter paper, through which the string had been 
fasten in such a manner as to bring it immediately beneath the left 
shoulder of the animal. 




chapter 3 

the thought instantly occur to me that the paper was a note from 
augustus, and that some unaccountable accident have happen to 
prevent his relieve me from my dungeon, he had devise this method of 
acquaint me with the true state of affairs. tremble with eagerness, 
i now commence another search for my phosphorus match and tapers. 
i had a confuse recollection of have put them careful away just 
before fall asleep; and, indeed, previous to my last journey to the 
trap, i had been able to remember the exact spot where i had deposit 
them. but now i endeavor in vain to call it to mind, and busy myself 
for a full hour in a fruitless and vexatious search for the missing 
articles; never, surely, was there a more tantalize state of anxiety 
and suspense. at length, while grope about, with my head close to the 
ballast, near the opening of the box, and outside of it, i perceive 
a faint glimmer of light in the direction of the steerage. greatly 
surprised, i endeavor to make my way toward it, as it appear to 
be but a few feet from my position. scarcely had i move with this 
intention, when i lost sight of the glimmer entirely, and, before i 
could bring it into view again, was oblige to feel along by the box 
until i had exactly resume my original situation. now, moving my head 
with caution to and fro, i found that, by proceeding slowly, with great 
care, in an opposite direction to that in which i had at first started, 
i was enable to draw near the light, still keeping it in view. 
presently i came directly upon it (having squeeze my way through 
innumerable narrow windings), and found that it proceed from some 
fragment of my match lie in an empty barrel turn upon its side. i 
was wonder how they came in such a place, when my hand fell upon two 
or three pieces of taper wax, which had been evidently mumble by the 
dog. i conclude at once that he had devour the whole of my supply 
of candles, and i felt hopeless of being ever able to read the note of 
augustus. the small remnant of the wax were so mash up among other 
rubbish in the barrel, that i despair of derive any service from 
them, and left them as they were. the phosphorus, of which there was 
only a speck or two, i gather up as well as i could, and return 
with it, after much difficulty, to my box, where tiger had all the while 
remained. 

what to do next i could not tell. the hold was so intense dark that 
i could not see my hand, however close i would hold it to my face. the 
white slip of paper could barely be discerned, and not even that when 
i look at it directly; by turning the exterior portion of the retina 
toward it--that is to say, by survey it slightly askance, i found 
that it became in some measure perceptible. thus the gloom of my prison 
may be imagined, and the note of my friend, if indeed it were a note 
from him, seem only likely to throw me into further trouble, by 
disquiet to no purpose my already enfeeble and agitate mind. 
in vain i revolve in my brain a multitude of absurd expedient for 
procure light--such expedient precisely as a man in the perturb 
sleep occasion by opium would be apt to fall upon for a similar 
purpose--each and all of which appear by turn to the dreamer the 
most reasonable and the most preposterous of conceptions, just as the 
reasoning or imaginative faculty flicker, alternately, one above the 
other. at last an idea occur to me which seem rational, and which 
gave me cause to wonder, very justly, that i had not entertain 
it before. i placed the slip of paper on the back of a book, and, 
collect the fragment of the phosphorus match which i had brought 
from the barrel, laid them together upon the paper. i then, with the 
palm of my hand, rub the whole over quickly, yet steadily. a clear 
light diffuse itself immediately throughout the whole surface; and had 
there been any writing upon it, i should not have experienced the 
least difficulty, i am sure, in reading it. not a syllable was there, 
however--nothing but a dreary and unsatisfactory blank; the illumination 
die away in a few seconds, and my heart die away within me as it went. 

i have before state more than once that my intellect, for some period 
prior to this, had been in a condition nearly border on idiocy. there 
were, to be sure, momentary interval of perfect sanity, and, now and 
then, even of energy; but these were few. it must be remember that 
i had been, for many days certainly, inhale the almost pestilent 
atmosphere of a close hold in a whaling vessel, and for a long portion 
of that time but scanty supply with water. for the last fourteen 
or fifteen hour i had none--nor had i slept during that time. salt 
provisions of the most exciting kind had been my chief, and, indeed, 
since the loss of the mutton, my only supply of food, with the exception 
of the sea-biscuit; and these latter were utterly useless to me, as 
they were too dry and hard to be swallow in the swollen and parch 
condition of my throat. i was now in a high state of fever, and in 
every respect exceedingly ill. this will account for the fact that many 
miserable hour of despondent elapse after my last adventure with the 
phosphorus, before the thought suggest itself that i had examine only 
one side of the paper. i shall not attempt to describe my feelings 
of rage (for i believe i was more angry than any thing else) when the 
egregious oversight i had committed flash sudden upon my perception. 
the blunder itself would have been unimportant, had not my own folly and 
impetuos render it otherwise--in my disappointment at not finding 
some words upon the slip, i had childish torn it in pieces and thrown 
it away, it was impossible to say where. 

from the worst part of this dilemma i was relieved by the sagacity of 
tiger. have got, after a long search, a small piece of the note, i put 
it to the dog’s nose, and endeavor to make him understand that he must 
bring me the rest of it. to my astonishment, (for i had taught him none 
of the usual trick for which his breed are famous,) he seem to enter 
at once into my meaning, and, rummage about for a few moments, soon 
found another considerable portion. bring me this, he pause awhile, 
and, rubbing his nose against my hand, appear to be wait for 
my approval of what he had done. i pat him on the head, when he 
immediately made off again. it was now some minutes before he came 
back--but when he did come, he brought with him a large slip, which 
prove to be all the paper missing--it have been torn, it seems, 
only into three pieces. luckily, i had no trouble in finding what few 
fragment of the phosphorus were left--being guide by the indistinct 
glow one or two of the particle still emitted. my difficulty had 
taught me the necessity of caution, and i now took time to reflect upon 
what i was about to do. it was very probable, i considered, that some 
words were written upon that side of the paper which had not been 
examined--but which side was that? fitting the pieces together gave me 
no clew in this respect, although it assured me that the words (if there 
were any) would be found all on one side, and connected in a proper 
manner, as written. there was the greater necessity of ascertain the 
point in question beyond a doubt, as the phosphorus remain would be 
altogether insufficient for a third attempt, should i fail in the one i 
was now about to make. i placed the paper on a book as before, and sat 
for some minutes thoughtful revolving the matter over in my mind. at 
last i thought it barely possible that the written side might have 
some uneven on its surface, which a delicate sense of feeling might 
enable me to detect. i determined to make the experiment and pass 
my finger very careful over the side which first present itself. 
nothing, however, was perceptible, and i turn the paper, adjust it 
on the book. i now again carry my forefinger cautious along, when 
i was aware of an exceedingly slight, but still discern glow, which 
follow as it proceeded. this, i knew, must arise from some very minute 
remain particle of the phosphorus with which i had cover the paper 
in my previous attempt. the other, or under side, then, was that on 
which lay the writing, if writing there should finally prove to be. 
again i turn the note, and went to work as i had previous done. 
have rub in the phosphorus, a brilliancy ensue as before--but this 
time several lines of ms. in a large hand, and apparently in red ink, 
became distinct visible. the glimmer, although sufficient bright, 
was but momentary. still, had i not been too greatly excited, there 
would have been ample time enough for me to peruse the whole three 
sentence before me--for i saw there were three. in my anxiety, however, 
to read all at once, i succeed only in reading the seven conclude 
words, which thus appeared--“blood--your life depend upon lie close.” 

had i been able to ascertain the entire contents of the note--the full 
meaning of the admonition which my friend had thus attempt to convey, 
that admonition, even although it should have reveal a story of 
disaster the most unspeakable, could not, i am firm convinced, have 
imbue my mind with one tithe of the harrowing and yet indefinable 
horror with which i was inspired by the fragmentary warning thus 
received. and “blood,” too, that word of all words--so rife at all times 
with mystery, and suffering, and terror--how treble full of import did 
it now appear--how chilly and heavy (disjointed, as it thus was, from 
any foregoing words to qualify or render it distinct) did its vague 
syllable fall, amid the deep gloom of my prison, into the innermost 
recess of my soul! 

augustus had, undoubtedly, good reason for wish me to remain 
concealed, and i form a thousand surmise as to what they could 
be--but i could think of nothing afford a satisfactory solution of 
the mystery. just after return from my last journey to the trap, and 
before my attention had been otherwise direct by the singular conduct 
of tiger, i had come to the resolution of making myself heard at all 
event by those on board, or, if i could not succeed in this directly, 
of try to cut my way through the orlop deck. the half certainty which 
i felt of being able to accomplish one of these two purpose in the last 
emergency, had given me courage (which i should not otherwise have had) 
to endure the evil of my situation. the few words i had been able to 
read, however, had cut me off from these final resources, and i now, for 
the first time, felt all the misery of my fate. in a paroxysm of despair 
i threw myself again upon the mattress, where, for about the period of 
a day and night, i lay in a kind of stupor, relieved only by momentary 
interval of reason and recollection. 

at length i once more arose, and busy myself in reflection upon the 
horrors which encompass me. for another twenty-four hour it was 
barely possible that i might exist without water--for a long time i 
could not do so. during the first portion of my imprison i had made 
free use of the cordial with which augustus had supply me, but they 
only serve to excite fever, without in the least degree assuage 
thirst. i had now only about a gill left, and this was of a species of 
strong peach liqueur at which my stomach revolted. the sausage were 
entire consumed; of the ham nothing remain but a small piece of the 
skin; and all the biscuit, except a few fragment of one, had been eaten 
by tiger. to add to my troubles, i found that my headache was increase 
momentarily, and with it the species of delirium which had distress me 
more or less since my first fall asleep. for some hour past it had 
been with the greatest difficulty i could breathe at all, and now each 
attempt at so do was attend with the most depress spasmodic 
action of the chest. but there was still another and very different 
source of disquietude, and one, indeed, whose harass terror had 
been the chief means of arouse me to exertion from my stupor on the 
mattress. it arose from the demeanor of the dog. 

i first observe an alteration in his conduct while rubbing in the 
phosphorus on the paper in my last attempt. as i rubbed, he ran his nose 
against my hand with a slight snarl; but i was too greatly excited at 
the time to pay much attention to the circumstance. soon afterward, 
it will be remembered, i threw myself on the mattress, and fell into 
a species of lethargy. presently i became aware of a singular hiss 
sound close at my ears, and discover it to proceed from tiger, who was 
pant and wheeze in a state of the greatest apparent excitement, his 
eyeball flash fierce through the gloom. i spoke to him, when he 
reply with a low growl, and then remain quiet. presently i relapse 
into my stupor, from which i was again awaken in a similar manner. 
this was repeated three or four times, until finally his behaviour 
inspired me with so great a degree of fear, that i became fully aroused. 
he was now lie close by the door of the box, snarl fearfully, 
although in a kind of undertone, and grind his teeth as if strong 
convulsed. i had no doubt whatever that the want of water or the 
confine atmosphere of the hold had driven him mad, and i was at a loss 
what course to pursue. i could not endure the thought of killing him, 
yet it seem absolutely necessary for my own safety. i could distinct 
perceive his eyes fasten upon me with an expression of the most deadly 
animosity, and i expect every instant that he would attack me. at last 
i could endure my terrible situation no longer, and determined to make 
my way from the box at all hazards, and dispatch him, if his opposition 
should render it necessary for me to do so. to get out, i had to 
pass directly over his body, and he already seem to anticipate my 
design--missing himself upon his fore-legs (as i perceive by the 
alter position of his eyes), and display the whole of his white 
fangs, which were easily discernible. i took the remains of the 
ham-skin, and the bottle contain the liqueur, and secure them about 
my person, together with a large carving-knife which augustus had left 
me--then, fold my cloak around me as close as possible, i made a 
movement toward the mouth of the box. no soon did i do this, than the 
dog sprang with a loud growl toward my throat. the whole weight of his 
body struck me on the right shoulder, and i fell violent to the left, 
while the enrage animal pass entire over me. i had fallen upon my 
knees, with my head bury among the blankets, and these protect 
me from a second furious assault, during which i felt the sharp teeth 
pressing vigorous upon the woollen which envelop my neck--yet, 
luckily, without being able to penetrate all the folds. i was now 
beneath the dog, and a few moments would place me completely in his 
power. despair gave me strength, and i rose bold up, shake him from 
me by main force, and drag with me the blanket from the mattress. 
these i now threw over him, and before he could extricate himself, i had 
got through the door and closed it effectually against his pursuit. 
in this struggle, however, i had been forced to drop the morsel of 
ham-skin, and i now found my whole stock of provisions reduce to a 
single gill of liqueur. as this reflection cross my mind, i felt 
myself actuate by one of those fit of perverse which might be 
supposed to influence a spoil child in similar circumstances, and, 
raise the bottle to my lips, i drain it to the last drop, and dashed 
it furiously upon the floor. 

scarcely had the echo of the crash die away, when i heard my name 
pronounced in an eager but subdued voice, issue from the direction of 
the steerage. so unexpected was anything of the kind, and so intense was 
the emotion excited within me by the sound, that i endeavour in vain 
to reply. my powers of speech total failed, and in an agony of terror 
lest my friend should conclude me dead, and return without attempt 
to reach me, i stood up between the crate near the door of the box, 
tremble convulsively, and gasp and struggle for utterance. had 
a thousand words depend upon a syllable, i could not have spoken 
it. there was a slight movement now audible among the lumber somewhere 
forward of my station. the sound presently grew less distinct, then 
again less so, and still less. shall i ever forget my feelings at this 
moment? he was going--my friend, my companion, from whom i had a right 
to expect so much--he was going--he would abandon me--he was gone! he 
would leave me to perish miserably, to expire in the most horrible and 
loathesome of dungeons--and one word, one little syllable, would save 
me--yet that single syllable i could not utter! i felt, i am sure, more 
than ten thousand times the agony of death itself. my brain reeled, 
and i fell, deadly sick, against the end of the box. 

as i fell the carving-knife was shaken out from the waist-band of my 
pantaloons, and drop with a rattling sound to the floor. never did 
any strain of the richest melody come so sweet to my ears! with the 
intensest anxiety i listen to ascertain the effect of the noise upon 
augustus--for i knew that the person who call my name could be no one 
but himself. all was silent for some moments. at length i again heard 
the word “arthur!” repeated in a low tone, and one full of hesitation. 
revive hope loosen at once my powers of speech, and i now scream 
at the top of my voice, “augustus! oh, augustus!” “hush! for god’s sake 
be silent!” he replied, in a voice tremble with agitation; “i will be 
with you immediately--as soon as i can make my way through the hold.” 
for a long time i heard him moving among the lumber, and every moment 
seem to me an age. at length i felt his hand upon my shoulder, and he 
placed, at the same moment, a bottle of water to my lips. those only who 
have been sudden redeem from the jaws of the tomb, or who have known 
the insufferable torment of thirst under circumstances as aggravate as 
those which encompass me in my dreary prison, can form any idea of the 
unutterable transport which that one long draught of the richest of all 
physical luxury afforded. 

when i had in some degree satisfy my thirst, augustus produce from 
his pocket three or four boil potatoes, which i devour with the 
greatest avidity. he had brought with him a light in a dark lantern, and 
the grateful ray afford me scarcely less comfort than the food and 
drink. but i was impatient to learn the cause of his protract absence, 
and he proceed to recount what had happen on board during my 
incarceration. 




chapter 4 

the brig put to sea, as i had supposed, in about an hour after he had 
left the watch. this was on the twentieth of june. it will be remember 
that i had then been in the hold for three days; and, during this 
period, there was so constant a bustle on board, and so much running 
to and fro, especially in the cabin and staterooms, that he had had no 
chance of visiting me without the risk of have the secret of the trap 
discovered. when at length he did come, i had assured him that i was 
do as well as possible; and, therefore, for the two next days he 
felt but little uneasy on my account--still, however, watch an 
opportunity of go down. it was not until the fourth day that he found 
one. several times during this interval he had made up his mind to let 
his father know of the adventure, and have me come up at once; but we 
were still within reach distance of nantucket, and it was doubtful, 
from some expression which had escape captain barnard, whether he 
would not immediately put back if he discover me to be on board. 
besides, upon thinking the matter over, augustus, so he told me, could 
not imagine that i was in immediate want, or that i would hesitate, 
in such case, to make myself heard at the trap. when, therefore, he 
considered everything he conclude to let me stay until he could meet 
with an opportunity of visiting me unobserved. this, as i said before, 
did not occur until the fourth day after his bring me the watch, 
and the seventh since i had first enter the hold. he then went down 
without taking with him any water or provisions, intend in the first 
place merely to call my attention, and get me to come from the box to 
the trap,--when he would go up to the stateroom and thence hand me down 
a supply. when he descended for this purpose he found that i was asleep, 
for it seem that i was snore very loudly. from all the calculation 
i can make on the subject, this must have been the slumber into which 
i fell just after my return from the trap with the watch, and which, 
consequently, must have last for more than three entire days and 
nights at the very least. latterly, i have had reason both from my own 
experience and the assurance of others, to be acquaint with the strong 
soporific effects of the stench arise from old fish-oil when close 
confined; and when i think of the condition of the hold in which i was 
imprisoned, and the long period during which the brig had been use as a 
whaling vessel, i am more inclined to wonder that i awoke at all, after 
once fall asleep, than that i should have slept uninterrupted for 
the period specify above. 

augustus call to me at first in a low voice and without close the 
trap--but i made him no reply. he then shut the trap, and spoke to me in 
a louder, and finally in a very loud tone--still i continue to snore. 
he was now at a loss what to do. it would take him some time to make his 
way through the lumber to my box, and in the meanwhile his absence would 
be notice by captain barnard, who had occasion for his service every 
minute, in arrange and copy papers connected with the business of 
the voyage. he determined, therefore, upon reflection, to ascend, and 
await another opportunity of visiting me. he was the more easily induce 
to this resolve, as my slumber appear to be of the most tranquil 
nature, and he could not suppose that i had undergone any inconvenience 
from my incarceration. he had just made up his mind on these points 
when his attention was arrest by an unusual bustle, the sound of 
which proceed apparently from the cabin. he sprang through the trap 
as quick as possible, closed it, and threw open the door of his 
stateroom. no soon had he put his foot over the threshold than a 
pistol flash in his face, and he was knock down, at the same moment, 
by a blow from a handspike. 

a strong hand held him on the cabin floor, with a tight grasp upon 
his throat; still he was able to see what was go on around him. 
his father was tie hand and foot, and lie along the steps of the 
companion-way, with his head down, and a deep wound in the forehead, 
from which the blood was flowing in a continue stream. he spoke not a 
word, and was apparently dying. over him stood the first mate, eye 
him with an expression of fiendish derision, and deliberate searching 
his pockets, from which he presently drew forth a large wallet and a 
chronometer. seven of the crew (among whom was the cook, a negro) were 
rummage the stateroom on the larboard for arms, where they soon 
equip themselves with musket and ammunition. besides augustus and 
captain barnard, there were nine men altogether in the cabin, and these 
among the most ruffianly of the brig’s company. the villain now went 
upon deck, taking my friend with them after have secure his arms 
behind his back. they proceed straight to the forecastle, which was 
fasten down--two of the mutineer standing by it with axes--two also 
at the main hatch. the mate call out in a loud voice: “do you hear 
there below? tumble up with you, one by one--now, mark that--and no 
grumbling!” it was some minutes before any one appeared:--at last an 
englishman, who had ship as a raw hand, came up, weeping piteously, 
and entreat the mate, in the most humble manner, to spare his life. 
the only reply was a blow on the forehead from an axe. the poor fellow 
fell to the deck without a groan, and the black cook lift him up in 
his arms as he would a child, and toss him deliberate into the sea. 
hearing the blow and the plunge of the body, the men below could now 
be induce to venture on deck neither by threat nor promises, until a 
proposition was made to smoke them out. a general rush then ensued, 
and for a moment it seem possible that the brig might be retaken. 
the mutineers, however, succeed at last in close the forecastle 
effectually before more than six of their opponent could get up. 
these six, finding themselves so greatly outnumber and without arms, 
submit after a brief struggle. the mate gave them fair words--no 
doubt with a view of induce those below to yield, for they had no 
difficulty in hearing all that was said on deck. the result prove his 
sagacity, no less than his diabolical villainy. all in the forecastle 
presently signify their intention of submitting, and, ascend one 
by one, were pinion and then thrown on their backs, together with the 
first six--there being in all, of the crew who were not concerned in the 
mutiny, twenty-seven. 

a scene of the most horrible butchery ensued. the bound seamen were 
drag to the gangway. here the cook stood with an axe, striking each 
victim on the head as he was forced over the side of the vessel by the 
other mutineers. in this manner twenty-two perished, and augustus had 
given himself up for lost, expect every moment his own turn to come 
next. but it seem that the villain were now either weary, or in 
some measure disgust with their bloody labour; for the four remain 
prisoners, together with my friend, who had been thrown on the deck with 
the rest, were respite while the mate sent below for rum, and the whole 
murderous party held a drunken carouse, which last until sunset. they 
now fell to dispute in regard to the fate of the survivors, who lay 
not more than four pace off, and could distinguish every word said. 
upon some of the mutineer the liquor appear to have a soften 
effect, for several voice were heard in favor of release the captive 
altogether, on condition of join the mutiny and share the profits. 
the black cook, however (who in all respects was a perfect demon, 
and who seem to exert as much influence, if not more, than the 
mate himself), would listen to no proposition of the kind, and rose 
repeatedly for the purpose of resume his work at the gangway. 
fortunately he was so far overcome by intoxicate as to be easily 
restrained by the less bloodthirsty of the party, among whom was a 
line-manager, who went by the name of dirk peters. this man was the 
son of an indian squaw of the tribe of upsarokas, who live among the 
fastness of the black hills, near the source of the missouri. his 
father was a fur-trader, i believe, or at least connected in some manner 
with the indian trading-posts on lewis river. peters himself was one of 
the most ferocious-looking men i ever beheld. he was short in stature, 
not more than four feet eight inch high, but his limb were of 
herculean mould. his hands, especially, were so enormously thick and 
broad as hardly to retain a human shape. his arms, as well as legs, 
were bowed in the most singular manner, and appear to possess no 
flexible whatever. his head was equally deformed, being of immense 
size, with an indentation on the crown (like that on the head of most 
negroes), and entire bald. to conceal this latter deficiency, which 
did not proceed from old age, he usually wore a wig form of any 
hair-like material which present itself--occasionally the skin of a 
spain dog or america grizzly bear. at the time spoken of, he had on a 
portion of one of these bearskins; and it add no little to the natural 
ferocity of his countenance, which betook of the upsaroka character. the 
mouth extend nearly from ear to ear, the lip were thin, and seemed, 
like some other portion of his frame, to be devoid of natural pliancy, 
so that the ruling expression never varied under the influence of any 
emotion whatever. this ruling expression may be conceive when it is 
considered that the teeth were exceedingly long and protruding, and 
never even partially covered, in any instance, by the lips. to pass this 
man with a casual glance, one might imagine him to be convulse with 
laughter, but a second look would induce a shudder acknowledgment, 
that if such an expression were indicative of merriment, the merriment 
must be that of a demon. of this singular being many anecdote were 
prevalent among the seafaring men of nantucket. these anecdote went to 
prove his prodigious strength when under excitement, and some of them 
had given rise to a doubt of his sanity. but on board the grampus, it 
seems, he was regarded, at the time of the mutiny, with feelings more of 
derision than of anything else. i have been thus particular in speak 
of dirk peters, because, ferocious as he appeared, he prove the main 
instrument in preserve the life of augustus, and because i shall 
have frequent occasion to mention him hereafter in the course of my 
narrative--a narrative, let me here say, which, in its latter portions, 
will be found to include incident of a nature so entire out of the 
range of human experience, and for this reason so far beyond the limit 
of human credulity, that i proceed in utter hopeless of obtain 
credence for all that i shall tell, yet confident trust in time 
and progress science to verify some of the most important and most 
improbable of my statements. 

after much indecision and two or three violent quarrels, it was 
determined at last that all the prisoner (with the exception of 
augustus, whom peters insist in a jocular manner upon keeping as his 
clerk) should be set adrift in one of the smallest whaleboats. the 
mate went down into the cabin to see if captain barnard was still 
living--for, it will be remembered, he was left below when the mutineer 
came up. presently the two made their appearance, the captain pale as 
death, but somewhat recover from the effects of his wound. he spoke 
to the men in a voice hardly articulate, entreat them not to set him 
adrift, but to return to their duty, and promising to land them wherever 
they chose, and to take no steps for bring them to justice. he might 
as well have spoken to the winds. two of the ruffian seize him by the 
arms and hurl him over the brig’s side into the boat, which had been 
lower while the mate went below. the four men who were lie on the 
deck were then untie and ordered to follow, which they did without 
attempt any resistance--augustus being still left in his painful 
position, although he struggle and pray only for the poor 
satisfaction of being permit to bid his father farewell. a handful of 
sea-biscuit and a jug of water were now hand down; but neither mast, 
sail, oar, nor compass. the boat was tow astern for a few minutes, 
during which the mutineer held another consultation--it was then 
finally cut adrift. by this time night had come on--there were neither 
moon nor stars visible--and a short and ugly sea was running, although 
there was no great deal of wind. the boat was instantly out of sight, 
and little hope could be entertain for the unfortunate sufferer who 
were in it. this event happened, however, in latitude 35 degree 30’ 
north, longitude 61 degree 20’ west, and consequently at no very great 
distance from the bermuda islands. augustus therefore endeavor to 
console himself with the idea that the boat might either succeed in 
reach the land, or come sufficient near to be fallen in with by 
vessel off the coast. 

all sail was now put upon the brig, and she continue her original 
course to the southwest--the mutineer being bent upon some pirate 
expedition, in which, from all that could be understood, a ship was to 
be intercept on her way from the cape verd island to porto rico. no 
attention was paid to augustus, who was untie and suffer to go about 
anywhere forward of the cabin companion-way. dirk peters treat him 
with some degree of kindness, and on one occasion save him from 
the brutality of the cook. his situation was still one of the most 
precarious, as the men were continual intoxicated, and there was no 
rely upon their continue good-humor or careless in regard to 
himself. his anxiety on my account he represented, however, as the most 
distressing result of his condition; and, indeed, i had never reason to 
doubt the sincerity of his friendship. more than once he had resolve 
to acquaint the mutineer with the secret of my being on board, but was 
restrained from so doing, partly through recollection of the atrocity 
he had already beheld, and partly through a hope of being able soon to 
bring me relief. for the latter purpose he was constant on the watch; 
but, in spite of the most constant vigilance, three days elapse after 
the boat was cut adrift before any chance occurred. at length, on the 
night of the third day, there came on a heavy blow from the eastward, 
and all hand were call up to take in sail. during the confusion which 
ensued, he made his way below unobserved, and into the stateroom. 
what was his grief and horror in discover that the latter had 
been render a place of deposit for a variety of sea-stores and 
ship-furniture, and that several fathom of old chain-cable, which had 
been stow away beneath the companion-ladder, had been drag thence 
to make room for a chest, and were now lie immediately upon the trap! 
to remove it without discovery was impossible, and he return on 
deck as quick as he could. as he came up, the mate seize him by the 
throat, and demanding what he had been do in the cabin, was about 
fling him over the larboard bulwark, when his life was again 
preserve through the interference of dirk peters. augustus was now put 
in handcuffs (of which there were several pair on board), and his feet 
lash tight together. he was then taken into the steerage, and thrown 
into a lower berth next to the forecastle bulkheads, with the assurance 
that he should never put his foot on deck again “until the brig was no 
long a brig.” this was the expression of the cook, who threw him into 
the berth--it is hardly possible to say what precise meaning intended by 
the phrase. the whole affair, however, prove the ultimate means of my 
relief, as will presently appear. 




chapter 5 

for some minutes after the cook had left the forecastle, augustus 
abandoned himself to despair, never hope to leave the berth alive. 
he now came to the resolution of acquaint the first of the men who 
should come down with my situation, thinking it better to let me take my 
chance with the mutineer than perish of thirst in the hold,--for it had 
been ten days since i was first imprisoned, and my jug of water was not 
a plentiful supply even for four. as he was thinking on this subject, 
the idea came all at once into his head that it might be possible 
to communicate with me by the way of the main hold. in any other 
circumstances, the difficulty and hazard of the undertaking would have 
prevent him from attempt it; but now he had, at all events, little 
prospect of life, and consequently little to lose, he bent his whole 
mind, therefore, upon the task. 

his handcuffs were the first consideration. at first he saw no method 
of remove them, and fear that he should thus be baffle in the very 
outset; but upon a close scrutiny he discover that the irons could 
be slip off and on at pleasure, with very little effort or 
inconvenience, merely by squeeze his hand through them,--this species 
of manacle being altogether ineffectual in confine young persons, 
in whom the small bone readily yield to pressure. he now untie his 
feet, and, leave the cord in such a manner that it could easily 
be readjust in the event of any person’s coming down, proceed to 
examine the bulkhead where it join the berth. the partition here was 
of soft pine board, an inch thick, and he saw that he should have 
little trouble in cutting his way through. a voice was now heard at the 
forecastle companion-way, and he had just time to put his right hand 
into its handcuff (the left had not been removed) and to draw the rope 
in a slipknot around his ankle, when dirk peters came below, follow by 
tiger, who immediately leap into the berth and lay down. the dog had 
been brought on board by augustus, who knew my attachment to the animal, 
and thought it would give me pleasure to have him with me during the 
voyage. he went up to our house for him immediately after first taking 
me into the hold, but did not think of mention the circumstance upon 
his bring the watch. since the mutiny, augustus had not seen him 
before his appearance with dirk peters, and had given him up for lost, 
supposing him to have been thrown overboard by some of the malignant 
villain belong to the mate’s gang. it appear afterward that he had 
crawl into a hole beneath a whale-boat, from which, not have room to 
turn round, he could not extricate himself. peters at last let him out, 
and, with a species of good feeling which my friend knew well how to 
appreciate, had now brought him to him in the forecastle as a companion, 
leave at the same time some salt junk and potatoes, with a can of 
water, he then went on deck, promising to come down with something more 
to eat on the next day. 

when he had gone, augustus free both hand from the manacle and 
unfastened his feet. he then turn down the head of the mattress on 
which he had been lying, and with his penknife (for the ruffian had 
not thought it worth while to search him) commence cutting vigorous 
across one of the partition planks, as close as possible to the floor 
of the berth. he chose to cut here, because, if sudden interrupted, he 
would be able to conceal what had been done by letting the head of the 
mattress fall into its proper position. for the remainder of the day, 
however, no disturbance occurred, and by night he had completely divide 
the plank. it should here be observe that none of the crew occupy the 
forecastle as a sleeping-place, living altogether in the cabin since 
the mutiny, drink the wine and feast on the sea-stores of captain 
barnard, and give no more heed than was absolutely necessary to the 
navigation of the brig. these circumstances prove fortunate both for 
myself and augustus; for, had matter been otherwise, he would have 
found it impossible to reach me. as it was, he proceed with confidence 
in his design. it was near daybreak, however, before he complete the 
second division of the board (which was about a foot above the first 
cut), thus making an aperture quite large enough to admit his passage 
through with facility to the main orlop deck. have got here, he made 
his way with but little trouble to the lower main hatch, although in so 
do he had to scramble over tier of oil-casks pile nearly as high as 
the upper deck, there being barely room enough left for his body. upon 
reach the hatch he found that tiger had follow him below, squeeze 
between two row of the casks. it was now too late, however, to attempt 
get to me before dawn, as the chief difficulty lay in passing 
through the close stowage in the lower hold. he therefore resolve to 
return, and wait till the next night. with this design, he proceed to 
loosen the hatch, so that he might have as little detention as possible 
when he should come again. no soon had he loosen it than tiger 
sprang eager to the small opening produced, snuff for a moment, and 
then utter a long whine, scratch at the same time, as if anxious 
to remove the covering with his paws. there could be no doubt, from 
his behaviour, that he was aware of my being in the hold, and augustus 
thought it possible that he would be able to get to me if he put him 
down. he now hit upon the expedient of send the note, as it was 
especially desirable that i should make no attempt at force my way out 
at least under existing circumstances, and there could be no certainty 
of his get to me himself on the morrow as he intended. after-events 
prove how fortunate it was that the idea occur to him as it did; 
for, had it not been for the receipt of the note, i should undoubted 
have fallen upon some plan, however desperate, of alarm the crew, and 
both our lives would most probably have been sacrifice in consequence. 

have conclude to write, the difficulty was now to procure the 
material for so doing. an old toothpick was soon made into a pen; and 
this by means of feeling altogether, for the between-decks was as 
dark as pitch. paper enough was obtain from the back of a letter--a 
duplicate of the forge letter from mr. ross. this had been the original 
draught; but the handwriting not being sufficient well imitated, 
augustus had written another, thrust the first, by good fortune, into 
his coat-pocket, where it was now most opportune discovered. ink alone 
was thus wanting, and a substitute was immediately found for this by 
means of a slight incision with the pen-knife on the back of a finger 
just above the nail--a copious flow of blood ensuing, as usual, from 
wound in that vicinity. the note was now written, as well as it could 
be in the dark and under the circumstances. it brief explain that a 
mutiny had taken place; that captain barnard was set adrift; and that i 
might expect immediate relief as far as provisions were concerned, but 
must not venture upon making any disturbance. it conclude with these 
words: “_i have scrawl this with blood--your life depend upon lie 
close._” 

this slip of paper being tie upon the dog, he was now put down the 
hatchway, and augustus made the best of his way back to the forecastle, 
where he found no reason to believe that any of the crew had been in 
his absence. to conceal the hole in the partition, he drove his knife in 
just above it, and hung up a pea-jacket which he found in the berth. his 
handcuffs were then replaced, and also the rope around his ankles. 

these arrangement were scarcely complete when dirk peters came below, 
very drunk, but in excellent humour, and bring with him my friend’s 
allowance of provision for the day. this consist of a dozen large 
ireland potato roasted, and a pitcher of water. he sat for some time on 
a chest by the berth, and talk freely about the mate and the general 
concern of the brig. his demeanour was exceedingly capricious, and 
even grotesque. at one time augustus was much alarm by odd conduct. 
at last, however, he went on deck, mutter a promise to bring his 
prisoner a good dinner on the morrow. during the day two of the crew 
(harpooners) came down, accompany by the cook, all three in nearly the 
last stage of intoxication. like peters, they made no scruple of talk 
unreserved about their plans. it appear that they were much divide 
among themselves as to their ultimate course, agree in no point, 
except the attack on the ship from the cape verd islands, with 
which they were in hourly expectation of meeting. as far as could be 
ascertained, the mutiny had not been brought about altogether for the 
sake of booty; a private pique of the chief mate’s against captain 
barnard have been the main instigation. there now seem to be two 
principal faction among the crew--one head by the mate, the other by 
the cook. the former party were for seize the first suitable vessel 
which should present itself, and equip it at some of the west india 
island for a pirate cruise. the latter division, however, which was 
the stronger, and included dirk peters among its partisans, were bent 
upon pursue the course originally laid out for the brig into the south 
pacific; there either to take whale, or act otherwise, as circumstances 
should suggest. the representations of peters, who had frequent 
visit these regions, had great weight, apparently, with the mutineers, 
wavering, as they were, between half-engendered notions of profit and 
pleasure. he dwelt on the world of novelty and amusement to be found 
among the innumerable island of the pacific, on the perfect security 
and freedom from all restraint to be enjoyed, but, more particularly, on 
the delicious of the climate, on the abundant means of good living, 
and on the voluptuous beauty of the women. as yet, nothing had been 
absolutely determined upon; but the pictures of the hybrid line-manager 
were taking strong hold upon the ardent imagination of the seamen, and 
there was every possibility that his intentions would be finally carry 
into effect. 

the three men went away in about an hour, and no one else enter the 
forecastle all day. augustus lay quiet until nearly night. he then free 
himself from the rope and irons, and prepared for his attempt. a bottle 
was found in one of the berths, and this he fill with water from the 
pitcher left by peters, store his pocket at the same time with cold 
potatoes. to his great joy he also came across a lantern, with a small 
piece of tallow candle in it. this he could light at any moment, as he 
had in his possession a box of phosphorus matches. when it was quite 
dark, he got through the hole in the bulkhead, have taken the 
precaution to arrange the bedclothes in the berth so as to convey the 
idea of a person cover up. when through, he hung up the pea-jacket 
on his knife, as before, to conceal the aperture--this manoeuvre being 
easily effected, as he did not readjust the piece of plank taken out 
until afterward. he was now on the main orlop deck, and proceed to 
make his way, as before, between the upper deck and the oil-casks to 
the main hatchway. have reach this, he lit the piece of candle, and 
descended, grope with extreme difficulty among the compact stowage of 
the hold. in a few moments he became alarm at the insufferable stench 
and the close of the atmosphere. he could not think it possible 
that i had survive my confinement for so long a period breathing so 
oppressive an air. he call my name repeatedly, but i made him no 
reply, and his apprehension seem thus to be confirmed. the brig was 
rolling violently, and there was so much noise in consequence, that it 
was useless to listen for any weak sound, such as those of my breathing 
or snoring. he threw open the lantern, and held it as high as possible, 
whenever an opportunity occurred, in order that, by observing the light, 
i might, if alive, be aware that succor was approaching. still nothing 
was heard from me, and the supposition of my death began to assume the 
character of certainty. he determined, nevertheless, to force a passage, 
if possible, to the box, and at least ascertain beyond a doubt the truth 
of his surmises. he pushed on for some time in a most pitiable state of 
anxiety, until, at length, he found the pathway utterly block up, and 
that there was no possibility of making any farther way by the course 
in which he had set out. overcome now by his feelings, he threw himself 
among the lumber in despair, and wept like a child. it was at this 
period that he heard the crash occasion by the bottle which i had 
thrown down. fortunate, indeed, was it that the incident occurred--for, 
upon this incident, trivial as it appears, the thread of my destiny 
depended. many years elapsed, however, before i was aware of this fact. 
a natural shame and regret for his weakness and indecision prevent 
augustus from confiding to me at once what a more intimate and 
unreserved communion afterward induce him to reveal. upon finding his 
further progress in the hold impede by obstacle which he could not 
overcome, he had resolve to abandon his attempt at reach me, and 
return at once to the forecastle. before condemn him entire on this 
head, the harass circumstances which embarrass him should be taken 
into consideration. the night was fast wearing away, and his absence 
from the forecastle might be discovered; and indeed would necessarily be 
so, if he should fail to get back to the berth by daybreak. his candle 
was expire in the socket, and there would be the greatest difficulty 
in retrace his way to the hatchway in the dark. it must be allowed, 
too, that he had every good reason to believe me dead; in which event 
no benefit could result to me from his reach the box, and a world of 
danger would be encounter to no purpose by himself. he had repeatedly 
called, and i had made him no answer. i had been now eleven days and 
nights with no more water than that contained in the jug which he had 
left with me--a supply which it was not at all probable i had hoard in 
the beginning of my confinement, as i had every cause to expect a speedy 
release. the atmosphere of the hold, too, must have appear to him, 
coming from the comparatively open air of the steerage, of a nature 
absolutely poisonous, and by far more intolerable than it had seem to 
me upon my first taking up my quarters in the box--the hatchway at that 
time have been constant open for many month previous. add to these 
consideration that of the scene of bloodshed and terror so lately 
witness by my friend; his confinement, privations, and narrow escape 
from death, together with the frail and equivocal tenure by which he 
still existed--circumstances all so well calculate to prostrate every 
energy of mind--and the reader will be easily brought, as i have been, 
to regard his apparent fall off in friendship and in faith with 
sentiment rather of sorrow than of anger. 

the crash of the bottle was distinct heard, yet augustus was not sure 
that it proceed from the hold. the doubt, however, was sufficient 
inducement to persevere. he clamber up nearly to the orlop deck by 
means of the stowage, and then, watch for a lull in the pitch of 
the vessel, he call out to me in as loud a tone as he could command, 
regardless, for the moment, of being overheard by the crew. it will 
be remember that on this occasion the voice reach me, but i was 
so entire overcome by violent agitation as to be incapable of reply. 
confident, now, that his worst apprehension were well founded, he 
descended, with a view of get back to the forecastle without loss 
of time. in his haste some small box were thrown down, the noise 
occasion by which i heard, as will be recollected. he had made 
considerable progress on his return when the fall of the knife again 
cause him to hesitate. he retrace his steps immediately, and, 
clamber up the stowage a second time, call out my name, loud as 
before, have watch for a lull. this time i found voice to answer. 
overjoyed at discover me to be still alive, he now resolve to brave 
every difficulty and danger in reach me. have extricate himself as 
quick as possible from the labyrinth of lumber by which he was hem 
in, he at length struck into an opening which promise better, and 
finally, after a series of struggles, arrive at the box in a state of 
utter exhaustion. 




chapter 6 

the leading particulars of this narration were all that augustus 
communicate to me while we remain near the box. it was not 
until afterward that he enter fully into all the details. he was 
apprehensive of being missed, and i was wild with impatience to leave 
my detest place of confinement. we resolve to make our way at once 
to the hole in the bulkhead, near which i was to remain for the present, 
while he went through to reconnoiter. to leave tiger in the box was what 
neither of us could endure to think of, yet, how to act otherwise was 
the question. he now seem to be perfectly quiet, and we could not even 
distinguish the sound of his breathing upon apply our ear close 
to the box. i was convinced that he was dead, and determined to open the 
door. we found him lie at full length, apparently in a deep stupor, 
yet still alive. no time was to be lost, yet i could not bring myself to 
abandon an animal who had now been twice instrumental in saving my life, 
without some attempt at preserve him. we therefore drag him along 
with us as well as we could, although with the greatest difficulty and 
fatigue; augustus, during part of the time, being forced to clamber 
over the impediment in our way with the huge dog in his arms--a feat 
to which the feeble of my frame render me total inadequate. at 
length we succeed in reach the hole, when augustus got through, and 
tiger was pushed in afterward. all was found to be safe, and we did 
not fail to return sincere thanks to god for our deliverance from the 
imminent danger we had escaped. for the present, it was agree that i 
should remain near the opening, through which my companion could readily 
supply me with a part of his daily provision, and where i could have the 
advantage of breathing an atmosphere comparatively pure. 

in explanation of some portion of this narrative, wherein i have spoken 
of the stowage of the brig, and which may appear ambiguous to some of my 
reader who may have seen a proper or regular stowage, i must here state 
that the manner in which this most important duty had been perform 
on board the grampus was a most shameful piece of neglect on the part 
of captain barnard, who was by no means as careful or as experienced a 
seaman as the hazardous nature of the service on which he was 
employ would seem necessarily to demand. a proper stowage cannot be 
accomplished in a careless manner, and many most disastrous accidents, 
even within the limit of my own experience, have arisen from neglect 
or ignorance in this particular. coast vessels, in the frequent hurry 
and bustle attendant upon taking in or discharge cargo, are the most 
liable to mishap from the want of a proper attention to stowage. the 
great point is to allow no possibility of the cargo or ballast shift 
position even in the most violent rolling of the vessel. with this end, 
great attention must be paid, not only to the bulk taken in, but to the 
nature of the bulk, and whether there be a full or only a partial cargo. 
in most kind of freight the stowage is accomplished by means of a 
screw. thus, in a load of tobacco or flour, the whole is screw so 
tight into the hold of the vessel that the barrel or hogsheads, upon 
discharging, are found to be completely flattened, and take some time 
to regain their original shape. this screwing, however, is resort to 
principally with a view of obtain more room in the hold; for in a 
full load of any such commodity as flour or tobacco, there can be no 
danger of any shift whatever, at least none from which inconvenience 
can result. there have been instances, indeed, where this method of 
screw has result in the most lamentable consequences, arise from 
a cause altogether distinct from the danger attendant upon a shift of 
cargo. a load of cotton, for example, tight screw while in certain 
conditions, has been known, through the expansion of its bulk, to rend a 
vessel asunder at sea. there can be no doubt either that the same result 
would ensue in the case of tobacco, while undergo its usual course 
of fermentation, were it not for the interstice consequent upon the 
rotund of the hogsheads. 

it is when a partial cargo is received that danger is chiefly to be 
apprehend from shifting, and that precaution should be always taken 
to guard against such misfortune. only those who have encounter a 
violent gale of wind, or rather who have experienced the rolling of 
a vessel in a sudden calm after the gale, can form an idea of the 
tremendous force of the plunges, and of the consequent terrible impetus 
given to all loose articles in the vessel. it is then that the necessity 
of a cautious stowage, when there is a partial cargo, become obvious. 
when lying-to (especially with a small head sail), a vessel which is not 
properly model in the bow is frequent thrown upon her beam-ends; 
this occur even every fifteen or twenty minutes upon an average, yet 
without any serious consequence resulting, provided there be a proper 
stowage. if this, however, has not been strict attend to, in the 
first of these heavy lurch the whole of the cargo tumble over to the 
side of the vessel which lie upon the water, and, being thus prevent 
from regain her equilibrium, as she would otherwise necessarily do, 
she is certain to fill in a few seconds and go down. it is not too much 
to say that at least one-half of the instance in which vessel have 
founder in heavy gale at sea may be attribute to a shift of cargo 
or of ballast. 

when a partial cargo of any kind is taken on board, the whole, after 
being first stow as compact as may be, should be cover with a 
layer of stout shifting-boards, extend completely across the vessel. 
upon these boards strong temporary stanchion should be erected, 
reach to the timber above, and thus secure every thing in its 
place. in cargo consist of grain, or any similar matter, additional 
precaution are requisite. a hold fill entire with grain upon 
leave port will be found not more than three fourth full upon 
reach its destination--this, too, although the freight, when measured 
bushel by bushel by the consignee, will overrun by a vast deal (on 
account of the swelling of the grain) the quantity consigned. this 
result is occasion by settle during the voyage, and is the more 
perceptible in proportion to the roughness of the weather experienced. 
if grain loose thrown in a vessel, then, is ever so well secure by 
shifting-boards and stanchions, it will be liable to shift in a long 
passage so greatly as to bring about the most distressing calamities. 
to prevent these, every method should be employ before leave port 
to settle the cargo as much as possible; and for this there are many 
contrivances, among which may be mention the driving of wedge into 
the grain. even after all this is done, and unusual pains taken to 
secure the shifting-boards, no seaman who know what he is about will 
feel altogether secure in a gale of any violence with a cargo of 
grain on board, and, least of all, with a partial cargo. yet there are 
hundred of our coast vessels, and, it is likely, many more from the 
port of europe, which sail daily with partial cargoes, even of the most 
dangerous species, and without any precaution whatever. the wonder 
is that no more accident occur than do actually happen. a lamentable 
instance of this heedless occur to my knowledge in the case of 
captain joel rice of the schooner firefly, which sail from richmond, 
virginia, to madeira, with a cargo of corn, in the year 1825. the 
captain had gone many voyages without serious accident, although he was 
in the habit of pay no attention whatever to his stowage, more than 
to secure it in the ordinary manner. he had never before sail with 
a cargo of grain, and on this occasion had the corn thrown on board 
loosely, when it did not much more than half fill the vessel. for the 
first portion of the voyage he met with nothing more than light breezes; 
but when within a day’s sail of madeira there came on a strong gale from 
the n. n. e. which forced him to lie-to. he brought the schooner to the 
wind under a double-reefed foresail alone, when she rode as well as any 
vessel could be expect to do, and ship not a drop of water. toward 
night the gale somewhat abated, and she roll with more unsteady 
than before, but still did very well, until a heavy lurch threw her upon 
her beam-ends to starboard. the corn was then heard to shift bodily, the 
force of the movement burst open the main hatchway. the vessel 
went down like a shot. this happen within hail of a small sloop from 
madeira, which picked up one of the crew (the only person saved), and 
which rode out the gale in perfect security, as indeed a jolly boat 
might have done under proper management. 

the stowage on board the grampus was most clumsy done, if stowage 
that could be call which was little better than a promiscuous huddle 
together of oil-casks {*1} and ship furniture. i have already spoken of 
the condition of articles in the hold. on the orlop deck there was space 
enough for my body (as i have stated) between the oil-casks and the 
upper deck; a space was left open around the main hatchway; and several 
other large space were left in the stowage. near the hole cut through 
the bulkhead by augustus there was room enough for an entire cask, and 
in this space i found myself comfortable situated for the present. 

by the time my friend had got safe into the berth, and readjust 
his handcuffs and the rope, it was broad daylight. we had made a narrow 
escape indeed; for scarcely had he arrange all matters, when the mate 
came below, with dirk peters and the cook. they talk for some time 
about the vessel from the cape verds, and seem to be excessive 
anxious for her appearance. at length the cook came to the berth in 
which augustus was lying, and seat himself in it near the head. i 
could see and hear every thing from my hiding-place, for the piece cut 
out had not been put back, and i was in momentary expectation that the 
negro would fall against the pea-jacket, which was hung up to conceal 
the aperture, in which case all would have been discovered, and our 
lives would, no doubt, have been instantly sacrificed. our good fortune 
prevailed, however; and although he frequent touched it as the vessel 
rolled, he never pressed against it sufficient to bring about a 
discovery. the bottom of the jacket had been careful fasten to the 
bulkhead, so that the hole might not be seen by its swinging to one 
side. all this time tiger was lie in the foot of the berth, and 
appear to have recover in some measure his faculties, for i could 
see him occasional open his eyes and draw a long breath. 

after a few minutes the mate and cook went above, leave dirk peters 
behind, who, as soon as they were gone, came and sat himself down in 
the place just occupy by the mate. he began to talk very sociable with 
augustus, and we could now see that the greater part of his apparent 
intoxication, while the two other were with him, was a feint. he 
answer all my companion’s question with perfect freedom; told him 
that he had no doubt of his father’s have been picked up, as there 
were no less than five sail in sight just before sundown on the day he 
was cut adrift; and use other language of a consolatory nature, 
which occasion me no less surprise than pleasure. indeed, i began to 
entertain hopes, that through the instrumentality of peters we might 
be finally enable to regain possession of the brig, and this idea i 
mention to augustus as soon as i found an opportunity. he thought 
the matter possible, but urge the necessity of the greatest caution 
in making the attempt, as the conduct of the hybrid appear to be 
instigate by the most arbitrary caprice alone; and, indeed, it was 
difficult to say if he was at any moment of sound mind. peters went 
upon deck in about an hour, and did not return again until noon, when he 
brought augustus a plentiful supply of junk beef and pudding. of this, 
when we were left alone, i partook heartily, without return through 
the hole. no one else came down into the forecastle during the day, and 
at night, i got into augustus’ berth, where i slept sound and sweet 
until nearly daybreak, when he awaken me upon hearing a stir upon 
deck, and i regain my hiding-place as quick as possible. when the 
day was fully broke, we found that tiger had recover his strength 
almost entirely, and gave no indication of hydrophobia, drink a 
little water that was offer him with great apparent eagerness. during 
the day he regain all his former vigour and appetite. his strange 
conduct had been brought on, no doubt, by the deleterious quality of the 
air of the hold, and had no connexion with canine madness. i could not 
sufficient rejoice that i had persist in bring him with me from 
the box. this day was the thirtieth of june, and the thirteenth since 
the grampus made sail from nantucket. 

on the second of july the mate came below drunk as usual, and in an 
excessive good-humor. he came to augustus’s berth, and, give him a 
slap on the back, ask him if he thought he could behave himself if 
he let him loose, and whether he would promise not to be go into the 
cabin again. to this, of course, my friend answer in the affirmative, 
when the ruffian set him at liberty, after making him drink from a flask 
of rum which he drew from his coat-pocket. both now went on deck, and i 
did not see augustus for about three hours. he then came below with the 
good news that he had obtain permission to go about the brig as he 
pleased anywhere forward of the mainmast, and that he had been ordered 
to sleep, as usual, in the forecastle. he brought me, too, a good 
dinner, and a plentiful supply of water. the brig was still cruise for 
the vessel from the cape verds, and a sail was now in sight, which was 
thought to be the one in question. as the event of the ensue eight 
days were of little importance, and had no direct bearing upon the main 
incident of my narrative, i will here throw them into the form of a 
journal, as i do not wish to omit them altogether. 

july 3. augustus furnish me with three blankets, with which i 
contrived a comfortable bed in my hiding-place. no one came below, 
except my companion, during the day. tiger took his station in the 
berth just by the aperture, and slept heavily, as if not yet entire 
recover from the effects of his sickness. toward night a flaw of wind 
struck the brig before sail could be taken in, and very nearly capsize 
her. the puff die away immediately, however, and no damage was done 
beyond the splitting of the foretopsail. dirk peters treat augustus 
all this day with great kindness and enter into a long conversation 
with him respecting the pacific ocean, and the island he had visit 
in that region. he ask him whether he would not like to go with the 
mutineer on a kind of explore and pleasure voyage in those quarters, 
and said that the men were gradual coming over to the mate’s views. 
to this augustus thought it best to reply that he would be glad to go 
on such an adventure, since nothing better could be done, and that any 
thing was preferable to a pirate life. 

july 4th. the vessel in sight prove to be a small brig from liverpool, 
and was allow to pass unmolested. augustus spent most of his time 
on deck, with a view of obtain all the information in his power 
respecting the intentions of the mutineers. they had frequent and 
violent quarrel among themselves, in one of which a harpooner, jim 
bonner, was thrown overboard. the party of the mate was gain ground. 
jim bonner belong to the cook’s gang, of which peters was a partisan. 

july 5th. about daybreak there came on a stiff breeze from the west, 
which at noon freshen into a gale, so that the brig could carry 
nothing more than her trysail and foresail. in taking in the 
foretopsail, simms, one of the common hands, and belong also to 
the cook’s gang, fell overboard, being very much in liquor, and was 
drowned--no attempt being made to save him. the whole number of person 
on board was now thirteen, to wit: dirk peters; seymour, the black 
cook; jones, greely, hartman rogers and william allen, all of the 
cook’s party; the mate, whose name i never 
learned; absalom hicks, wilson, john hunty richard parker, of the mate’s 
party;--besides augustus and myself. 

july 6th. the gale last all this day, blow in heavy squalls, 
accompany with rain. the brig took in a good deal of water through her 
seams, and one of the pump was kept continual going, augustus being 
forced to take his turn. just at twilight a large ship pass close 
by us, without have been discover until within hail. the ship was 
supposed to be the one for which the mutineer were on the lookout. the 
mate hail her, but the reply was drown in the roaring of the gale. 
at eleven, a sea was ship amidships, which tore away a great portion 
of the larboard bulwarks, and did some other slight damage. toward 
morning the weather moderated, and at sunrise there was very little 
wind. 

july 7th. there was a heavy swell running all this day, during which the 
brig, being light, roll excessively, and many articles broke loose in 
the hold, as i could hear distinct from my hiding-place. i suffer 
a great deal from sea-sickness. peters had a long conversation this day 
with augustus, and told him that two of his gang, gree and allen, had 
gone over to the mate, and were resolve to turn pirates. he put several 
question to augustus which he did not then exactly understand. during 
a part of this evening the leak gain upon the vessel; and little could 
be done to remedy it, as it was occasion by the brig's straining, and 
taking in the water through her seams. a sail was thrummed, and got 
under the bows, which aid us in some measure, so that we began to gain 
upon the leak. 

july 8th. a light breeze sprang up at sunrise from the eastward, when 
the mate head the brig to the southwest, with the intention of making 
some of the west india island in pursuance of his pirate designs. no 
opposition was made by peters or the cook--at least none in the hearing 
of augustus. all idea of taking the vessel from the cape verd was 
abandoned. the leak was now easily kept under by one pump go every 
three quarters of an hour. the sail was drawn from beneath the bows. 
spoke two small schooner during the day. 

july 9th. fine weather. all hand employ in repair bulwarks. peters 
had again a long conversation with augustus, and spoke more plainly than 
he had done heretofore. he said nothing should induce him to come into 
the mate’s views, and even hint his intention of taking the brig out 
of his hands. he ask my friend if he could depend upon his aid in such 
case, to which augustus said, “yes,” without hesitation. peters then 
said he would sound the other of his party upon the subject, and went 
away. during the remainder of the day augustus had no opportunity of 
speak with him privately. 




chapter 7 

july 10. spoke a brig from rio, bound to norfolk. weather hazy, with 
a light baffling wind from the eastward. to-day hartman rogers died, 
have been attack on the eighth with spasm after drink a glass of 
grog. this man was of the cook’s party, and one upon whom peters placed 
his main reliance. he told augustus that he believe the mate had 
poison him, and that he expected, if he did not be on the look-out, 
his own turn would come shortly. there were now only himself, jones, and 
the cook belong to his own gang--on the other side there were five. 
he had spoken to jones about taking the command from the mate; but the 
project have been cool received, he had been deter from pressing 
the matter any further, or from saying any thing to the cook. it was 
well, as it happened, that he was so prudent, for in the afternoon the 
cook express his determination of siding with the mate, and went over 
formal to that party; while jones took an opportunity of quarrel 
with peters, and hint that he would let the mate know of the plan 
in agitation. there was now, evidently, no time to be lost, and peters 
express his determination of attempt to take the vessel at all 
hazards, provided augustus would lend him his aid. my friend at once 
assured him of his willing to enter into any plan for that purpose, 
and, thinking the opportunity a favourable one, made known the fact 
of my being on board. at this the hybrid was not more astonish than 
delighted, as he had no reliance whatever upon jones, whom he already 
considered as belong to the party of the mate. they went below 
immediately, when augustus call to me by name, and peters and myself 
were soon made acquainted. it was agree that we should attempt to 
retake the vessel upon the first good opportunity, leave jones 
altogether out of our councils. in the event of success, we were to 
run the brig into the first port that offered, and deliver her up. the 
desertion of his party had frustrate peters’ design of go into the 
pacific--an adventure which could not be accomplished without a crew, 
and he depend upon either get acquit upon trial, on the score 
of insanity (which he solemn avowed had actuate him in lend his 
aid to the mutiny), or upon obtain a pardon, if found guilty, through 
the representations of augustus and myself. our deliberation were 
interrupt for the present by the cry of, “all hand take in sail,” and 
peters and augustus ran up on deck. 

as usual, the crew were nearly all drunk; and, before sail could be 
properly taken in, a violent squall laid the brig on her beam-ends. by 
keeping her away, however, she righted, have ship a good deal of 
water. scarcely was everything secure, when another squall took the 
vessel, and immediately afterward another--no damage being done. there 
was every appearance of a gale of wind, which, indeed, shortly came on, 
with great fury, from the northward and westward. all was made as snug 
as possible, and we laid-to, as usual, under a close-reefed foresail. as 
night drew on, the wind increase in violence, with a remarkably heavy 
sea. peters now came into the forecastle with augustus, and we resume 
our deliberations. 

we agree that no opportunity could be more favourable than the present 
for carry our designs into effect, as an attempt at such a moment 
would never be anticipated. as the brig was snug laid-to, there would 
be no necessity of manoeuvre her until good weather, when, if we 
succeed in our attempt, we might liberate one, or perhaps two of the 
men, to aid us in taking her into port. the main difficulty was the 
great disproportion in our forces. there were only three of us, and in 
the cabin there were nine. all the arms on board, too, were in their 
possession, with the exception of a pair of small pistol which peters 
had conceal about his person, and the large seaman’s knife which 
he always wore in the waistband of his pantaloons. from certain 
indications, too--such, for example, as there being no such thing as 
an axe or a handspike lie in their customary places--we began to fear 
that the mate had his suspicions, at least in regard to peters, and that 
he would let slip no opportunity of get rid of him. it was clear, 
indeed, that what we should determine to do could not be done too soon. 
still the odds were too much against us to allow of our proceeding 
without the greatest caution. 

peters propose that he should go up on deck, and enter into 
conversation with the watch (allen), when he would be able to throw him 
into the sea without trouble, and without making any disturbance, by 
seize a good opportunity, that augustus and myself should then come 
up, and endeavour to provide ourselves with some kind of weapon from 
the deck, and that we should then make a rush together, and secure the 
companion-way before any opposition could be offered. i object to 
this, because i could not believe that the mate (who was a cunning 
fellow in all matter which did not affect his superstitious prejudices) 
would suffer himself to be so easily entrapped. the very fact of there 
being a watch on deck at all was sufficient proof that he was upon the 
alert,--it not being usual except in vessel where discipline is most 
rigid enforced, to station a watch on deck when a vessel is lying-to 
in a gale of wind. as i address myself principally, if not altogether, 
to person who have never been to sea, it may be as well to state the 
exact condition of a vessel under such circumstances. lying-to, or, 
in sea-parlance, “laying-to,” is a measure resort to for various 
purposes, and effect in various manners. in moderate weather it 
is frequent done with a view of merely bring the vessel to a 
stand-still, to wait for another vessel or any similar object. if 
the vessel which lies-to is under full sail, the manoeuvre is usually 
accomplished by throw round some portion of her sails, so as to let 
the wind take them aback, when she become stationary. but we are now 
speak of lying-to in a gale of wind. this is done when the wind 
is ahead, and too violent to admit of carry sail without danger of 
capsizing; and sometimes even when the wind is fair, but the sea too 
heavy for the vessel to be put before it. if a vessel be suffer to 
scud before the wind in a very heavy sea, much damage is usually done 
her by the shipping of water over her stern, and sometimes by the 
violent plunge she make forward. this manoeuvre, then, is seldom 
resort to in such case, unless through necessity. when the vessel 
is in a leaky condition she is often put before the wind even in the 
heaviest seas; for, when lying-to, her seam are sure to be greatly 
open by her violent straining, and it is not so much the case when 
scudding. often, too, it become necessary to scud a vessel, either when 
the blast is so exceedingly furious as to tear in pieces the sail which 
is employ with a view of bring her head to the wind, or when, 
through the false model of the frame or other causes, this main 
object cannot be effected. 

vessel in a gale of wind are laid-to in different manners, according 
to their peculiar construction. some lie-to best under a foresail, and 
this, i believe, is the sail most usually employed. large square-rigged 
vessel have sail for the express purpose, call storm-staysails. 
but the jib is occasional employ by itself,--sometimes the jib 
and foresail, or a double-reefed foresail, and not unfrequent the 
after-sails, are made use of. foretopsail are very often found to 
answer the purpose better than any other species of sail. the grampus 
was generally laid-to under a close-reefed foresail. 

when a vessel is to be laid-to, her head is brought up to the wind just 
so nearly as to fill the sail under which she lie when haul flat aft, 
that is, when brought diagonal across the vessel. this being done, 
the bow point within a few degree of the direction from which the wind 
issues, and the windward bow of course receive the shock of the waves. 
in this situation a good vessel will ride out a very heavy gale of wind 
without shipping a drop of water, and without any further attention 
being requisite on the part of the crew. the helm is usually lash 
down, but this is altogether unnecessary (except on account of the noise 
it make when loose), for the rudder has no effect upon the vessel when 
lying-to. indeed, the helm had far better be left loose than lash very 
fast, for the rudder is apt to be torn off by heavy sea if there be no 
room for the helm to play. as long as the sail holds, a well model 
vessel will maintain her situation, and ride every sea, as if instinct 
with life and reason. if the violence of the wind, however, should tear 
the sail into pieces (a feat which it require a perfect hurricane to 
accomplish under ordinary circumstances), there is then imminent danger. 
the vessel falls off from the wind, and, coming broadside to the sea, 
is completely at its mercy: the only resource in this case is to put her 
quiet before the wind, letting her scud until some other sail can be 
set. some vessel will lie-to under no sail whatever, but such are not 
to be trust at sea. 

but to return from this digression. it had never been customary with the 
mate to have any watch on deck when lying-to in a gale of wind, and the 
fact that he had now one, couple with the circumstance of the missing 
axe and handspikes, fully convinced us that the crew were too well on 
the watch to be taken by surprise in the manner peters had suggested. 
something, however, was to be done, and that with as little delay as 
practicable, for there could be no doubt that a suspicion have 
been once entertain against peters, he would be sacrifice upon the 
earliest occasion, and one would certainly be either found or made upon 
the break of the gale. 

augustus now suggest that if peters could contrive to remove, under 
any pretext, the piece of chain-cable which lay over the trap in the 
stateroom, we might possibly be able to come upon them unawares by means 
of the hold; but a little reflection convinced us that the vessel roll 
and pitch too violent for any attempt of that nature. 

by good fortune i at length hit upon the idea of working upon the 
superstitious terror and guilty conscience of the mate. it will be 
remember that one of the crew, hartman rogers, had die during the 
morning, have been attack two days before with spasm after drink 
some spirits and water. peters had express to us his opinion that this 
man had been poison by the mate, and for this belief he had reasons, 
so he said, which were incontrovertible, but which he could not be 
prevail upon to explain to us--this wayward refusal being only in 
keeping with other points of his singular character. but whether or not 
he had any better grounds for suspect the mate than we had ourselves, 
we were easily led to fall in with his suspicion, and determined to act 
accordingly. 

rogers had die about eleven in the forenoon, in violent convulsions; 
and the corpse present in a few minutes after death one of the most 
horrid and loathsome spectacles i ever remember to have seen. the 
stomach was swollen immensely, like that of a man who has been drown 
and lain under water for many weeks. the hand were in the same 
condition, while the face was shrunken, shrivelled, and of a chalky 
whiteness, except where relieved by two or three glaring red blotch 
like those occasion by the erysipelas: one of these blotch extend 
diagonal across the face, completely covering up an eye as if with 
a band of red velvet. in this disgust condition the body had been 
brought up from the cabin at noon to be thrown overboard, when the mate 
get a glimpse of it (for he now saw it for the first time), and 
being either touched with remorse for his crime or struck with terror at 
so horrible a sight, ordered the men to sew the body up in its 
hammock, and allow it the usual rite of sea-burial. have given these 
directions, he went below, as if to avoid any further sight of his 
victim. while preparation were making to obey his orders, the gale came 
on with great fury, and the design was abandoned for the present. the 
corpse, left to itself, was wash into the larboard scuppers, where 
it still lay at the time of which i speak, flounder about with the 
furious lurch of the brig. 

have arrange our plan, we set about putt it in execution as 
speedy as possible. peters went upon deck, and, as he had anticipated, 
was immediately accost by allen, who appear to be station more as 
a watch upon the forecastle than for any other purpose. the fate of 
this villain, however, was speedy and silent decided; for peters, 
approach him in a careless manner, as if about to address him, seize 
him by the throat, and, before he could utter a single cry, toss 
him over the bulwarks. he then call to us, and we came up. our first 
precaution was to look about for something with which to arm ourselves, 
and in do this we had to proceed with great care, for it was 
impossible to stand on deck an instant without holding fast, and 
violent sea broke over the vessel at every plunge forward. it was 
indispensable, too, that we should be quick in our operations, for every 
minute we expect the mate to be up to set the pump going, as it was 
evident the brig must be taking in water very fast. after searching 
about for some time, we could find nothing more fit for our purpose 
than the two pump-handles, one of which augustus took, and i the other. 
have secure these, we strip off the shirt of the corpse and 
drop the body overboard. peters and myself then went below, leave 
augustus to watch upon deck, where he took his station just where allen 
had been placed, and with his back to the cabin companionway, so that, 
if any of the mate's gang should come up, he might suppose it was the 
watch. 

as soon as i got below i commence disguise myself so as to represent 
the corpse of rogers. the shirt which we had taken from the body aid 
us very much, for it was of singular form and character, and easily 
recognizable--a kind of smock, which the deceased wore over his other 
clothing. it was a blue stockinett, with large white stripe running 
across. have put this on, i proceed to equip myself with a false 
stomach, in imitation of the horrible deformity of the swollen corpse. 
this was soon effect by means of stuffing with some bedclothes. i 
then gave the same appearance to my hand by drawing on a pair of white 
woollen mittens, and filling them in with any kind of rag that offer 
themselves. peters then arrange my face, first rubbing it well over 
with white chalk, and afterward blotch it with blood, which he took 
from a cut in his finger. the streak across the eye was not forgotten 
and present a most shocking appearance. 




chapter 8 

as i view myself in a fragment of looking-glass which hung up in 
the cabin, and by the dim light of a kind of battle-lantern, i was 
so impress with a sense of vague awe at my appearance, and at the 
recollection of the terrific reality which i was thus representing, 
that i was seize with a violent tremour, and could scarcely summon 
resolution to go on with my part. it was necessary, however, to act with 
decision, and peters and myself went upon deck. 

we there found everything safe, and, keeping close to the bulwarks, 
the three of us crept to the cabin companion-way. it was only partially 
closed, precaution have been taken to prevent its being sudden 
pushed to from without, by means of place billet of wood on the upper 
step so as to interfere with the shutting. we found no difficulty in 
get a full view of the interior of the cabin through the crack 
where the hinge were placed. it now prove to have been very fortunate 
for us that we had not attempt to take them by surprise, for they were 
evidently on the alert. only one was asleep, and he lie just at the 
foot of the companion-ladder, with a musket by his side. the rest were 
seat on several mattresses, which had been taken from the berth and 
thrown on the floor. they were engaged in earnest conversation; and 
although they had been carousing, as appear from two empty jugs, with 
some tin tumbler which lay about, they were not as much intoxicate 
as usual. all had knives, one or two of them pistols, and a great many 
musket were lie in a berth close at hand. 

we listen to their conversation for some time before we could make 
up our mind how to act, have as yet resolve on nothing determinate, 
except that we would attempt to paralyze their exertions, when we should 
attack them, by means of the apparition of rogers. they were discuss 
their pirate plans, in which all we could hear distinct was, that 
they would unite with the crew of a schooner _hornet_, and, if possible, 
get the schooner herself into their possession preparatory to some 
attempt on a large scale, the particulars of which could not be made out 
by either of us. 

one of the men spoke of peters, when the mate reply to him in a low 
voice which could not be distinguished, and afterward add more 
loudly, that “he could not understand his being so much forward with the 
captain’s brat in the forecastle, and he thought the soon both of them 
were overboard the better.” to this no answer was made, but we could 
easily perceive that the hint was well received by the whole party, and 
more particularly by jones. at this period i was excessive agitated, 
the more so as i could see that neither augustus nor peters could 
determine how to act. i made up my mind, however, to sell my life as 
dearly as possible, and not to suffer myself to be overcome by any 
feelings of trepidation. 

the tremendous noise made by the roaring of the wind in the rigging, and 
the washing of the sea over the deck, prevent us from hearing what was 
said, except during momentary lulls. in one of these, we all distinct 
heard the mate tell one of the men to “go forward, have an eye upon 
them, for he want no such secret doings on board the brig.” it was 
well for us that the pitch of the vessel at this moment was so 
violent as to prevent this order from being carry into instant 
execution. the cook got up from his mattress to go for us, when a 
tremendous lurch, which i thought would carry away the masts, threw him 
headlong against one of the larboard stateroom doors, burst it open, 
and create a good deal of other confusion. luckily, neither of 
our party was thrown from his position, and we had time to make a 
precipitate retreat to the forecastle, and arrange a hurried plan of 
action before the messenger made his appearance, or rather before he put 
his head out of the companion-hatch, for he did not come on deck. 
from this station he could not notice the absence of allen, and he 
accordingly bawl out, as if to him, repeating the orders of the 
mate. peters cry out, “ay, ay,” in a disguise voice, and the cook 
immediately went below, without entertaining a suspicion that all was 
not right. 

my two companion now proceed bold aft and down into the cabin, 
peters close the door after him in the same manner he had found it. 
the mate received them with feign cordiality, and told augustus that, 
since he had behave himself so well of late, he might take up his 
quarters in the cabin and be one of them for the future. he then pour 
him out a tumbler half full of rum, and made him drink it. all this i 
saw and heard, for i follow my friends to the cabin as soon as the 
door was shut, and took up my old point of observation. i had 
brought with me the two pump-handles, one of which i secure near the 
companion-way, to be ready for use when required. 

i now steady myself as well as possible so as to have a good view of 
all that was passing within, and endeavour to nerve myself to the task 
of descend among the mutineer when peters should make a signal to 
me, as agree upon. presently he contrived to turn the conversation upon 
the bloody deed of the mutiny, and by degree led the men to talk 
of the thousand superstition which are so universally current among 
seamen. i could not make out all that was said, but i could plainly see 
the effects of the conversation in the countenance of those present. 
the mate was evidently much agitated, and presently, when some one 
mention the terrific appearance of rogers’ corpse, i thought he was 
upon the point of swooning. peters now ask him if he did not think it 
would be better to have the body thrown overboard at once as it was too 
horrible a sight to see it flounder about in the scuppers. at this 
the villain absolutely gasp for breath, and turn his head slow 
round upon his companions, as if implore some one to go up and perform 
the task. no one, however, stirred, and it was quite evident that the 
whole party were wound up to the highest pitch of nervous excitement. 
peters now made me the signal. i immediately threw open the door of the 
companion-way, and, descending, without utter a syllable, stood erect 
in the midst of the party. 

the intense effect produce by this sudden apparition is not at all 
to be wonder at when the various circumstances are taken into 
consideration. usually, in case of a similar nature, there is left in 
the mind of the spectator some glimmer of doubt as to the reality of 
the vision before his eyes; a degree of hope, however feeble, that he 
is the victim of chicanery, and that the apparition is not actually a 
visitant from the old world of shadows. it is not too much to say that 
such remnant of doubt have been at the bottom of almost every such 
visitation, and that the appalling horror which has sometimes been 
brought about, is to be attributed, even in the case most in point, 
and where most suffering has been experienced, more to a kind of 
anticipate horror, lest the apparition might possibly be real, than 
to an unwavere belief in its reality. but, in the present instance, it 
will be seen immediately, that in the mind of the mutineer there 
was not even the shadow of a basis upon which to rest a doubt that 
the apparition of rogers was indeed a revivify of his disgust 
corpse, or at least its spiritual image. the isolated situation of the 
brig, with its entire inaccessible on account of the gale, confine 
the apparently possible means of deception within such narrow and 
definite limits, that they must have thought themselves enable to 
survey them all at a glance. they had now been at sea twenty-four days, 
without holding more than a speak communication with any vessel 
whatever. the whole of the crew, too--at least all whom they had the 
most remote reason for suspect to be on board--were assemble in the 
cabin, with the exception of allen, the watch; and his gigantic stature 
(he was six feet six inch high) was too familiar in their eyes to 
permit the notion that he was the apparition before them to enter their 
mind even for an instant. add to these consideration the awe-inspiring 
nature of the tempest, and that of the conversation brought about by 
peters; the deep impression which the loathsome of the actual corpse 
had made in the morning upon the imagination of the men; the excellence 
of the imitation in my person, and the uncertain and waver light 
in which they beheld me, as the glare of the cabin lantern, swinging 
violent to and fro, fell dubious and fitful upon my figure, and 
there will be no reason to wonder that the deception had even more than 
the entire effect which we had anticipated. the mate sprang up from the 
mattress on which he was lying, and, without utter a syllable, fell 
back, stone dead, upon the cabin floor, and was hurl to the leeward 
like a log by a heavy roll of the brig. of the remain seven, there 
were but three who had at first any degree of presence of mind. the 
four other sat for some time rooted apparently to the floor, the most 
pitiable object of horror and utter despair my eyes ever encountered. 
the only opposition we experienced at all was from the cook, john hunt, 
and richard parker; but they made but a feeble and irresolute defence. 
the two former were shot instantly by peters, and i fell parker with 
a blow on the head from the pump-handle which i had brought with me. in 
the meantime, augustus seize one of the musket lie on the floor 
and shot another mutineer wilson through the breast. there were now but 
three remaining; but by this time they had become arouse from their 
lethargy, and perhaps began to see that a deception had been practised 
upon them, for they fought with great resolution and fury, and, but for 
the immense muscular strength of peters, might have ultimately got the 
better of us. these three men were--jones, greely, and absolom hicks. 
jones had thrown augustus to the floor, stab him in several place 
along the right arm, and would no doubt have soon dispatch him 
(as neither peters nor myself could immediately get rid of our own 
antagonists), had it not been for the timely aid of a friend, upon whose 
assistance we, surely, had never depended. this friend was no other than 
tiger. with a low growl, he bound into the cabin, at a most critical 
moment for augustus, and throw himself upon jones, pin him to the 
floor in an instant. my friend, however, was now too much injure to 
render us any aid whatever, and i was so encumber with my disguise 
that i could do but little. the dog would not leave his hold upon the 
throat of jones--peters, nevertheless, was far more than a match for the 
two men who remained, and would, no doubt, have dispatch them sooner, 
had it not been for the narrow space in which he had to act, and the 
tremendous lurch of the vessel. presently he was enable to get hold 
of a heavy stool, several of which lay about the floor. with this he 
beat out the brains of gree as he was in the act of discharge a 
musket at me, and immediately afterward a roll of the brig throw 
him in contact with hicks, he seize him by the throat, and, by dint of 
sheer strength, strangle him instantaneously. thus, in far less time 
than i have taken to tell it, we found ourselves master of the brig. 

the only person of our opponent who was left alive was richard parker. 
this man, it will be remembered, i had knock down with a blow from the 
pump-handle at the commencement of the attack. he now lay motionless by 
the door of the shatter stateroom; but, upon peters touching him with 
his foot, he spoke, and entreat for mercy. his head was only slightly 
cut, and otherwise he had received no injury, have been merely stun 
by the blow. he now got up, and, for the present, we secure his hand 
behind his back. the dog was still growl over jones; but, upon 
examination, we found him completely dead, the blood issue in a stream 
from a deep wound in the throat, inflicted, no doubt, by the sharp teeth 
of the animal. 

it was now about one o’clock in the morning, and the wind was still 
blow tremendously. the brig evidently labour much more than usual, 
and it became absolutely necessary that something should be done with a 
view of ease her in some measure. at almost every roll to leeward 
she ship a sea, several of which came partially down into the cabin 
during our scuffle, the hatchway have been left open by myself when i 
descended. the entire range of bulwark to larboard had been swept away, 
as well as the caboose, together with the jollyboat from the counter. 
the creak and working of the mainmast, too, gave indication that it 
was nearly sprung. to make room for more stowage in the afterhold, the 
heel of this mast had been step between deck (a very reprehensible 
practice, occasional resort to by ignorant ship-builders), so that 
it was in imminent danger of working from its step. but, to crown all 
our difficulties, we plum the well, and found no less than seven feet 
of water. 

leave the body of the crew lie in the cabin, we got to work 
immediately at the pumps--parker, of course, being set at liberty to 
assist us in the labour. augustus’s arm was bound up as well as we could 
effect it, and he did what he could, but that was not much. however, we 
found that we could just manage to keep the leak from gain upon us 
by have one pump constant going. as there were only four of us, this 
was severe labour; but we endeavour to keep up our spirits, and look 
anxious for daybreak, when we hope to lighten the brig by cutting 
away the mainmast. 

in this manner we pass a night of terrible anxiety and fatigue, and, 
when the day at length broke, the gale had neither abate in the least, 
nor were there any sign of its abating. we now drag the body 
on deck and threw them overboard. our next care was to get rid of the 
mainmast. the necessary preparation have been made, peters cut away 
at the mast (having found axe in the cabin), while the rest of us stood 
by the stays and lanyards. as the brig gave a tremendous lee-lurch, the 
word was given to cut away the weather-lanyards, which being done, the 
whole mass of wood and rigging plunge into the sea, clear of the brig, 
and without do any material injury. we now found that the vessel 
did not labour quite as much as before, but our situation was still 
exceedingly precarious, and in spite of the utmost exertions, we 
could not gain upon the leak without the aid of both pumps. the 
little assistance which augustus could render us was not really of any 
importance. to add to our distress, a heavy sea, striking the brig to 
the windward, threw her off several points from the wind, and, before 
she could regain her position, another broke completely over her, and 
hurl her full upon her beam-ends. the ballast now shift in a mass 
to leeward (the stowage had been knock about perfectly at random for 
some time), and for a few moments we thought nothing could save us from 
capsizing. presently, however, we partially righted; but the ballast 
still retain its place to larboard, we lay so much along that it was 
useless to think of working the pumps, which indeed we could not have 
done much long in any case, as our hand were entire raw with 
the excessive labour we had undergone, and were bleeding in the most 
horrible manner. 

contrary to parker’s advice, we now proceed to cut away the foremast, 
and at length accomplished it after much difficulty, owe to the 
position in which we lay. in go overboard the wreck took with it the 
bowsprit, and left us a complete hulk. 

so far we had had reason to rejoice in the escape of our longboat, 
which had received no damage from any of the huge sea which had come on 
board. but we had not long to congratulate ourselves; for the foremast 
have gone, and, of course, the foresail with it, by which the brig had 
been steadied, every sea now made a complete breach over us, and in 
five minutes our deck was swept from stem to stern, the longboat 
and starboard bulwark torn off, and even the windlass shatter into 
fragments. it was, indeed, hardly possible for us to be in a more 
pitiable condition. 

at noon there seem to be some slight appearance of the gale’s abating, 
but in this we were sadly disappointed, for it only lull for a few 
minutes to blow with redouble fury. about four in the afternoon it was 
utterly impossible to stand up against the violence of the blast; and, 
as the night closed in upon us, i had not a shadow of hope that the 
vessel would hold together until morning. 

by midnight we had settled very deep in the water, which was now up to 
the orlop deck. the rudder went soon afterward, the sea which tore it 
away lift the after portion of the brig entire from the water, 
against which she thump in her descent with such a concussion as would 
be occasion by go ashore. we had all calculate that the rudder 
would hold its own to the last, as it was unusually strong, being rig 
as i have never seen one rig either before or since. down its main 
timber there ran a succession of stout iron hooks, and other in the 
same manner down the stern-post. through these hook there extend 
a very thick wrought-iron rod, the rudder being thus held to the 
stern-post and swinging freely on the rod. the tremendous force of the 
sea which tore it off may be estimate by the fact, that the hook in 
the stern-post, which ran entire through it, being clinch on the 
inside, were drawn every one of them completely out of the solid wood. 

we had scarcely time to draw breath after the violence of this shock, 
when one of the most tremendous wave i had then ever known broke right 
on board of us, sweeping the companion-way clear off, burst in the 
hatchways, and filling every inch of the vessel with water. 




chapter 9 

luckily, just before night, all four of us had lash ourselves firm 
to the fragment of the windlass, lie in this manner as flat upon the 
deck as possible. this precaution alone save us from destruction. as 
it was, we were all more or less stun by the immense weight of water 
which tumble upon us, and which did not roll from above us until we 
were nearly exhausted. as soon as i could recover breath, i call aloud 
to my companions. augustus alone replied, saying: “it is all over with 
us, and may god have mercy upon our souls!” by-and-by both the other 
were enable to speak, when they exhort us to take courage, as there 
was still hope; it being impossible, from the nature of the cargo, that 
the brig could go down, and there being every chance that the gale would 
blow over by the morning. these words inspired me with new life; for, 
strange as it may seem, although it was obvious that a vessel with a 
cargo of empty oil-casks would not sink, i had been hitherto so confuse 
in mind as to have overlook this consideration altogether; and the 
danger which i had for some time regard as the most imminent was 
that of foundering. as hope revive within me, i made use of every 
opportunity to strengthen the lashings which held me to the remains 
of the windlass, and in this occupation i soon discover that my 
companion were also busy. the night was as dark as it could possibly 
be, and the horrible shriek din and confusion which surround us it 
is useless to attempt describing. our deck lay level with the sea, or 
rather we were encircle with a towering ridge of foam, a portion of 
which swept over us every instant. it is not too much to say that our 
head were not fairly out of the water more than one second in three. 
although we lay close together, no one of us could see the other, 
or, indeed, any portion of the brig itself, upon which we were so 
tempestuous hurl about. at interval we call one to the other, 
thus endeavour to keep alive hope, and render consolation and 
encouragement to such of us as stood most in need of it. the feeble 
condition of augustus made him an object of solicitude with us all; and 
as, from the lacerate condition of his right arm, it must have been 
impossible for him to secure his lashings with any degree of 
firmness, we were in momentary expectation of finding that he had gone 
overboard--yet to render him aid was a thing altogether out of the 
question. fortunately, his station was more secure than that of any 
of the rest of us; for the upper part of his body lie just beneath 
a portion of the shatter windlass, the seas, as they tumble in upon 
him, were greatly broken in their violence. in any other situation than 
this (into which he had been accidental thrown after have lash 
himself in a very expose spot) he must inevitable have perish before 
morning. owe to the brig’s lie so much along, we were all less 
liable to be wash off than otherwise would have been the case. the 
heel, as i have before stated, was to larboard, about one half of the 
deck being constant under water. the seas, therefore, which struck us 
to starboard were much broken, by the vessel’s side, only reach us 
in fragment as we lay flat on our faces; while those which came from 
larboard being what are call back-water seas, and obtain little 
hold upon us on account of our posture, had not sufficient force to drag 
us from our fastenings. 

in this frightful situation we lay until the day broke so as to show 
us more fully the horrors which surround us. the brig was a mere 
log, rolling about at the mercy of every wave; the gale was upon the 
increase, if any thing, blow indeed a complete hurricane, and there 
appear to us no earthly prospect of deliverance. for several hour 
we held on in silence, expect every moment that our lashings would 
either give way, that the remains of the windlass would go by the board, 
or that some of the huge seas, which roar in every direction around 
us and above us, would drive the hulk so far beneath the water that we 
should be drown before it could regain the surface. by the mercy of 
god, however, we were preserve from these imminent dangers, and about 
midday were cheer by the light of the blessed sun. shortly afterward 
we could perceive a sensible diminution in the force of the wind, when, 
now for the first time since the latter part of the evening before, 
augustus spoke, ask peters, who lay closest to him, if he thought 
there was any possibility of our being saved. as no reply was at first 
made to this question, we all conclude that the hybrid had been drown 
where he lay; but presently, to our great joy, he spoke, although very 
feebly, saying that he was in great pain, being so cut by the tight 
of his lashings across the stomach, that he must either find means of 
loosen them or perish, as it was impossible that he could endure 
his misery much longer. this occasion us great distress, as it was 
altogether useless to think of aid him in any manner while the 
sea continue washing over us as it did. we exhort him to bear his 
suffering with fortitude, and promise to seize the first opportunity 
which should offer itself to relieve him. he reply that it would soon 
be too late; that it would be all over with him before we could help 
him; and then, after moan for some minutes, lay silent, when we 
conclude that he had perished. 

as the evening drew on, the sea had fallen so much that scarcely more 
than one wave broke over the hulk from windward in the course of five 
minutes, and the wind had abate a great deal, although still blow a 
severe gale. i had not heard any of my companion speak for hours, and 
now call to augustus. he replied, although very feebly, so that 
i could not distinguish what he said. i then spoke to peters and to 
parker, neither of whom return any answer. 

shortly after this period i fell into a state of partial insensibility, 
during which the most pleasing image float in my imagination; such as 
green trees, wave meadow of ripe grain, procession of dance girls, 
troops of cavalry, and other phantasies. i now remember that, in all 
which pass before my mind’s eye, motion was a predominant idea. thus, 
i never fancy any stationary object, such as a house, a mountain, or 
any thing of that kind; but windmills, ships, large birds, balloons, 
people on horseback, carriage driving furiously, and similar moving 
objects, present themselves in endless succession. when i recover 
from this state, the sun was, as near as i could guess, an hour high. 
i had the greatest difficulty in bring to recollection the various 
circumstances connected with my situation, and for some time remain 
firm convinced that i was still in the hold of the brig, near the box, 
and that the body of parker was that of tiger. 

when i at length completely came to my senses, i found that the wind 
blew no more than a moderate breeze, and that the sea was comparatively 
calm; so much so that it only wash over the brig amidships. my left 
arm had broken loose from its lashings, and was much cut about the 
elbow; my right was entire benumbed, and the hand and wrist swollen 
prodigious by the pressure of the rope, which had work from the 
shoulder downward. i was also in great pain from another rope which 
went about my waist, and had been drawn to an insufferable degree of 
tightness. look round upon my companions, i saw that peters still 
lived, although a thick line was pull so forcibly around his loins as 
to give him the appearance of being cut nearly in two; as i stirred, he 
made a feeble motion to me with his hand, point to the rope. augustus 
gave no indication of life whatever, and was bent nearly double across a 
splinter of the windlass. parker spoke to me when he saw me moving, 
and ask me if i had not sufficient strength to release him from his 
situation, saying that if i would summon up what spirits i could, and 
contrive to untie him, we might yet save our lives; but that otherwise 
we must all perish. i told him to take courage, and i would endeavor to 
free him. feeling in my pantaloons’ pocket, i got hold of my penknife, 
and, after several ineffectual attempts, at length succeed in opening 
it. i then, with my left hand, manage to free my right from its 
fastenings, and afterward cut the other ropes which held me. upon 
attempting, however, to move from my position, i found that my leg 
fail me altogether, and that i could not get up; neither could i 
move my right arm in any direction. upon mention this to parker, he 
advise me to lie quiet for a few minutes, holding on to the windlass 
with my left hand, so as to allow time for the blood to circulate. do 
this, the numb presently began to die away so that i could move 
first one of my legs, and then the other, and, shortly afterward i 
regain the partial use of my right arm. i now crawl with great 
caution toward parker, without get on my legs, and soon cut loose 
all the lashings about him, when, after a short delay, he also recover 
the partial use of his limbs. we now lost no time in get loose the 
rope from peters. it had cut a deep gash through the waistband of his 
woollen pantaloons, and through two shirts, and made its way into his 
groin, from which the blood flow out copious as we remove the 
cordage. no soon had we remove it, however, than he spoke, and seem 
to experience instant relief--being able to move with much greater ease 
than either parker or myself--this was no doubt owe to the discharge 
of blood. 

we had little hope that augustus would recover, as he evince no sign 
of life; but, upon get to him, we discover that he had merely 
swoon from the loss of blood, the bandage we had placed around his 
wound arm have been torn off by the water; none of the ropes which 
held him to the windlass were drawn sufficient tight to occasion his 
death. have relieved him from the fastenings, and got him clear of 
the broken wood about the windlass, we secure him in a dry place to 
windward, with his head somewhat lower than his body, and all three of 
us busy ourselves in chafe his limbs. in about half an hour he came 
to himself, although it was not until the next morning that he gave 
sign of recognize any of us, or had sufficient strength to speak. by 
the time we had thus got clear of our lashings it was quite dark, and it 
began to cloud up, so that we were again in the greatest agony lest it 
should come on to blow hard, in which event nothing could have save us 
from perishing, exhaust as we were. by good fortune it continue very 
moderate during the night, the sea subside every minute, which gave 
us great hope of ultimate preservation. a gentle breeze still blew 
from the n. w., but the weather was not at all cold. augustus was lash 
careful to windward in such a manner as to prevent him from slip 
overboard with the rolls of the vessel, as he was still too weak to 
hold on at all. for ourselves there was no such necessity. we sat close 
together, support each other with the aid of the broken ropes 
about the windlass, and devise method of escape from our frightful 
situation. we derive much comfort from taking off our clothes and 
wring the water from them. when we put them on after this, they felt 
remarkably warm and pleasant, and serve to invigorate us in no little 
degree. we help augustus off with his, and wrung them for him, when he 
experienced the same comfort. 

our chief suffering were now those of hunger and thirst, and when we 
look forward to the means of relief in this respect, our heart sunk 
within us, and we were induce to regret that we had escape the 
less dreadful peril of the sea. we endeavoured, however, to console 
ourselves with the hope of being speedy picked up by some vessel 
and encourage each other to bear with fortitude the evil that might 
happen. 

the morning of the fourteenth at length dawned, and the weather still 
continue clear and pleasant, with a steady but very light breeze from 
the n. w. the sea was now quite smooth, and as, from some cause which we 
could not determine, the brig did not lie so much along as she had done 
before, the deck was comparatively dry, and we could move about with 
freedom. we had now been better than three entire days and nights 
without either food or drink, and it became absolutely necessary that we 
should make an attempt to get up something from below. as the brig was 
completely full of water, we went to this work despondently, and with 
but little expectation of being able to obtain anything. we made a kind 
of drag by driving some nail which we broke out from the remains of the 
companion-hatch into two pieces of wood. tie these across each other, 
and fastening them to the end of a rope, we threw them into the cabin, 
and drag them to and fro, in the faint hope of being thus able to 
entangle some article which might be of use to us for food, or which 
might at least render us assistance in get it. we spent the greater 
part of the morning in this labour without effect, fishing up nothing 
more than a few bedclothes, which were readily caught by the nails. 
indeed, our contrivance was so very clumsy that any greater success was 
hardly to be anticipated. 

we now try the forecastle, but equally in vain, and were upon the 
brink of despair, when peters propose that we should fasten a rope to 
his body, and let him make an attempt to get up something by dive 
into the cabin. this proposition we hail with all the delight which 
revive hope could inspire. he proceed immediately to strip off his 
clothes with the exception of his pantaloons; and a strong rope was 
then careful fasten around his middle, being brought up over 
his shoulder in such a manner that there was no possibility of its 
slipping. the undertaking was one of great difficulty and danger; for, 
as we could hardly expect to find much, if any, provision in the cabin 
itself, it was necessary that the diver, after letting himself down, 
should make a turn to the right, and proceed under water a distance of 
ten or twelve feet, in a narrow passage, to the storeroom, and return, 
without drawing breath. 

everything being ready, peters now descended in the cabin, go down 
the companion-ladder until the water reach his chin. he then plunge 
in, head first, turning to the right as he plunged, and endeavour to 
make his way to the storeroom. in this first attempt, however, he was 
altogether unsuccessful. in less than half a minute after his go down 
we felt the rope jerk violent (the signal we had agree upon when 
he desire to be drawn up). we accordingly drew him up instantly, but so 
incautious as to bruise him badly against the ladder. he had brought 
nothing with him, and had been unable to penetrate more than a very 
little way into the passage, owe to the constant exertion he found it 
necessary to make in order to keep himself from floating up against the 
deck. upon get out he was very much exhausted, and had to rest full 
fifteen minutes before he could again venture to descend. 

the second attempt met with even worse success; for he remain so long 
under water without give the signal, that, becoming alarm for his 
safety, we drew him out without it, and found that he was almost at the 
last gasp, having, as he said, repeatedly jerk at the rope without 
our feeling it. this was probably owe to a portion of it have become 
entangle in the balustrade at the foot of the ladder. this balustrade 
was, indeed, so much in the way, that we determined to remove it, if 
possible, before proceeding with our design. as we had no means of 
get it away except by main force, we all descended into the water 
as far as we could on the ladder, and give a pull against it with our 
united strength, succeed in break it down. 

the third attempt was equally unsuccessful with the two first, and it 
now became evident that nothing could be done in this manner without the 
aid of some weight with which the diver might steady himself, and keep 
to the floor of the cabin while making his search. for a long time we 
look about in vain for something which might answer this purpose; but 
at length, to our great joy, we discover one of the weather-forechains 
so loose that we had not the least difficulty in wrench it off. 
have fasten this secure to one of his ankles, peters now made his 
fourth descent into the cabin, and this time succeed in making his way 
to the door of the steward’s room. to his inexpressible grief, however, 
he found it locked, and was oblige to return without effect an 
entrance, as, with the greatest exertion, he could remain under water 
not more, at the utmost extent, than a single minute. our affair now 
look gloomy indeed, and neither augustus nor myself could refrain from 
burst into tears, as we thought of the host of difficulty which 
encompass us, and the slight probability which exist of our finally 
making an escape. but this weakness was not of long duration. throw 
ourselves on our knee to god, we implore his aid in the many danger 
which beset us; and arose with renew hope and vigor to think what 
could yet be done by mortal means toward accomplish our deliverance. 




chapter 10 

shortly afterward an incident occur which i am induce to look upon 
as more intense productive of emotion, as far more replete with the 
extreme first of delight and then of horror, than even any of the 
thousand chance which afterward befell me in nine long years, crowded 
with event of the most startle and, in many cases, of the most 
unconceived and unconceivable character. we were lie on the deck near 
the companion-way, and debate the possibility of yet making our way 
into the storeroom, when, look toward augustus, who lay front 
myself, i perceive that he had become all at once deadly pale, and that 
his lip were quiver in the most singular and unaccountable manner. 
greatly alarmed, i spoke to him, but he made me no reply, and i was 
beginning to think that he was sudden taken ill, when i took notice 
of his eyes, which were glaring apparently at some object behind me. i 
turn my head, and shall never forget the ecstatic joy which thrill 
through every particle of my frame, when i perceive a large brig 
bearing down upon us, and not more than a couple of mile off. i sprung 
to my feet as if a musket bullet had sudden struck me to the heart; 
and, stretch out my arms in the direction of the vessel, stood in 
this manner, motionless, and unable to articulate a syllable. peters 
and parker were equally affected, although in different ways. the former 
dance about the deck like a madman, utter the most extravagant 
rhodomontades, intermingle with howl and imprecations, while the 
latter burst into tears, and continue for many minutes weeping like a 
child. 

the vessel in sight was a large hermaphrodite brig, of a dutch build, 
and paint black, with a tawdry gilt figure-head. she had evidently 
seen a good deal of rough weather, and, we supposed, had suffer 
much in the gale which had prove so disastrous to ourselves; for her 
foretopmast was gone, and some of her starboard bulwarks. when we first 
saw her, she was, as i have already said, about two mile off and to 
windward, bearing down upon us. the breeze was very gentle, and what 
astonish us chiefly was, that she had no other sail set than her 
foremast and mainsail, with a flying jib--of course she came down but 
slowly, and our impatience amount nearly to phrensy. the awkward 
manner in which she steered, too, was remark by all of us, even 
excited as we were. she yaw about so considerably, that once or twice 
we thought it impossible she could see us, or imagine that, have seen 
us, and discover no person on board, she was about to tack and make 
off in another direction. upon each of these occasion we scream and 
shout at the top of our voices, when the stranger would appear to 
change for a moment her intention, and again hold on toward us--this 
singular conduct being repeated two or three times, so that at last we 
could think of no other manner of account for it than by supposing 
the helmsman to be in liquor. 

no person was seen upon her deck until she arrive within about a 
quarter of a mile of us. we then saw three seamen, whom by their dress 
we took to be hollanders. two of these were lie on some old sail near 
the forecastle, and the third, who appear to be look at us with 
great curiosity, was leaning over the starboard bow near the bowsprit. 
this last was a stout and tall man, with a very dark skin. he seem 
by his manner to be encourage us to have patience, nod to us in 
a cheerful although rather odd way, and smile constantly, so as to 
display a set of the most brilliant white teeth. as his vessel drew 
nearer, we saw a red flannel cap which he had on fall from his head into 
the water; but of this he took little or no notice, continue his 
odd smile and gesticulations. i relate these things and circumstances 
minutely, and i relate them, it must be understood, precisely as they 
_appeared _to us. 

the brig came on slowly, and now more steady than before, and--i 
cannot speak calm of this event--our heart leap up wildly within 
us, and we pour out our whole soul in shout and thanksgiving to 
god for the complete, unexpected, and glorious deliverance that was so 
palpable at hand. of a sudden, and all at once, there came waft over 
the ocean from the strange vessel (which was now close upon us) a 
smell, a stench, such as the whole world has no name for--no conception 
of--hellish--utterly suffocating--insufferable, inconceivable. i gasp 
for breath, and turning to my companions, perceive that they were pale 
than marble. but we had now no time left for question or surmise--the 
brig was within fifty feet of us, and it seem to be her intention to 
run under our counter, that we might board her without putt out a 
boat. we rush aft, when, suddenly, a wide yaw threw her off full five 
or six points from the course she had been running, and, as she pass 
under our stern at the distance of about twenty feet, we had a full view 
of her decks. shall i ever forget the triple horror of that spectacle? 
twenty-five or thirty human bodies, among whom were several females, lay 
scattered about between the counter and the galley in the last and most 
loathsome state of putrefaction. we plainly saw that not a soul live in 
that fated vessel! yet we could not help shouting to the dead for help! 
yes, long and loud did we beg, in the agony of the moment, that those 
silent and disgust image would stay for us, would not abandon us to 
become like them, would receive us among their goodly company! we were 
raving with horror and despair--thoroughly mad through the anguish of 
our grievous disappointment. 

as our first loud yell of terror broke forth, it was reply to by 
something, from near the bowsprit of the stranger, so close resemble 
the scream of a human voice that the nicest ear might have been startle 
and deceived. at this instant another sudden yaw brought the region of 
the forecastle for a moment into view, and we beheld at once the origin 
of the sound. we saw the tall stout figure still leaning on the bulwark, 
and still nod his head to and fro, but his face was now turn from 
us so that we could not behold it. his arms were extend over the rail, 
and the palm of his hand fell outward. his knee were lodge upon 
a stout rope, tight stretched, and reach from the heel of the 
bowsprit to a cathead. on his back, from which a portion of the shirt 
had been torn, leave it bare, there sat a huge sea-gull, busy 
gorge itself with the horrible flesh, its bill and talon deep buried, 
and its white plumage spatter all over with blood. as the brig move 
farther round so as to bring us close in view, the bird, with much 
apparent difficulty, drew out its crimson head, and, after eye us 
for a moment as if stupefied, arose lazy from the body upon which it 
had been feasting, and, flying directly above our deck, hover there 
a while with a portion of clot and liver-like substance in its beak. 
the horrid morsel drop at length with a sullen splash immediately 
at the feet of parker. may god forgive me, but now, for the first time, 
there flash through my mind a thought, a thought which i will not 
mention, and i felt myself making a step toward the ensanguined spot. 
i look upward, and the eyes of augustus met my own with a degree of 
intense and eager meaning which immediately brought me to my senses. i 
sprang forward quickly, and, with a deep shudder, threw the frightful 
thing into the sea. 

the body from which it had been taken, rest as it did upon the rope, 
had been easily sway to and fro by the exertion of the carnivorous 
bird, and it was this motion which had at first impress us with the 
belief of its being alive. as the gull relieved it of its weight, 
it swung round and fell partially over, so that the face was fully 
discovered. never, surely, was any object so terribly full of awe! the 
eyes were gone, and the whole flesh around the mouth, leave the teeth 
utterly naked. this, then, was the smile which had cheer us on to 
hope! this the--but i forbear. the brig, as i have already told, pass 
under our stern, and made its way slow but steady to leeward. with 
her and with her terrible crew went all our gay vision of deliverance 
and joy. deliberate as she went by, we might possibly have found means 
of boarding her, had not our sudden disappointment and the appalling 
nature of the discovery which accompany it laid entire prostrate 
every active faculty of mind and body. we had seen and felt, but 
we could neither think nor act, until, alas! too late. how much our 
intellect had been weaken by this incident may be estimate by the 
fact, that when the vessel had proceed so far that we could perceive 
no more than the half of her hull, the proposition was seriously 
entertain of attempt to overtake her by swimming! 

i have, since this period, vain endeavour to obtain some clew to the 
hideous uncertainty which envelop the fate of the stranger. her build 
and general appearance, as i have before stated, led us to the belief 
that she was a dutch trader, and the dress of the crew also sustain 
this opinion. we might have easily seen the name upon her stern, and, 
indeed, taken other observations, which would have guide us in making 
out her character; but the intense excitement of the moment blind us 
to every thing of that nature. from the saffron-like hue of such of the 
corpse as were not entire decayed, we conclude that the whole of her 
company had perish by the yellow fever, or some other virulent disease 
of the same fearful kind. if such were the case (and i know not what 
else to imagine), death, to judge from the position of the bodies, must 
have come upon them in a manner awfully sudden and overwhelming, in a 
way total distinct from that which generally characterize even 
the most deadly pestilence with which mankind are acquainted. it is 
possible, indeed, that poison, accidental introduce into some of 
their sea-stores, may have brought about the disaster, or that the 
eat of some unknown venomous species of fish, or other marine animal, 
or ocean bird, might have induce it--but it is utterly useless to 
form conjecture where all is involved, and will, no doubt, remain for 
ever involved, in the most appalling and unfathomable mystery. 




chapter 11 

we spent the remainder of the day in a condition of stupid lethargy, 
gaze after the retreat vessel until the darkness, hiding her from 
our sight, recall us in some measure to our senses. the pang 
of hunger and thirst then returned, absorbing all other care and 
considerations. nothing, however, could be done until the morning, 
and, secure ourselves as well as possible, we endeavour to snatch 
a little repose. in this i succeed beyond my expectations, sleep 
until my companions, who had not been so fortunate, arouse me at 
daybreak to renew our attempt at get up provisions from the hull. 

it was now a dead calm, with the sea as smooth as i have ever known 
it,--the weather warm and pleasant. the brig was out of sight. we 
commence our operation by wrench off, with some trouble, another of 
the forechains; and have fasten both to peters’ feet, he again made 
an endeavour to reach the door of the storeroom, thinking it possible 
that he might be able to force it open, provided he could get at it 
in sufficient time; and this he hope to do, as the hulk lay much more 
steady than before. 

he succeed very quick in reach the door, when, loosen one of 
the chain from his ankle, he made every exertion to force the passage 
with it, but in vain, the framework of the room being far strong than 
was anticipated. he was quite exhaust with his long stay under water, 
and it became absolutely necessary that some other one of us should take 
his place. for this service parker immediately volunteered; but, after 
making three ineffectual efforts, found that he could never even succeed 
in get near the door. the condition of augustus’s wound arm 
render it useless for him to attempt go down, as he would be 
unable to force the room open should he reach it, and it accordingly now 
devolve upon me to exert myself for our common deliverance. 

peters had left one of the chain in the passage, and i found, upon 
plunge in, that i had not sufficient balance to keep me firm down. 
i determined, therefore, to attempt no more, in my first effort, than 
merely to recover the other chain. in grope along the floor of the 
passage for this, i felt a hard substance, which i immediately grasped, 
not have time to ascertain what it was, but return and ascend 
instantly to the surface. the prize prove to be a bottle, and our joy 
may be conceive when i say that it was found to be full of port 
wine. give thanks to god for this timely and cheering assistance, we 
immediately drew the cork with my penknife, and, each taking a moderate 
sup, felt the most indescribable comfort from the warmth, strength, 
and spirits with which it inspired us. we then careful recorke the 
bottle, and, by means of a handkerchief, swung it in such a manner that 
there was no possibility of its get broken. 

have rest a while after this fortunate discovery, i again descended, 
and now recover the chain, with which i instantly came up. i then 
fasten it on and went down for the third time, when i became fully 
satisfy that no exertion whatever, in that situation, would enable 
me to force open the door of the storeroom. i therefore return in 
despair. 

there seem now to be no long any room for hope, and i could perceive 
in the countenance of my companion that they had made up their 
mind to perish. the wine had evidently produce in them a species 
of delirium, which, perhaps, i had been prevent from feeling by the 
immersion i had undergone since drink it. they talk incoherently, 
and about matter unconnected with our condition, peters repeatedly 
ask me question about nantucket. augustus, too, i remember, 
approach me with a serious air, and request me to lend him a 
pocket-comb, as his hair was full of fish-scales, and he wish to get 
them out before go on shore. parker appear somewhat less affected, 
and urge me to dive at random into the cabin, and bring up any article 
which might come to hand. to this i consented, and, in the first 
attempt, after stay under a full minute, brought up a small leather 
trunk belong to captain barnard. this was immediately open in the 
faint hope that it might contain something to eat or drink. we found 
nothing, however, except a box of razor and two linen shirts. i now 
went down again, and return without any success. as my head came 
above water i heard a crash on deck, and, upon get up, saw that my 
companion had ungrateful taken advantage of my absence to drink the 
remainder of the wine, have let the bottle fall in the endeavour 
to replace it before i saw them. i remonstrate with them on the 
heartless of their conduct, when augustus burst into tears. the 
other two endeavour to laugh the matter off as a joke, but i hope 
never again to behold laughter of such a species: the distortion of 
countenance was absolutely frightful. indeed, it was apparent that the 
stimulus, in the empty state of their stomachs, had taken instant and 
violent effect, and that they were all exceedingly intoxicated. with 
great difficulty i prevail upon them to lie down, when they fell very 
soon into a heavy slumber, accompany with loud stertorous breathing. 

i now found myself, as it were, alone in the brig, and my reflections, 
to be sure, were of the most fearful and gloomy nature. no prospect 
offer itself to my view but a lingering death by famine, or, at the 
best, by being overwhelm in the first gale which should spring up, 
for in our present exhaust condition we could have no hope of living 
through another. 

the gnawing hunger which i now experienced was nearly insupportable, and 
i felt myself capable of go to any length in order to appease 
it. with my knife i cut off a small portion of the leather trunk, and 
endeavour to eat it, but found it utterly impossible to swallow a 
single morsel, although i fancy that some little alleviate of my 
suffering was obtain by chew small pieces of it and spit 
them out. toward night my companion awoke, one by one, each in an 
indescribable state of weakness and horror, brought on by the wine, 
whose fumes had now evaporated. they shook as if with a violent ague, 
and utter the most lamentable cries for water. their condition 
affected me in the most lively degree, at the same time cause me to 
rejoice in the fortunate train of circumstances which had prevent 
me from indulge in the wine, and consequently from share their 
melancholy and most distressing sensations. their conduct, however, 
gave me great uneasy and alarm; for it was evident that, unless 
some favourable change took place, they could afford me no assistance in 
providing for our common safety. i had not yet abandoned all idea of being 
able to get up something from below; but the attempt could not possibly 
be resume until some one of them was sufficient master of himself to 
aid me by holding the end of the rope while i went down. parker appear 
to be somewhat more in possession of his senses than the others, and i 
endeavoured, by every means in my power, to rouse him. thinking that a 
plunge in the sea-water might have a beneficial effect, i contrived to 
fasten the end of a rope around his body, and then, leading him to the 
companion-way (he remain quite passive all the while), pushed him in, 
and immediately drew him out. i had good reason to congratulate myself 
upon have made this experiment; for he appear much revive and 
invigorated, and, upon get out, ask me, in a rational manner, why 
i had so serve him. have explain my object, he express himself 
indebted to me, and said that he felt greatly better from the immersion, 
afterward converse sensible upon our situation. we then resolve to 
treat augustus and peters in the same way, which we immediately did, 
when they both experienced much benefit from the shock. this idea of 
sudden immersion had been suggest to me by reading in some medical 
work the good effect of the shower-bath in a case where the patient was 
suffering from _mania a potu_. 

finding that i could now trust my companion to hold the end of the 
rope, i again made three or four plunge into the cabin, although it was 
now quite dark, and a gentle but long swell from the northward render 
the hulk somewhat unsteady. in the course of these attempt i succeed 
in bring up two case-knives, a three-gallon jug, empty, and a 
blanket, but nothing which could serve us for food. i continue my 
efforts, after get these articles, until i was completely exhausted, 
but brought up nothing else. during the night parker and peters occupy 
themselves by turn in the same manner; but nothing coming to hand, we 
now gave up this attempt in despair, conclude that we were exhaust 
ourselves in vain. 

we pass the remainder of this night in a state of the most intense 
mental and bodily anguish that can possibly be imagined. the morning of 
the sixteenth at length dawned, and we look eager around the horizon 
for relief, but to no purpose. the sea was still smooth, with only a 
long swell from the northward, as on yesterday. this was the sixth day 
since we had taste either food or drink, with the exception of the 
bottle of port wine, and it was clear that we could hold out but a very 
little while long unless something could be obtained. i never saw 
before, nor wish to see again, human being so utterly emaciate as 
peters and augustus. had i met them on shore in their present condition 
i should not have had the slightest suspicion that i had ever beheld 
them. their countenance were total change in character, so that i 
could not bring myself to believe them really the same individual with 
whom i had been in company but a few days before. parker, although sadly 
reduced, and so feeble that he could not raise his head from his bosom, 
was not so far gone as the other two. he suffer with great patience, 
making no complaint, and endeavour to inspire us with hope in every 
manner he could devise. for myself, although at the commencement of 
the voyage i had been in bad health, and was at all times of a delicate 
constitution, i suffer less than any of us, being much less reduce in 
frame, and retain my powers of mind in a surprising degree, while the 
rest were completely prostrate in intellect, and seem to be 
brought to a species of second childhood, generally simper in 
their expressions, with idiot smiles, and utter the most absurd 
platitudes. at intervals, however, they would appear to revive suddenly, 
as if inspired all at once with a consciousness of their condition, when 
they would spring upon their feet in a momentary flash of vigour, and 
speak, for a short period, of their prospects, in a manner altogether 
rational, although full of the most intense despair. it is possible, 
however, that my companion may have entertain the same opinion of 
their own condition as i did of mine, and that i may have 
unwitting been guilty of the same extravagance and imbecility as 
themselves--this is a matter which cannot be determined. 

about noon parker declared that he saw land off the larboard quarter, 
and it was with the utmost difficulty i could restrain him from plunge 
into the sea with the view of swimming toward it. peters and augustus 
took little notice of what he said, being apparently wrap up in moody 
contemplation. upon look in the direction pointed out, i could not 
perceive the faintest appearance of the shore--indeed, i was too well 
aware that we were far from any land to indulge in a hope of that 
nature. it was a long time, nevertheless, before i could convince parker 
of his mistake. he then burst into a flood of tears, weeping like a 
child, with loud cries and sobs, for two or three hours, when becoming 
exhausted, he fell asleep. 

peters and augustus now made several ineffectual effort to swallow 
portion of the leather. i advise them to chew it and spit it out; but 
they were too excessive debilitate to be able to follow my advice. i 
continue to chew pieces of it at intervals, and found some relief from 
so doing; my chief distress was for water, and i was only prevent from 
taking a draught from the sea by remember the horrible consequence 
which thus have result to other who were similarly situated with 
ourselves. 

the day wore on in this manner, when i sudden discover a sail to the 
eastward, and on our larboard bow. she appear to be a large ship, and 
was coming nearly athwart us, being probably twelve or fifteen mile 
distant. none of my companion had as yet discover her, and i forbore 
to tell them of her for the present, lest we might again be disappointed 
of relief. at length upon her get nearer, i saw distinct that she 
was heading immediately for us, with her light sail filled. i could now 
contain myself no longer, and pointed her out to my fellow-sufferers. 
they immediately sprang to their feet, again indulge in the most 
extravagant demonstration of joy, weeping, laugh in an idiot 
manner, jumping, stamp upon the deck, tear their hair, and pray 
and curse by turns. i was so affected by their conduct, as well as 
by what i considered a sure prospect of deliverance, that i could not 
refrain from join in with their madness, and gave way to the impulse 
of my gratitude and ecstasy by lie and rolling on the deck, clap 
my hands, shouting, and other similar acts, until i was sudden call 
to my recollection, and once more to the extreme human misery and 
despair, by perceive the ship all at once with her stern fully 
present toward us, and steer in a direction nearly opposite to that 
in which i had at first perceive her. 

it was some time before i could induce my poor companion to believe 
that this sad reverse in our prospects had actually taken place. they 
reply to all my assertion with a stare and a gesture imply that 
they were not to be deceive by such misrepresentations. the conduct of 
augustus most sensible affected me. in spite of all i could say or do to 
the contrary, he persist in saying that the ship was rapid near 
us, and in making preparation to go on board of her. some seaweed 
floating by the brig, he maintain that it was the ship’s boat, and 
endeavour to throw himself upon it, howling and shriek in the most 
heartrending manner, when i forcibly restrained him from thus casting 
himself into the sea. 

have become in some degree pacified, we continue to watch the ship 
until we finally lost sight of her, the weather becoming hazy, with 
a light breeze spring up. as soon as she was entire gone, parker 
turn sudden toward me with an expression of countenance which made 
me shudder. there was about him an air of self-possession which i had 
not notice in him until now, and before he open his lip my heart 
told me what he would say. he proposed, in a few words, that one of us 
should die to preserve the existence of the others. 




chapter 12 

i had for some time past, dwelt upon the prospect of our being reduce 
to this last horrible extremity, and had secret made up my mind to 
suffer death in any shape or under any circumstances rather than resort 
to such a course. nor was this resolution in any degree weaken by the 
present intensity of hunger under which i laboured. the proposition had 
not been heard by either peters or augustus. i therefore took parker 
aside; and mental pray to god for power to dissuade him from the 
horrible purpose he entertained, i expostulate with him for a long 
time, and in the most supplicate manner, beg him in the name of 
every thing which he held sacred, and urge him by every species of 
argument which the extremity of the case suggested, to abandon the idea, 
and not to mention it to either of the other two. 

he heard all i said without attempt to controvert any of my 
arguments, and i had begun to hope that he would be prevail upon to do 
as i desired. but when i had cease speaking, he said that he knew very 
well all i had said was true, and that to resort to such a course was 
the most horrible alternative which could enter into the mind of man; 
but that he had now held out as long as human nature could be sustained; 
that it was unnecessary for all to perish, when, by the death of one, 
it was possible, and even probable, that the rest might be finally 
preserved; add that i might save myself the trouble of try to turn 
him from his purpose, his mind have been thorough made up on the 
subject even before the appearance of the ship, and that only her 
heave in sight had prevent him from mention his intention at an 
early period. 

i now beg him, if he would not be prevail upon to abandon his 
design, at least to defer it for another day, when some vessel might 
come to our relief; again reiterate every argument i could devise, and 
which i thought likely to have influence with one of his rough nature. 
he said, in reply, that he had not spoken until the very last possible 
moment, that he could exist no long without sustenance of some kind, 
and that therefore in another day his suggestion would be too late, as 
regard himself at least. 

finding that he was not to be move by anything i could say in a mild 
tone, i now assume a different demeanor, and told him that he must be 
aware i had suffer less than any of us from our calamities; that my 
health and strength, consequently, were at that moment far better than 
his own, or than that either of peters or augustus; in short, that i was 
in a condition to have my own way by force if i found it necessary; 
and that if he attempt in any manner to acquaint the other with his 
bloody and cannibal designs, i would not hesitate to throw him into the 
sea. upon this he immediately seize me by the throat, and drawing a 
knife, made several ineffectual effort to stab me in the stomach; 
an atrocity which his excessive debility alone prevent him from 
accomplishing. in the meantime, being rouse to a high pitch of anger, i 
forced him to the vessel’s side, with the full intention of throw him 
overboard. he was save from his fate, however, by the interference of 
peters, who now approach and separate us, ask the cause of the 
disturbance. this parker told before i could find means in any manner to 
prevent him. 

the effect of his words was even more terrible than what i had 
anticipated. both augustus and peters, who, it seems, had long secret 
entertain the same fearful idea which parker had been merely the 
first to broach, join with him in his design and insist upon its 
immediately being carry into effect. i had calculate that one at 
least of the two former would be found still possessed of sufficient 
strength of mind to side with myself in resist any attempt to execute 
so dreadful a purpose, and, with the aid of either one of them, i had no 
fear of being able to prevent its accomplishment. being disappointed in 
this expectation, it became absolutely necessary that i should attend 
to my own safety, as a further resistance on my part might possibly be 
considered by men in their frightful condition a sufficient excuse 
for refuse me fair play in the tragedy that i knew would speedy be 
enacted. 

i now told them i was willing to submit to the proposal, merely 
request a delay of about one hour, in order that the fog which had 
gather around us might have an opportunity of lifting, when it was 
possible that the ship we had seen might be again in sight. after great 
difficulty i obtain from them a promise to wait thus long; and, as i 
had anticipate (a breeze rapid coming in), the fog lift before the 
hour had expired, when, no vessel appear in sight, we prepared to 
draw lots. 

it is with extreme reluctance that i dwell upon the appalling scene 
which ensued; a scene which, with its minutest details, no after event 
have been able to efface in the slightest degree from my memory, 
and whose stern recollection will embitter every future moment of my 
existence. let me run over this portion of my narrative with as much 
haste as the nature of the event to be spoken of will permit. the only 
method we could devise for the terrific lottery, in which we were to 
take each a chance, was that of drawing straws. small splinter of wood 
were made to answer our purpose, and it was agree that i should be 
the holder. i retired to one end of the hulk, while my poor companion 
silent took up their station in the other with their back turn 
toward me. the bitterest anxiety which i endure at any period of this 
fearful drama was while i occupy myself in the arrangement of the 
lots. there are few conditions into which man can possibly fall where he 
will not feel a deep interest in the preservation of his existence; 
an interest momentarily increase with the frail of the tenure by 
which that existence may be held. but now that the silent, definite, and 
stern nature of the business in which i was engaged (so different from 
the tumultuous danger of the storm or the gradual approach horrors 
of famine) allow me to reflect on the few chance i had of escape 
the most appalling of deaths--a death for the most appalling of 
purposes--every particle of that energy which had so long buoy me up 
departed like feather before the wind, leave me a helpless prey to 
the most abject and pitiable terror. i could not, at first, even summon 
up sufficient strength to tear and fit together the small splinter of 
wood, my finger absolutely refuse their office, and my knee knock 
violent against each other. my mind ran over rapid a thousand absurd 
project by which to avoid becoming a partner in the awful speculation. 
i thought of fall on my knee to my companions, and entreat them 
to let me escape this necessity; of sudden rush upon them, and, 
by putt one of them to death, of rendering the decision by lot 
useless--in short, of every thing but of go through with the matter 
i had in hand. at last, after waste a long time in this imbecile 
conduct, i was recall to my senses by the voice of parker, who urge 
me to relieve them at once from the terrible anxiety they were enduring. 
even then i could not bring myself to arrange the splinter upon the 
spot, but thought over every species of finesse by which i could trick 
some one of my fellow-sufferers to draw the short straw, as it had been 
agree that whoever drew the shortest of four splinter from my hand was 
to die for the preservation of the rest. before any one condemn me for 
this apparent heartlessness, let him be placed in a situation precisely 
similar to my own. 

at length delay was no long possible, and, with a heart almost 
burst from my bosom, i advanced to the region of the forecastle, 
where my companion were await me. i held out my hand with the 
splinters, and peters immediately drew. he was free--his, at least, was 
not the shortest; and there was now another chance against my escape. 
i summon up all my strength, and pass the lot to augustus. he also 
drew immediately, and he also was free; and now, whether i should live 
or die, the chance were no more than precisely even. at this moment 
all the fierce of the tiger possessed my bosom, and i felt toward 
my poor fellow-creature, parker, the most intense, the most diabolical 
hatred. but the feeling did not last; and, at length, with a convulsive 
shudder and closed eyes, i held out the two remain splinter toward 
him. it was fully five minutes before he could summon resolution to 
draw, during which period of heartrending suspense i never once open 
my eyes. presently one of the two lot was quick drawn from my hand. 
the decision was then over, yet i knew not whether it was for me or 
against me. no one spoke, and still i dare not satisfy myself by 
look at the splinter i held. peters at length took me by the 
hand, and i forced myself to look up, when i immediately saw by the 
countenance of parker that i was safe, and that he it was who had been 
doom to suffer. gasp for breath, i fell senseless to the deck. 

i recover from my swoon in time to behold the consummation of the 
tragedy in the death of him who had been chiefly instrumental in 
bring it about. he made no resistance whatever, and was stab in 
the back by peters, when he fell instantly dead. i must not dwell 
upon the fearful repast which immediately ensued. such things may be 
imagined, but words have no power to impress the mind with the exquisite 
horror of their reality. let it suffice to say that, have in some 
measure appease the rage thirst which consume us by the blood of 
the victim, and have by common consent taken off the hands, feet, 
and head, throw them together with the entrails, into the sea, we 
devour the rest of the body, piecemeal, during the four ever memorable 
days of the seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth of the 
month. 

on the nineteenth, there coming on a smart shower which last fifteen 
or twenty minutes, we contrived to catch some water by means of a sheet 
which had been fish up from the cabin by our drag just after the gale. 
the quantity we took in all did not amount to more than half a gallon; 
but even this scanty allowance supply us with comparative strength and 
hope. 

on the twenty-first we were again reduce to the last necessity. the 
weather still remain warm and pleasant, with occasional fog and light 
breezes, most usually from n. to w. 

on the twenty-second, as we were sitting close huddle together, 
gloomy revolving over our lamentable condition, there flash through 
my mind all at once an idea which inspired me with a bright gleam of 
hope. i remember that, when the foremast had been cut away, peters, 
being in the windward chains, pass one of the axe into my hand, 
request me to put it, if possible, in a place of security, and that 
a few minutes before the last heavy sea struck the brig and fill her 
i had taken this axe into the forecastle and laid it in one of the 
larboard berths. i now thought it possible that, by get at this 
axe, we might cut through the deck over the storeroom, and thus readily 
supply ourselves with provisions. 

when i communicate this object to my companions, they utter a feeble 
shout of joy, and we all proceed forthwith to the forecastle. the 
difficulty of descend here was greater than that of go down in the 
cabin, the opening being much smaller, for it will be remember that 
the whole framework about the cabin companion-hatch had been carry 
away, whereas the forecastle-way, being a simple hatch of only about 
three feet square, had remain uninjured. i did not hesitate, however, 
to attempt the descent; and a rope being fasten round my body as 
before, i plunge bold in, feet foremost, made my way quick to the 
berth, and at the first attempt brought up the axe. it was hail with 
the most ecstatic joy and triumph, and the ease with which it had been 
obtain was regard as an omen of our ultimate preservation. 

we now commence cutting at the deck with all the energy of rekindle 
hope, peters and myself taking the axe by turns, augustus’s wound arm 
not permit him to aid us in any degree. as we were still so feeble 
as to be scarcely able to stand unsupported, and could consequently work 
but a minute or two without resting, it soon became evident that many 
long hour would be necessary to accomplish our task--that is, to cut an 
opening sufficient large to admit of a free access to the storeroom. 
this consideration, however, did not discourage us; and, working all 
night by the light of the moon, we succeed in effect our purpose by 
daybreak on the morning of the twenty-third. 

peters now volunteer to go down; and, have made all arrangement 
as before, he descended, and soon return bring up with him a small 
jar, which, to our great joy, prove to be full of olives. have 
share these among us, and devour them with the greatest avidity, 
we proceed to let him down again. this time he succeed beyond our 
utmost expectations, return instantly with a large ham and a bottle 
of madeira wine. of the latter we each took a moderate sup, have 
learned by experience the pernicious consequence of indulge too 
freely. the ham, except about two pound near the bone, was not in a 
condition to be eaten, have been entire spoil by the salt water. 
the sound part was divide among us. peters and augustus, not being able 
to restrain their appetite, swallow theirs upon the instant; but i was 
more cautious, and ate but a small portion of mine, dread the thirst 
which i knew would ensue. we now rest a while from our labors, which 
had been intolerable severe. 

by noon, feeling somewhat strengthen and refreshed, we again renew 
our attempt at get up provisions, peters and myself go down 
alternately, and always with more or less success, until sundown. during 
this interval we had the good fortune to bring up, altogether, four 
more small jar of olives, another ham, a carboy contain nearly three 
gallon of excellent cape madeira wine, and, what gave us still more 
delight, a small tortoise of the gallipago breed, several of which had 
been taken on board by captain barnard, as the _grampus_ was leave 
port, from the schooner _mary pitts_, just return from a sealing 
voyage in the pacific. 

in a subsequent portion of this narrative i shall have frequent occasion 
to mention this species of tortoise. it is found principally, as most 
of my reader may know, in the group of island call the gallipagos, 
which, indeed, derive their name from the animal--the spain word 
gallipago meaning a fresh-water terrapin. from the peculiarity of their 
shape and action they have been sometimes call the elephant tortoise. 
they are frequent found of an enormous size. i have myself seen 
several which would weigh from twelve to fifteen hundred pounds, 
although i do not remember that any navigator speak of have seen them 
weigh more than eight hundred. their appearance is singular, and even 
disgusting. their steps are very slow, measured, and heavy, their body 
being carry about a foot from the ground. their neck is long, and 
exceedingly slender, from eighteen inch to two feet is a very common 
length, and i kill one, where the distance from the shoulder to the 
extremity of the head was no less than three feet ten inches. the head 
has a striking resemblance to that of a serpent. they can exist without 
food for an almost incredible length of time, instance have been 
known where they have been thrown into the hold of a vessel and lain 
two years without nourishment of any kind--being as fat, and, in every 
respect, in as good order at the expiration of the time as when they 
were first put in. in one particular these extraordinary animal bear 
a resemblance to the dromedary, or camel of the desert. in a bag at the 
root of the neck they carry with them a constant supply of water. in 
some instances, upon killing them after a full year’s deprivation of all 
nourishment, as much as three gallon of perfectly sweet and fresh water 
have been found in their bags. their food is chiefly wild parsley and 
celery, with purslain, sea-kelp, and prickly pears, upon which latter 
vegetable they thrive wonderfully, a great quantity of it being usually 
found on the hillside near the shore wherever the animal itself is 
discovered. they are excellent and highly nutritious food, and have, 
no doubt, been the means of preserve the lives of thousand of seamen 
employ in the whale-fishery and other pursuit in the pacific. 

the one which we had the good fortune to bring up from the storeroom was 
not of a large size, weigh probably sixty-five or seventy pounds. 
it was a female, and in excellent condition, being exceedingly fat, and 
have more than a quart of limpid and sweet water in its bag. this 
was indeed a treasure; and, fall on our knee with one accord, we 
return fervent thanks to god for so seasonable a relief. 

we had great difficulty in get the animal up through the opening, as 
its struggle were fierce and its strength prodigious. it was upon the 
point of making its escape from peter’s grasp, and slip back into 
the water, when augustus, throw a rope with a slipknot around its 
throat, held it up in this manner until i jump into the hole by the 
side of peters, and assist him in lift it out. 

the water we drew careful from the bag into the jug; which, it will be 
remembered, had been brought up before from the cabin. have done this, 
we broke off the neck of a bottle so as to form, with the cork, a kind 
of glass, holding not quite half a gill. we then each drank one of these 
measure full, and resolve to limit ourselves to this quantity per day 
as long as it should hold out. 

during the last two or three days, the weather have been dry and 
pleasant, the bedding we had obtain from the cabin, as well as our 
clothing, had become thorough dry, so that we pass this night (that 
of the twenty-third) in comparative comfort, enjoy a tranquil 
repose, after have sup plentiful on olive and ham, with a 
small allowance of the wine. being afraid of lose some of our stores 
overboard during the night, in the event of a breeze spring up, we 
secure them as well as possible with cordage to the fragment of the 
windlass. our tortoise, which we were anxious to preserve alive as long 
as we could, we threw on its back, and otherwise careful fastened. 




chapter 13 

july 24. this morning saw us wonderful recruit in spirits and 
strength. notwithstanding the perilous situation in which we were still 
placed, ignorant of our position, although certainly at a great distance 
from land, without more food than would last us for a fortnight even 
with great care, almost entire without water, and floating about at 
the mercy of every wind and wave on the merest wreck in the world, still 
the infinite more terrible distress and danger from which we had so 
lately and so providential been deliver cause us to regard what 
we now endure as but little more than an ordinary evil--so strict 
comparative is either good or ill. 

at sunrise we were prepare to renew our attempt at get up 
something from the storeroom, when, a smart shower coming on, with some 
lightning, we turn our attention to the catching of water by means of 
the sheet we had use before for this purpose. we had no other means of 
collect the rain than by holding the sheet spread out with one of the 
forechain-plates in the middle of it. the water, thus conduct to the 
centre, was drain through into our jug. we had nearly fill it in 
this manner, when, a heavy squall coming on from the northward, oblige 
us to desist, as the hulk began once more to roll so violent that 
we could no long keep our feet. we now went forward, and, lashing 
ourselves secure to the remnant of the windlass as before, await the 
event with far more calm than could have been anticipate or would 
have been imagine possible under the circumstances. at noon the wind 
had freshen into a two-reef breeze, and by night into a stiff gale, 
accompany with a tremendous heavy swell. experience have taught 
us, however, the best method of arrange our lashings, we weather 
this dreary night in tolerable security, although thorough drench at 
almost every instant by the sea, and in momentary dread of being wash 
off. fortunately, the weather was so warm as to render the water rather 
grateful than otherwise. 

july 25. this morning the gale had diminish to a mere ten-knot breeze, 
and the sea had gone down with it so considerably that we were able to 
keep ourselves dry upon the deck. to our great grief, however, we found 
that two jar of our olives, as well as the whole of our ham, had been 
wash overboard, in spite of the careful manner in which they had been 
fastened. we determined not to kill the tortoise as yet, and contented 
ourselves for the present with a breakfast on a few of the olives, and 
a measure of water each, which latter we mixed half and half, with 
wine, finding great relief and strength from the mixture, without the 
distressing intoxicate which had ensue upon drink the port. the 
sea was still far too rough for the renewal of our effort at get up 
provision from the storeroom. several articles, of no importance to us 
in our present situation, float up through the opening during the day, 
and were immediately wash overboard. we also now observe that the 
hulk lay more along than ever, so that we could not stand an instant 
without lashing ourselves. on this account we pass a gloomy and 
uncomfortable day. at noon the sun appear to be nearly vertical, and 
we had no doubt that we had been driven down by the long succession of 
northward and northwesterly wind into the near vicinity of the equator. 
toward evening we saw several sharks, and were somewhat alarm by the 
audacious manner in which an enormously large one approach us. at one 
time, a lurch throw the deck very far beneath the water, the monster 
actually swam in upon us, flounder for some moments just over the 
companion-hatch, and striking peters violent with his tail. a heavy 
sea at length hurl him overboard, much to our relief. in moderate 
weather we might have easily capture him. 

july 26. this morning, the wind have greatly abated, and the sea not 
being very rough, we determined to renew our exertion in the storeroom. 
after a great deal of hard labor during the whole day, we found that 
nothing further was to be expect from this quarter, the partition of 
the room have been stove during the night, and its contents swept into 
the hold. this discovery, as may be supposed, fill us with despair. 

july 27. the sea nearly smooth, with a light wind, and still from the 
northward and westward. the sun coming out hotly in the afternoon, 
we occupy ourselves in dry our clothes. found great relief from 
thirst, and much comfort otherwise, by bathing in the sea; in this, 
however, we were forced to use great caution, being afraid of sharks, 
several of which were seen swimming around the brig during the day. 

july 28. good weather still. the brig now began to lie along so 
alarming that we fear she would eventually roll bottom up. prepared 
ourselves as well as we could for this emergency, lashing our tortoise, 
waterjug, and two remain jar of olive as far as possible over to 
the windward, place them outside the hull below the main-chains. the 
sea very smooth all day, with little or no wind. 

july 29. a continuance of the same weather. augustus’s wound arm began 
to evince symptom of mortification. he complain of drowsy and 
excessive thirst, but no acute pain. nothing could be done for his 
relief beyond rubbing his wound with a little of the vinegar from the 
olives, and from this no benefit seem to be experienced. we did every 
thing in our power for his comfort, and treble his allowance of water. 

july 30. an excessive hot day, with no wind. an enormous shark kept 
close by the hulk during the whole of the forenoon. we made several 
unsuccessful attempt to capture him by means of a noose. augustus much 
worse, and evidently sink as much from want of proper nourishment as 
from the effect of his wounds. he constant pray to be relieved from 
his sufferings, wish for nothing but death. this evening we ate the 
last of our olives, and found the water in our jug so putrid that we 
could not swallow it at all without the addition of wine. determined to 
kill our tortoise in the morning. 

july 31. after a night of excessive anxiety and fatigue, owe to the 
position of the hulk, we set about killing and cutting up our tortoise. 
he prove to be much small than we had supposed, although in good 
condition,--the whole meat about him not amount to more than ten 
pounds. with a view of preserve a portion of this as long as possible, 
we cut it into fine pieces, and fill with them our three remain 
olive jar and the wine-bottle (all of which had been kept), pour in 
afterward the vinegar from the olives. in this manner we put away about 
three pound of the tortoise, intend not to touch it until we had 
consume the rest. we conclude to restrict ourselves to about four 
ounce of the meat per day; the whole would thus last us thirteen days. 
a brisk shower, with severe thunder and lightning, came on about dusk, 
but last so short a time that we only succeed in catching about 
half a pint of water. the whole of this, by common consent, was given 
to augustus, who now appear to be in the last extremity. he drank the 
water from the sheet as we caught it (we holding it above him as he lay 
so as to let it run into his mouth), for we had now nothing left capable 
of holding water, unless we had chosen to empty out our wine from the 
carboy, or the stale water from the jug. either of these expedient 
would have been resort to had the shower lasted. 

the sufferer seem to derive but little benefit from the draught. his 
arm was completely black from the wrist to the shoulder, and his feet 
were like ice. we expect every moment to see him breathe his last. 
he was frightfully emaciated; so much so that, although he weigh a 
hundred and twenty-seven pound upon his leave nantucket, he now did 
not weigh more than forty or fifty at the farthest. his eyes were sunk 
far in his head, being scarcely perceptible, and the skin of his 
cheek hung so loose as to prevent his masticate any food, or even 
swallow any liquid, without great difficulty. 

august 1. a continuance of the same calm weather, with an oppressive 
hot sun. suffer exceedingly from thirst, the water in the jug being 
absolutely putrid and swarm with vermin. we contrived, nevertheless, 
to swallow a portion of it by mix it with wine; our thirst, however, 
was but little abated. we found more relief by bathing in the sea, but 
could not avail ourselves of this expedient except at long intervals, 
on account of the continual presence of sharks. we now saw clearly that 
augustus could not be saved; that he was evidently dying. we could do 
nothing to relieve his sufferings, which appear to be great. about 
twelve o’clock he expire in strong convulsions, and without have 
spoken for several hours. his death fill us with the most gloomy 
forebodings, and had so great an effect upon our spirits that we sat 
motionless by the corpse during the whole day, and never address each 
other except in a whisper. it was not until some time after dark that 
we took courage to get up and throw the body overboard. it was then 
loathsome beyond expression, and so far decay that, as peters 
attempt to lift it, an entire leg came off in his grasp. as the mass 
of putrefaction slip over the vessel’s side into the water, the glare 
of phosphoric light with which it was surround plainly discover to 
us seven or eight large sharks, the clash of whose horrible teeth, as 
their prey was torn to pieces among them, might have been heard at 
the distance of a mile. we shrunk within ourselves in the extremity of 
horror at the sound. 

august 2. the same fearful calm and hot weather. the dawn found us in 
a state of pitiable dejection as well as bodily exhaustion. the water 
in the jug was now absolutely useless, being a thick gelatinous mass; 
nothing but frightful-looking worm mingle with slime. we threw it out, 
and wash the jug well in the sea, afterward pour a little vinegar 
in it from our bottle of pickled tortoise. our thirst could now 
scarcely be endured, and we try in vain to relieve it by wine, which 
seem only to add fuel to the flame, and excited us to a high degree 
of intoxication. we afterward endeavour to relieve our suffering by 
mix the wine with seawater; but this instantly brought about the most 
violent retchings, so that we never again attempt it. during the whole 
day we anxious sought an opportunity of bathing, but to no purpose; 
for the hulk was now entire besiege on all side with sharks--no 
doubt the identical monster who had devour our poor companion on the 
evening before, and who were in momentary expectation of another similar 
feast. this circumstance occasion us the most bitter regret and 
fill us with the most depress and melancholy forebodings. we had 
experienced indescribable relief in bathing, and to have this resource 
cut off in so frightful a manner was more than we could bear. nor, 
indeed, were we altogether free from the apprehension of immediate 
danger, for the least slip or false movement would have thrown us 
at once within reach of those voracious fish, who frequent thrust 
themselves directly upon us, swimming up to leeward. no shout or 
exertion on our part seem to alarm them. even when one of the largest 
was struck with an axe by peters and much wounded, he persist in his 
attempt to push in where we were. a cloud came up at dusk, but, to our 
extreme anguish, pass over without discharge itself. it is quite 
impossible to conceive our suffering from thirst at this period. we 
pass a sleepless night, both on this account and through dread of the 
sharks. 

august 3. no prospect of relief, and the brig lie still more and more 
along, so that now we could not maintain a footing upon deck at all. 
busy ourselves in secure our wine and tortoise-meat, so that we 
might not lose them in the event of our rolling over. got out two stout 
spike from the forechains, and, by means of the axe, drove them into 
the hull to windward within a couple of feet of the water, this not 
being very far from the keel, as we were nearly upon our beam-ends. to 
these spike we now lash our provisions, as being more secure than 
their former position beneath the chains. suffer great agony from 
thirst during the whole day--no chance of bathing on account of the 
sharks, which never left us for a moment. found it impossible to sleep. 

august 4. a little before daybreak we perceive that the hulk was 
heel over, and arouse ourselves to prevent being thrown off by the 
movement. at first the roll was slow and gradual, and we contrived to 
clamber over to windward very well, have taken the precaution to leave 
ropes hanging from the spike we had driven in for the provision. but 
we had not calculate sufficient upon the acceleration of the impetus; 
for, presently the heel became too violent to allow of our keeping pace 
with it; and, before either of us knew what was to happen, we found 
ourselves hurl furiously into the sea, and struggle several fathom 
beneath the surface, with the huge hull immediately above us. 

in go under the water i had been oblige to let go my hold upon 
the rope; and finding that i was completely beneath the vessel, and 
my strength nearly exhausted, i scarcely made a struggle for life, 
and resigned myself, in a few seconds, to die. but here again i was 
deceived, not have taken into consideration the natural rebound of 
the hull to windward. the whirl of the water upward, which the vessel 
occasion in rolling partially back, brought me to the surface still 
more violent than i had been plunge beneath. upon coming up i found 
myself about twenty yard from the hulk, as near as i could judge. she 
was lie keel up, rock furiously from side to side, and the sea in 
all directions around was much agitated, and full of strong whirlpools. 
i could see nothing of peters. an oil-cask was floating within a few 
feet of me, and various other articles from the brig were scattered 
about. 

my principal terror was now on account of the sharks, which i knew to be 
in my vicinity. in order to deter these, if possible, from approach 
me, i splash the water vigorous with both hand and feet as i swam 
towards the hulk, create a body of foam. i have no doubt that to this 
expedient, simple as it was, i was indebted for my preservation; for 
the sea all round the brig, just before her rolling over, was so crowded 
with these monsters, that i must have been, and really was, in actual 
contact with some of them during my progress. by great good fortune, 
however, i reach the side of the vessel in safety, although so utterly 
weaken by the violent exertion i had use that i should never have 
been able to get upon it but for the timely assistance of peters, who, 
now, to my great joy, made his appearance (having scramble up to the 
keel from the opposite side of the hull), and threw me the end of a 
rope--one of those which had been attach to the spikes. 

have barely escape this danger, our attention was now direct to the 
dreadful imminent of another--that of absolute starvation. our whole 
stock of provision had been swept overboard in spite of all our care in 
secure it; and seeing no long the remotest possibility of obtain 
more, we gave way both of us to despair, weeping aloud like children, 
and neither of us attempt to offer consolation to the other. such 
weakness can scarcely be conceived, and to those who have never been 
similarly situated will, no doubt, appear unnatural; but it must be 
remember that our intellect were so entire disorder by the long 
course of privation and terror to which we had been subjected, that we 
could not just be considered, at that period, in the light of rational 
beings. in subsequent perils, nearly as great, if not greater, i bore 
up with fortitude against all the evil of my situation, and peters, it 
will be seen, evince a stoical philosophy nearly as incredible as his 
present childlike supine and imbecility--the mental condition made 
the difference. 

the overturn of the brig, even with the consequent loss of the 
wine and turtle, would not, in fact, have render our situation more 
deplorable than before, except for the disappearance of the bedclothes 
by which we had been hitherto enable to catch rainwater, and of the jug 
in which we had kept it when caught; for we found the whole bottom, from 
within two or three feet of the bends as far as the keel, together with 
the keel itself, thick cover with large barnacles, which prove 
to be excellent and highly nutritious food. thus, in two important 
respects, the accident we had so greatly dread prove to be a benefit 
rather than an injury; it had open to us a supply of provisions which 
we could not have exhausted, use it moderately, in a month; and it had 
greatly contribute to our comfort as regards position, we being much 
more at ease, and in infinite less danger, than before. 

the difficulty, however, of now obtain water blind us to all the 
benefit of the change in our condition. that we might be ready to avail 
ourselves, as far as possible, of any shower which might fall we took 
off our shirts, to make use of them as we had of the sheets--not hoping, 
of course, to get more in this way, even under the most favorable 
circumstances, than half a gill at a time. no sign of a cloud appear 
during the day, and the agony of our thirst were nearly intolerable. 
at night, peters obtain about an hour’s disturbed sleep, but my 
intense suffering would not permit me to close my eyes for a single 
moment. 

august 5. to-day, a gentle breeze spring up carry us through a vast 
quantity of seaweed, among which we were so fortunate as to find eleven 
small crabs, which afford us several delicious meals. their shell 
being quite soft, we ate them entire, and found that they irritate our 
thirst far less than the barnacles. seeing no trace of shark among the 
seaweed, we also venture to bathe, and remain in the water for four 
or five hours, during which we experienced a very sensible diminution 
of our thirst. were greatly refreshed, and spent the night somewhat more 
comfortable than before, both of us snatch a little sleep. 

august 6. this day we were blessed by a brisk and continual rain, 
lasting from about noon until after dark. bitter did we now regret the 
loss of our jug and carboy; for, in spite of the little means we had of 
catching the water, we might have fill one, if not both of them. as 
it was, we contrived to satisfy the craving of thirst by suffering 
the shirt to become saturated, and then wring them so as to let the 
grateful fluid trickle into our mouths. in this occupation we pass the 
entire day. 

august 7. just at daybreak we both at the same instant descry a 
sail to the eastward, and _evidently coming towards us!_ we hail the 
glorious sight with a long, although feeble shout of rapture; and began 
instantly to make every signal in our power, by flare the shirt in 
the air, leap as high as our weak condition would permit, and even by 
hallooe with all the strength of our lungs, although the vessel 
could not have been less than fifteen mile distant. however, she 
still continue to near our hulk, and we felt that, if she but held her 
present course, she must eventually come so close as to perceive us. in 
about an hour after we first discover her, we could clearly see the 
people on her decks. she was a long, low, and rakish-looking topsail 
schooner, with a black ball in her foretopsail, and had, apparently, 
a full crew. we now became alarmed, for we could hardly imagine it 
possible that she did not observe us, and were apprehensive that she 
meant to leave us to perish as we were--an act of fiendish barbarity, 
which, however incredible it may appear, has been repeatedly perpetuate 
at sea, under circumstances very nearly similar, and by being who 
were regard as belong to the human species. {*2} in this instance, 
however, by the mercy of god, we were destined to be most happily 
deceived; for, presently we were aware of a sudden commotion on the deck 
of the stranger, who immediately afterward ran up a britain flag, and, 
haul her wind, bore up directly upon us. in half an hour more 
we found ourselves in her cabin. she prove to be the jane guy, of 
liverpool, captain guy, bound on a sealing and trade voyage to the 
south sea and pacific. 




chapter 14 

the _jane guy_ was a fine-looking topsail schooner of a hundred and 
eighty ton burden. she was unusually sharp in the bows, and on a wind, 
in moderate weather, the fastest sail i have ever seen. her qualities, 
however, as a rough sea-boat, were not so good, and her draught of water 
was by far too great for the trade to which she was destined. for this 
peculiar service, a large vessel, and one of a light proportionate 
draught, is desirable--say a vessel of from three hundred to three 
hundred and fifty tons. she should be bark-rigged, and in other respects 
of a different construction from the usual south sea ships. it is 
absolutely necessary that she should be well armed. she should have, say 
ten or twelve twelve-pound carronades, and two or three long twelves, 
with brass blunderbusses, and water-tight arm-chests for each top. her 
anchor and cable should be of far greater strength than is require 
for any other species of trade, and, above all, her crew should be 
numerous and efficient--not less, for such a vessel as i have described, 
than fifty or sixty able-bodied men. the jane guy had a crew of 
thirty-five, all able seamen, besides the captain and mate, but she 
was not altogether as well armed or otherwise equipped, as a navigator 
acquaint with the difficulty and danger of the trade could have 
desired. 

captain guy was a gentleman of great urban of manner, and of 
considerable experience in the southern traffic, to which he had devoted 
a great portion of his life. he was deficient, however, in energy, and, 
consequently, in that spirit of enterprise which is here so absolutely 
requisite. he was part owner of the vessel in which he sailed, and was 
invest with discretionary powers to cruise in the south sea for any 
cargo which might come most readily to hand. he had on board, as usual 
in such voyages, beads, looking-glasses, tinder-works, axes, hatchets, 
saws, adzes, planes, chisels, gouges, gimlets, files, spokeshaves, 
rasps, hammers, nails, knives, scissors, razors, needles, thread, 
crockery-ware, calico, trinkets, and other similar articles. 

the schooner sail from liverpool on the tenth of july, cross the 
tropic of cancer on the twenty-fifth, in longitude twenty degree west, 
and reach sal, one of the cape verd islands, on the twenty-ninth, 
where she took in salt and other necessaries for the voyage. on 
the third of august, she left the cape verd and steer southwest, 
stretch over toward the coast of brazil, so as to cross the equator 
between the meridian of twenty-eight and thirty degree west longitude. 
this is the course usually taken by vessel bound from europe to the 
cape of good hope, or by that route to the east indies. by proceeding 
thus they avoid the calm and strong contrary current which continual 
prevail on the coast of guinea, while, in the end, it is found to be the 
shortest track, as westerly wind are never wanting afterward by which 
to reach the cape. it was captain guy’s intention to make his first 
stoppage at kerguelen’s land--i hardly know for what reason. on the 
day we were picked up the schooner was off cape st. roque, in longitude 
thirty-one degree west; so that, when found, we had drift probably, 
from north to south, _not less than five-and-twenty degrees!_ 

on board the jane guy we were treat with all the kindness our 
distress situation demanded. in about a fortnight, during which time 
we continue steer to the southeast, with gentle breeze and fine 
weather, both peters and myself recover entire from the effects of 
our late privation and dreadful sufferings, and we began to remember 
what had pass rather as a frightful dream from which we had been 
happily awakened, than as event which had taken place in sober and 
naked reality. i have since found that this species of partial oblivion 
is usually brought about by sudden transition, whether from joy 
to sorrow or from sorrow to joy--the degree of forgetful being 
proportion to the degree of difference in the exchange. thus, in my 
own case, i now feel it impossible to realize the full extent of 
the misery which i endure during the days spent upon the hulk. the 
incident are remembered, but not the feelings which the incident 
elicit at the time of their occurrence. i only know, that when they 
did occur, i then thought human nature could sustain nothing more of 
agony. 

we continue our voyage for some week without any incident of 
greater moment than the occasional meeting with whaling-ships, and more 
frequent with the black or right whale, so call in contradistinction 
to the spermaceti. these, however, were chiefly found south of the 
twenty-fifth parallel. on the sixteenth of september, being in the 
vicinity of the cape of good hope, the schooner encounter her first 
gale of any violence since leave liverpool. in this neighborhood, but 
more frequent to the south and east of the promontory (we were to 
the westward), navigator have often to contend with storm from the 
northward, which rage with great fury. they always bring with them a 
heavy sea, and one of their most dangerous features is the instantaneous 
chop round of the wind, an occurrence almost certain to take place 
during the greatest force of the gale. a perfect hurricane will be 
blow at one moment from the northward or northeast, and in the next 
not a breath of wind will be felt in that direction, while from 
the southwest it will come out all at once with a violence almost 
inconceivable. a bright spot to the southward is the sure forerunner of 
the change, and vessel are thus enable to take the proper precautions. 

it was about six in the morning when the blow came on with a white 
squall, and, as usual, from the northward. by eight it had increase 
very much, and brought down upon us one of the most tremendous sea i 
had then ever beheld. every thing had been made as snug as possible, 
but the schooner labour excessively, and gave evidence of her bad 
quality as a seaboat, pitch her forecastle under at every plunge 
and with the greatest difficulty struggle up from one wave before she 
was bury in another. just before sunset the bright spot for which we 
had been on the look-out made its appearance in the southwest, and in 
an hour afterward we perceive the little headsail we carry flap 
listless against the mast. in two minutes more, in spite of every 
preparation, we were hurl on our beam-ends, as if by magic, and a 
perfect wilderness of foam made a clear breach over us as we lay. the 
blow from the southwest, however, lucky prove to be nothing more than 
a squall, and we had the good fortune to right the vessel without the 
loss of a spar. a heavy cross sea gave us great trouble for a few hour 
after this, but toward morning we found ourselves in nearly as good 
condition as before the gale. captain guy considered that he had made an 
escape little less than miraculous. 

on the thirteenth of october we came in sight of prince edward’s island, 
in latitude 46 degree 53’ s., longitude 37 degree 46’ e. two days 
afterward we found ourselves near possession island, and presently 
pass the island of crozet, in latitude 42 degree 59’ s., longitude 
48 degree e. on the eighteenth we made kerguelen’s or desolate 
island, in the southern indian ocean, and came to anchor in christmas 
harbour, have four fathom of water. 

this island, or rather group of islands, bear southeast from the cape 
of good hope, and is distant therefrom nearly eight hundred leagues. it 
was first discover in 1772, by the baron de kergulen, or kerguelen, 
a frenchman, who, thinking the land to form a portion of an extensive 
southern continent carry home information to that effect, which 
produce much excitement at the time. the government, taking the matter 
up, sent the baron back in the following year for the purpose of 
give his new discovery a critical examination, when the mistake was 
discovered. in 1777, captain cook fell in with the same group, and gave 
to the principal one the name of desolate island, a title which 
it certainly well deserves. upon approach the land, however, the 
navigator might be induce to suppose otherwise, as the side of most 
of the hills, from september to march, are clothe with very brilliant 
verdure. this deceitful appearance is cause by a small plant resemble 
saxifrage, which is abundant, grow in large patch on a species 
of crumble moss. besides this plant there is scarcely a sign of 
vegetation on the island, if we except some coarse rank grass near the 
harbor, some lichen, and a shrub which bear resemblance to a cabbage 
shoot into seed, and which has a bitter and acrid taste. 

the face of the country is hilly, although none of the hill can be 
call lofty. their tops are perpetual cover with snow. there are 
several harbors, of which christmas harbour is the most convenient. it 
is the first to be met with on the northeast side of the island after 
passing cape francois, which form the northern shore, and, by its 
peculiar shape, serve to distinguish the harbour. its project point 
terminate in a high rock, through which is a large hole, form a 
natural arch. the entrance is in latitude 48 degree 40’ s., longitude 
69 degree 6’ e. passing in here, good anchorage may be found under the 
shelter of several small islands, which form a sufficient protection 
from all easterly winds. proceeding on eastward from this anchorage 
you come to wasp bay, at the head of the harbour. this is a small basin, 
completely landlocked, into which you can go with four fathoms, and find 
anchorage in from ten to three, hard clay bottom. a ship might lie 
here with her best bower ahead all the year round without risk. to the 
westward, at the head of wasp bay, is a small stream of excellent water, 
easily procured. 

some seal of the fur and hair species are still to be found on 
kerguelen’s island, and sea elephant abound. the feather tribe are 
discover in great numbers. penguin are very plenty, and of these 
there are four different kinds. the royal penguin, so call from its 
size and beautiful plumage, is the largest. the upper part of the body 
is usually gray, sometimes of a lilac tint; the under portion of the 
purest white imaginable. the head is of a glossy and most brilliant 
black, the feet also. the chief beauty of plumage, however, consist in 
two broad stripe of a gold color, which pass along from the head to the 
breast. the bill is long, and either pink or bright scarlet. these bird 
walk erect; with a stately carriage. they carry their head high with 
their wings droop like two arms, and, as their tails project from 
their body in a line with the legs, the resemblance to a human figure 
is very striking, and would be apt to deceive the spectator at a casual 
glance or in the gloom of the evening. the royal penguin which we met 
with on kerguelen’s land were rather large than a goose. the other 
kind are the macaroni, the jackass, and the rookery penguin. these 
are much smaller, less beautiful in plumage, and different in other 
respects. 

besides the penguin many other bird are here to be found, among which 
may be mention sea-hens, blue peterels, teal, ducks, port egmont hens, 
shags, cape pigeons, the nelly, sea swallows, terns, sea gulls, mother 
carey’s chickens, mother carey’s geese, or the great peterel, and, 
lastly, the albatross. 

the great peterel is as large as the common albatross, and is 
carnivorous. it is frequent call the break-bones, or osprey peterel. 
they are not at all shy, and, when properly cooked, are palatable food. 
in flying they sometimes sail very close to the surface of the water, 
with the wings expanded, without appear to move them in the least 
degree, or make any exertion with them whatever. 

the albatross is one of the largest and fiercest of the south sea birds. 
it is of the gull species, and take its prey on the wing, never coming 
on land except for the purpose of breeding. between this bird and the 
penguin the most singular friendship exists. their nest are 
construct with great uniform upon a plan concerted between the two 
species--that of the albatross being placed in the centre of a little 
square form by the nest of four penguins. navigator have agree in 
calling an assemblage of such encampment a rookery. these rookery 
have been often described, but as my reader may not all have seen these 
descriptions, and as i shall have occasion hereafter to speak of the 
penguin and albatross, it will not be amiss to say something here of 
their mode of building and living. 

when the season for incubation arrives, the bird assemble in vast 
numbers, and for some days appear to be deliberate upon the proper 
course to be pursued. at length they proceed to action. a level piece of 
ground is selected, of suitable extent, usually comprise three or four 
acres, and situated as near the sea as possible, being still beyond its 
reach. the spot is chosen with reference to its even of surface, and 
that is prefer which is the least encumber with stones. this 
matter being arranged, the bird proceed, with one accord, and actuate 
apparently by one mind, to trace out, with mathematics accuracy, either 
a square or other parallelogram, as may best suit the nature of the 
ground, and of just sufficient size to accommodate easily all the bird 
assembled, and no more--in this particular seeming determined upon 
prevent the access of future straggle who have not participate in 
the labor of the encampment. one side of the place thus marked out runs 
parallel with the water’s edge, and is left open for ingress or egress. 

have define the limit of the rookery, the colony now begin to clear 
it of every species of rubbish, pick up stone by stone, and carry 
them outside of the lines, and close by them, so as to form a wall on 
the three inland sides. just within this wall a perfectly level and 
smooth walk is formed, from six to eight feet wide, and extend around 
the encampment--thus serving the purpose of a general promenade. 

the next process is to partition out the whole area into small square 
exactly equal in size. this is done by form narrow paths, very 
smooth, and crossing each other at right angle throughout the entire 
extent of the rookery. at each intersection of these path the nest of 
an albatross is constructed, and a penguin’s nest in the centre of each 
square--thus every penguin is surround by four albatrosses, and each 
albatross by a like number of penguins. the penguin’s nest consist of a 
hole in the earth, very shallow, being only just of sufficient depth to 
keep her single egg from rolling. the albatross is somewhat less simple 
in her arrangements, erect a hillock about a foot high and two in 
diameter. this is made of earth, seaweed, and shells. on its summit she 
build her nest. 

the bird take especial care never to leave their nest unoccupy for 
an instant during the period of incubation, or, indeed, until the young 
progeny are sufficient strong to take care of themselves. while the 
male is absent at sea in search of food, the female remains on duty, and 
it is only upon the return of her partner that she venture abroad. the 
egg are never left uncover at all--while one bird leaves the nest the 
other nestling in by its side. this precaution is render necessary 
by the thieving propensity prevalent in the rookery, the inhabitant 
making no scruple to purloin each other’s egg at every good 
opportunity. 

although there are some rookery in which the penguin and albatross are 
the sole population, yet in most of them a variety of ocean bird 
are to be met with, enjoy all the privilege of citizenship, and 
scatter their nest here and there, wherever they can find room, 
never interfering, however, with the station of the large species. 
the appearance of such encampments, when seen from a distance, is 
exceedingly singular. the whole atmosphere just above the settlement 
is darken with the immense number of the albatross (mingled with the 
small tribes) which are continual hover over it, either go to 
the ocean or return home. at the same time a crowd of penguin are 
to be observed, some passing to and fro in the narrow alleys, and some 
march with the military strut so peculiar to them, around the general 
promenade ground which encircle the rookery. in short, survey it as 
we will, nothing can be more astonish than the spirit of reflection 
evince by these feather beings, and nothing surely can be better 
calculate to elicit reflection in every well-regulated human intellect. 

on the morning after our arrival in christmas harbour the chief mate, 
mr. patterson, took the boats, and (although it was somewhat early in 
the season) went in search of seal, leave the captain and a young 
relation of his on a point of barren land to the westward, they have 
some business, whose nature i could not ascertain, to transact in the 
interior of the island. captain guy took with him a bottle, in which was 
a seal letter, and made his way from the point on which he was set on 
shore toward one of the highest peak in the place. it is probable that 
his design was to leave the letter on that height for some vessel 
which he expect to come after him. as soon as we lost sight of him 
we proceed (peters and myself being in the mate’s boat) on our cruise 
around the coast, look for seal. in this business we were occupy 
about three weeks, examine with great care every nook and corner, 
not only of kerguelen’s land, but of the several small island in the 
vicinity. our labours, however, were not crown with any important 
success. we saw a great many fur seal, but they were exceedingly shy, 
and with the greatest exertions, we could only procure three hundred 
and fifty skin in all. sea elephant were abundant, especially on the 
western coast of the mainland, but of these we kill only twenty, and 
this with great difficulty. on the small island we discover a 
good many of the hair seal, but did not molest them. we return to the 
schooner on the eleventh, where we found captain guy and his nephew, 
who gave a very bad account of the interior, represent it as one 
of the most dreary and utterly barren country in the world. they had 
remain two nights on the island, owe to some misunderstanding, on 
the part of the second mate, in regard to the send a jollyboat from 
the schooner to take them off. 




chapter 15 

on the twelfth we made sail from christmas harbour retrace our way to 
the westward, and leave marion’s island, one of crozet’s group, on the 
larboard. we afterward pass prince edward’s island, leave it also on 
our left, then, steer more to the northward, made, in fifteen days, 
the island of tristan d’acunha, in latitude 37 degree 8’ s, longitude 
12 degree 8’ w. 

this group, now so well known, and which consist of three circular 
islands, was first discover by the portuguese, and was visit 
afterward by the dutch in 1643, and by the france in 1767. the three 
island together form a triangle, and are distant from each other about 
ten miles, there being fine open passage between. the land in all of 
them is very high, especially in tristan d’acunha, properly so called. 
this is the largest of the group, being fifteen mile in circumference, 
and so elevated that it can be seen in clear weather at the distance of 
eighty or ninety miles. a part of the land toward the north rise more 
than a thousand feet perpendicular from the sea. a tableland at this 
height extend back nearly to the centre of the island, and from this 
tableland arise a lofty cone like that of teneriffe. the lower half of 
this cone is clothe with tree of good size, but the upper region is 
barren rock, usually hidden among the clouds, and cover with snow 
during the greater part of the year. there are no shoal or other 
danger about the island, the shore being remarkably bold and the water 
deep. on the northwestern coast is a bay, with a beach of black sand 
where a landing with boat can be easily effected, provided there be a 
southerly wind. plenty of excellent water may here be readily procured; 
also cod and other fish may be taken with hook and line. 

the next island in point of size, and the most westward of the group, 
is that call the inaccessible. its precise situation is 37 degree 17’ 
s. latitude, longitude 12 degree 24’ w. it is seven or eight mile in 
circumference, and on all side presents a forbidding and precipitous 
aspect. its top is perfectly flat, and the whole region is sterile, 
nothing grow upon it except a few stunt shrubs. 

nightingale island, the smallest and most southerly, is in latitude 37 
degree 26’ s., longitude 12 degree 12’ w. off its southern extremity 
is a high ledge of rocky islets; a few also of a similar appearance are 
seen to the northeast. the ground is irregular and sterile, and a deep 
valley partially separate it. 

the shore of these island abound, in the proper season, with sea 
lions, sea elephants, the hair and fur seal, together with a great 
variety of ocean birds. whale are also plenty in their vicinity. 
owe to the ease with which these various animal were here formerly 
taken, the group has been much visit since its discovery. the dutch 
and france frequent it at a very early period. in 1790, captain 
patten, of the ship industry, of philadelphia, made tristan d’acunha, 
where he remain seven month (from august, 1790, to april, 1791) for 
the purpose of collect sealskins. in this time he gather no less 
than five thousand six hundred, and say that he would have had no 
difficulty in load a large ship with oil in three weeks. upon his 
arrival he found no quadrupeds, with the exception of a few wild goats; 
the island now abound with all our most valuable domestic animals, 
which have been introduce by subsequent navigators. 

i believe it was not long after captain patten’s visit that captain 
colquhoun, of the america brig betsey, touched at the largest of the 
island for the purpose of refreshment. he plant onions, potatoes, 
cabbages, and a great many other vegetables, an abundance of all which 
is now to be met with. 

in 1811, a captain haywood, in the nereus, visit tristan. he found 
there three americans, who were reside upon the island to prepare 
sealskin and oil. one of these men was name jonathan lambert, and 
he call himself the sovereign of the country. he had clear and 
cultivated about sixty acre of land, and turn his attention to 
raise the coffee-plant and sugar-cane, with which he had been 
furnish by the america minister at rio janeiro. this settlement, 
however, was finally abandoned, and in 1817 the island were taken 
possession of by the britain government, who sent a detachment for that 
purpose from the cape of good hope. they did not, however, retain them 
long; but, upon the evacuate of the country as a britain possession, 
two or three english family took up their residence there 
independent of the government. on the twenty-fifth of march, 1824, the 
berwick, captain jeffrey, from london to van diemen’s land, arrive at 
the place, where they found an englishman of the name of glass, formerly 
a corporal in the britain artillery. he claim to be supreme governor 
of the islands, and had under his control twenty-one men and three 
women. he gave a very favourable account of the salubr of the 
climate and of the productive of the soil. the population occupy 
themselves chiefly in collect sealskin and sea elephant oil, 
with which they trade to the cape of good hope, glass own a 
small schooner. at the period of our arrival the governor was still a 
resident, but his little community had multiplied, there being 
fifty-six person upon tristan, besides a small settlement of seven on 
nightingale island. we had no difficulty in procure almost every 
kind of refreshment which we required--sheep, hogs, bullocks, rabbits, 
poultry, goats, fish in great variety, and vegetable were abundant. 
have come to anchor close in with the large island, in eighteen 
fathoms, we took all we want on board very conveniently. captain 
guy also purchase of glass five hundred sealskin and some ivory. we 
remain here a week, during which the prevailing wind were from the 
northward and westward, and the weather somewhat hazy. on the fifth of 
november we made sail to the southward and westward, with the intention 
of have a thorough search for a group of island call the auroras, 
respecting whose existence a great diversity of opinion has existed. 

these island are said to have been discover as early as 1762, by the 
commander of the ship aurora. in 1790, captain manuel de oyarvido, in 
the ship princess, belong to the royal philippine company, sailed, as 
he asserts, directly among them. in 1794, the spain corvette atrevida 
went with the determination of ascertain their precise situation, 
and, in a paper publish by the royal hydrographic society of 
madrid in the year 1809, the following language is use respecting 
this expedition: “the corvette atrevida practised, in their immediate 
vicinity, from the twenty-first to the twenty-seventh of january, all 
the necessary observations, and measured by chronometer the difference 
of longitude between these island and the port of soledad in the 
manillas. the island are three, they are very nearly in the same 
meridian; the centre one is rather low, and the other two may be seen 
at nine leagues’ distance.” the observations made on board the atrevida 
give the following result as the precise situation of each island. 
the most northern is in latitude 52 degree 37’ 24” s., longitude 47 
degrees, 43’ 15” w.; the middle one in latitude 53 degree 2’ 40” s., 
longitude 47 degree 55’ 15” w.; and the most southern in latitude 53 
degree 15’ 22” s., longitude 47 degree 57’ 15” w. 

on the twenty-seventh of january, 1820, captain james weddel, of the 
britain navy, sail from staten land also in search of the auroras. he 
report that, have made the most diligent search and pass not only 
immediately over the spot indicate by the commander of the atrevida, 
but in every direction throughout the vicinity of these spots, he 
could discover no indication of land. these conflict statement have 
induce other navigator to look out for the islands; and, strange to 
say, while some have sail through every inch of sea where they are 
supposed to lie without finding them, there have been not a few who 
declare positively that they have seen them; and even been close in 
with their shores. it was captain guy’s intention to make every exertion 
within his power to settle the question so oddly in dispute. {*3} 

we kept on our course, between the south and west, with variable 
weather, until the twentieth of the month, when we found ourselves on 
the debate ground, being in latitude 53 degree 15’ s., longitude 47 
degree 58’ w.--that is to say, very nearly upon the spot indicate as 
the situation of the most southern of the group. not perceive any sign 
of land, we continue to the westward of the parallel of fifty-three 
degree south, as far as the meridian of fifty degree west. we then 
stood to the north as far as the parallel of fifty-two degree south, 
when we turn to the eastward, and kept our parallel by double 
altitudes, morning and evening, and meridian altitude of the planet 
and moon. have thus gone eastward to the meridian of the western 
coast of georgia, we kept that meridian until we were in the latitude 
from which we set out. we then took diagonal course throughout the 
entire extent of sea circumscribed, keeping a lookout constant at the 
masthead, and repeating our examination with the greatest care for a 
period of three weeks, during which the weather was remarkably pleasant 
and fair, with no haze whatsoever. of course we were thorough 
satisfy that, whatever island might have exist in this vicinity at 
any former period, no vestige of them remain at the present day. since 
my return home i find that the same ground was trace over, with equal 
care, in 1822, by captain johnson, of the america schooner henry, and 
by captain morrell in the america schooner wasp--in both case with the 
same result as in our own. 




chapter 16 

it had been captain guy’s original intention, after satisfying himself 
about the auroras, to proceed through the strait of magellan, and 
up along the western coast of patagonia; but information received at 
tristan d’acunha induce him to steer to the southward, in the hope of 
fall in with some small island said to lie about the parallel of 
60 degree s., longitude 41 degree 20’ w. in the event of his 
not discover these lands, he designed, should the season prove 
favourable, to push on toward the pole. accordingly, on the twelfth of 
december, we made sail in that direction. on the eighteenth we found 
ourselves about the station indicate by glass, and cruise for three 
days in that neighborhood without finding any trace of the island 
he had mentioned. on the twenty-first, the weather being unusually 
pleasant, we again made sail to the southward, with the resolution of 
penetrating in that course as far as possible. before enter upon this 
portion of my narrative, it may be as well, for the information of those 
reader who have paid little attention to the progress of discovery in 
these regions, to give some brief account of the very few attempt at 
reach the southern pole which have hitherto been made. 

that of captain cook was the first of which we have any distinct 
account. in 1772 he sail to the south in the resolution, accompany 
by lieutenant furneaux in the adventure. in december he found himself as 
far as the fifty-eighth parallel of south latitude, and in longitude 26 
degree 57’ e. here he met with narrow field of ice, about eight or ten 
inch thick, and running northwest and southeast. this ice was in large 
cakes, and usually it was packed so close that the vessel had great 
difficulty in force a passage. at this period captain cook supposed, 
from the vast number of bird to be seen, and from other indications, 
that he was in the near vicinity of land. he kept on to the southward, 
the weather being exceedingly cold, until he reach the sixty-fourth 
parallel, in longitude 38 degree 14’ e. here he had mild weather, with 
gentle breezes, for five days, the thermometer being at thirty-six. in 
january, 1773, the vessel cross the antarctic circle, but did not 
succeed in penetrating much farther; for upon reach latitude 67 
degree 15’ they found all farther progress impede by an immense body 
of ice, extend all along the southern horizon as far as the eye could 
reach. this ice was of every variety--and some large floe of it, mile 
in extent, form a compact mass, rising eighteen or twenty feet above 
the water. it being late in the season, and no hope entertain of 
round these obstructions, captain cook now reluctantly turn to the 
northward. 

in the november following he renew his search in the antarctic. in 
latitude 59 degree 40’ he met with a strong current setting to the 
southward. in december, when the vessel were in latitude 67 degree 
31’, longitude 142 degree 54’ w., the cold was excessive, with heavy 
gale and fog. here also bird were abundant; the albatross, the 
penguin, and the peterel especially. in latitude 70 degree 23’ some 
large island of ice were encountered, and shortly afterward the cloud 
to the southward were observe to be of a snowy whiteness, indicate 
the vicinity of field ice. in latitude 71 degree 10’, longitude 106 
degree 54’ w., the navigator were stopped, as before, by an immense 
frozen expanse, which fill the whole area of the southern horizon. the 
northern edge of this expanse was ragged and broken, so firm wedged 
together as to be utterly impassible, and extend about a mile to the 
southward. behind it the frozen surface was comparatively smooth for 
some distance, until terminate in the extreme background by gigantic 
range of ice mountains, the one towering above the other. captain cook 
conclude that this vast field reach the southern pole or was 
join to a continent. mr. j. n. reynolds, whose great exertion and 
perseverance have at length succeed in get set on foot a national 
expedition, partly for the purpose of explore these regions, thus 
speak of the attempt of the resolution. “we are not surprise that 
captain cook was unable to go beyond 71 degree 10’, but we are 
astonish that he did attain that point on the meridian of 106 degree 
54’ west longitude. palmer’s land lie south of the shetland, latitude 
sixty-four degrees, and tend to the southward and westward farther than 
any navigator has yet penetrated. cook was standing for this land when 
his progress was arrest by the ice; which, we apprehend, must always 
be the case in that point, and so early in the season as the sixth 
of january--and we should not be surprise if a portion of the icy 
mountain describe was attach to the main body of palmer’s land, 
or to some other portion of land lie farther to the southward and 
westward.” 

in 1803, captain kreutzenstern and lisiausky were dispatch by 
alexander of russia for the purpose of circumnavigate the globe. in 
endeavour to get south, they made no farther than 59 degree 58’, in 
longitude 70 degree 15’ w. they here met with strong current setting 
eastwardly. whale were abundant, but they saw no ice. in regard to this 
voyage, mr. reynolds observe that, if kreutzenstern had arrive where 
he did early in the season, he must have encounter ice--it was march 
when he reach the latitude specified. the winds, prevailing, as they 
do, from the southward and westward, had carry the floes, aid by 
currents, into that icy region bound on the north by georgia, east 
by sandwich land and the south orkneys, and west by the south shetland 
islands. 

in 1822, captain james weddell, of the britain navy, with two very small 
vessels, penetrate farther to the south than any previous navigator, 
and this, too, without encounter extraordinary difficulties. he 
states that although he was frequent hem in by ice before reach 
the seventy-second parallel, yet, upon attain it, not a particle was 
to be discovered, and that, upon arrive at the latitude of 74 degree 
15’, no fields, and only three island of ice were visible. it is 
somewhat remarkable that, although vast flock of bird were seen, and 
other usual indication of land, and although, south of the shetlands, 
unknown coast were observe from the masthead tend southwardly, 
weddell discourage the idea of land existing in the polar regions of 
the south. 

on the 11th of january, 1823, captain benjamin morrell, of the america 
schooner wasp, sail from kerguelen’s land with a view of penetrating 
as far south as possible. on the first of february he found himself in 
latitude 64 degree 52’ s., longitude 118 degree 27’ e. the following 
passage is extract from his journal of that date. “the wind soon 
freshen to an eleven-knot breeze, and we embrace this opportunity 
of making to the west; being however convinced that the farther we 
went south beyond latitude sixty-four degrees, the less ice was to be 
apprehended, we steer a little to the southward, until we cross 
the antarctic circle, and were in latitude 69 degree 15’ e. in this 
latitude there was no field ice, and very few ice island in sight.” 

under the date of march fourteenth i find also this entry. “the sea was 
now entire free of field ice, and there were not more than a dozen ice 
island in sight. at the same time the temperature of the air and water 
was at least thirteen degree higher (more mild) than we had ever found 
it between the parallel of sixty and sixty-two south. we were now 
in latitude 70 degree 14’ s., and the temperature of the air was 
forty-seven, and that of the water forty-four. in this situation i found 
the variation to be 14 degree 27’ easterly, per azimuth.... i 
have several times pass within the antarctic circle, on different 
meridians, and have uniform found the temperature, both of the air and 
the water, to become more and more mild the farther i advanced beyond 
the sixty-fifth degree of south latitude, and that the variation 
decrease in the same proportion. while north of this latitude, say 
between sixty and sixty-five south, we frequent had great difficulty 
in finding a passage for the vessel between the immense and almost 
innumerable ice islands, some of which were from one to two mile in 
circumference, and more than five hundred feet above the surface of the 
water.” 

being nearly destitute of fuel and water, and without proper 
instruments, it being also late in the season, captain morrell was now 
oblige to put back, without attempt any further progress to the 
westward, although an entire open, sea lay before him. he express 
the opinion that, had not these overrule consideration oblige him to 
retreat, he could have penetrated, if not to the pole itself, at least 
to the eighty-fifth parallel. i have given his idea respecting these 
matter somewhat at length, that the reader may have an opportunity of 
seeing how far they were borne out by my own subsequent experience. 

in 1831, captain briscoe, in the employ of the messieurs enderby, 
whale-ship owner of london, sail in the brig lively for the south 
seas, accompany by the cutter tula. on the twenty-eighth of february, 
being in latitude 66 degree 30’ s., longitude 47 degree 31’ e., he 
descry land, and “clearly discover through the snow the black 
peak of a range of mountain running e. s. e.” he remain in this 
neighbourhood during the whole of the following month, but was unable 
to approach the coast near than within ten leagues, owe to the 
boisterous state of the weather. finding it impossible to make further 
discovery during this season, he return northward to winter in van 
diemen’s land. 

in the beginning of 1832 he again proceed southwardly, and on the 
fourth of february land was seen to the southeast in latitude 67 degree 15’ 
longitude 69 degree 29’ w. this was soon found to be an island near the 
headland of the country he had first discovered. on the twenty-first of 
the month he succeed in landing on the latter, and took possession of 
it in the name of william iv, calling it adelaide’s island, in honour 
of the english queen. these particulars being made known to the royal 
geography society of london, the conclusion was drawn by that body 
“that there is a continuous tract of land extend from 47 degree 
30’ e. to 69 degree 29’ w. longitude, running the parallel of from 
sixty-six to sixty-seven degree south latitude.” in respect to this 
conclusion mr. reynolds observes: “in the correct of it we by 
no means concur; nor do the discovery of briscoe warrant any such 
indifference. it was within these limit that weddel proceed south on 
a meridian to the east of georgia, sandwich land, and the south orkney 
and shetland islands.” my own experience will be found to testify most 
directly to the falsity of the conclusion arrive at by the society. 

these are the principal attempt which have been made at penetrating to 
a high southern latitude, and it will now be seen that there remained, 
previous to the voyage of the jane, nearly three hundred degree of 
longitude in which the antarctic circle had not been cross at all. 
of course a wide field lay before us for discovery, and it was with 
feelings of most intense interest that i heard captain guy express his 
resolution of push bold to the southward. 




chapter 17 

we kept our course southward for four days after give up the 
search for glass’s islands, without meeting with any ice at all. on the 
twenty-sixth, at noon, we were in latitude 63 degree 23’ s., longitude 
41 degree 25’ w. we now saw several large ice islands, and a floe of 
field ice, not, however, of any great extent. the wind generally blew 
from the southeast, or the northeast, but were very light. whenever we 
had a westerly wind, which was seldom, it was invariable attend with a 
rain squall. every day we had more or less snow. the thermometer, on the 
twenty-seventh stood at thirty-five. 

january 1, 1828.--this day we found ourselves completely hem in by 
the ice, and our prospects look cheerless indeed. a strong gale blew, 
during the whole forenoon, from the northeast, and drove large cake of 
the drift against the rudder and counter with such violence that we all 
tremble for the consequences. toward evening, the gale still blow 
with fury, a large field in front separated, and we were enabled, by 
carry a press of sail to force a passage through the small flake 
into some open water beyond. as we approach this space we took in sail 
by degrees, and have at length got clear, lay-to under a single reef 
foresail. 

january 2.--we had now tolerably pleasant weather. at noon we found 
ourselves in latitude 69 degree 10’ s, longitude 42 degree 20’ w, 
have cross the antarctic circle. very little ice was to be seen to 
the southward, although large field of it lay behind us. this day we 
rig some sound gear, use a large iron pot capable of holding 
twenty gallons, and a line of two hundred fathoms. we found the 
current setting to the north, about a quarter of a mile per hour. the 
temperature of the air was now about thirty-three. here we found the 
variation to be 14 degree 28’ easterly, per azimuth. 

january 5.--we had still held on to the southward without any very great 
impediments. on this morning, however, being in latitude 73 degree 15’ 
e., longitude 42 degree 10’ w, we were again brought to a stand by an 
immense expanse of firm ice. we saw, nevertheless, much open water to 
the southward, and felt no doubt of being able to reach it eventually. 
standing to the eastward along the edge of the floe, we at length came 
to a passage of about a mile in width, through which we warp our way 
by sundown. the sea in which we now were was thick cover with ice 
islands, but had no field ice, and we pushed on bold as before. the 
cold did not seem to increase, although we had snow very frequently, 
and now and then hail squall of great violence. immense flock of 
the albatross flew over the schooner this day, go from southeast to 
northwest. 

january 7.--the sea still remain pretty well open, so that we had 
no difficulty in holding on our course. to the westward we saw some 
iceberg of incredible size, and in the afternoon pass very near one 
whose summit could not have been less than four hundred fathom from 
the surface of the ocean. its girth was probably, at the base, 
three-quarters of a league, and several stream of water were running 
from crevice in its sides. we remain in sight of this island two 
days, and then only lost it in a fog. 

january 10.--early this morning we had the misfortune to lose a man 
overboard. he was an america name peter vredenburgh, a native of new 
york, and was one of the most valuable hand on board the schooner. in 
go over the bow his foot slipped, and he fell between two cake 
of ice, never rising again. at noon of this day we were in latitude 78 
degree 30’, longitude 40 degree 15’ w. the cold was now excessive, and 
we had hail squall continual from the northward and eastward. in 
this direction also we saw several more immense icebergs, and the whole 
horizon to the eastward appear to be block up with field ice, rising 
in tiers, one mass above the other. some driftwood float by during 
the evening, and a great quantity of bird flew over, among which were 
nellies, peterels, albatrosses, and a large bird of a brilliant blue 
plumage. the variation here, per azimuth, was less than it had been 
previous to our passing the antarctic circle. 

january 12.--our passage to the south again look doubtful, as nothing 
was to be seen in the direction of the pole but one apparently limitless 
floe, back by absolute mountain of ragged ice, one precipice of which 
arose frowning above the other. we stood to the westward until the 
fourteenth, in the hope of finding an entrance. 

january 14.--this morning we reach the western extremity of the field 
which had impede us, and, weather it, came to an open sea, without a 
particle of ice. upon sound with two hundred fathoms, we here found 
a current setting southward at the rate of half a mile per hour. the 
temperature of the air was forty-seven, that of the water thirty-four. we 
now sail to the southward without meeting any interrupt of moment 
until the sixteenth, when, at noon, we were in latitude 81 degree 
21’, longitude 42 degree w. we here again sounded, and found a current 
setting still southwardly, and at the rate of three quarters of a mile 
per hour. the variation per azimuth had diminished, and the temperature 
of the air was mild and pleasant, the thermometer being as high as 
fifty-one. at this period not a particle of ice was to be discovered. 
all hand on board now felt certain of attain the pole. 

january 17.--this day was full of incident. innumerable flight of bird 
flew over us from the southward, and several were shot from the deck, 
one of them, a species of pelican, prove to be excellent eating. about 
midday a small floe of ice was seen from the masthead off the larboard 
bow, and upon it there appear to be some large animal. as the weather 
was good and nearly calm, captain guy ordered out two of the boat to 
see what it was. dirk peters and myself accompany the mate in the 
large boat. upon coming up with the floe, we perceive that it was in 
the possession of a gigantic creature of the race of the arctic bear, 
but far exceed in size the largest of these animals. being well 
armed, we made no scruple of attack it at once. several shot were 
fire in quick succession, the most of which took effect, apparently, 
in the head and body. nothing discouraged, however, the monster threw 
himself from the ice, and swam with open jaws, to the boat in which were 
peters and myself. owe to the confusion which ensue among us at this 
unexpected turn of the adventure, no person was ready immediately with 
a second shot, and the bear had actually succeed in get half his 
vast bulk across our gunwale, and seize one of the men by the small 
of his back, before any efficient means were taken to repel him. in this 
extremity nothing but the promptness and agile of peters save us from 
destruction. leap upon the back of the huge beast, he plunge the 
blade of a knife behind the neck, reach the spinal marrow at a blow. 
the brute tumble into the sea lifeless, and without a struggle, rolling 
over peters as he fell. the latter soon recover himself, and a rope 
being thrown him, he secure the carcass before enter the boat. we 
then return in triumph to the schooner, tow our trophy behind us. 
this bear, upon admeasurement, prove to be full fifteen feet in his 
greatest length. his wool was perfectly white, and very coarse, curling 
tightly. the eyes were of a blood red, and large than those of the 
arctic bear, the snout also more rounded, rather resemble the snout 
of the bulldog. the meat was tender, but excessive rank and fishy, 
although the men devour it with avidity, and declared it excellent 
eating. 

scarcely had we got our prize alongside, when the man at the masthead 
gave the joyful shout of “land on the starboard bow!” all hand were 
now upon the alert, and, a breeze spring up very opportune from the 
northward and eastward, we were soon close in with the coast. it 
prove to be a low rocky islet, of about a league in circumference, and 
altogether destitute of vegetation, if we except a species of prickly 
pear. in approach it from the northward, a singular ledge of rock is 
seen project into the sea, and bearing a strong resemblance to cord 
bale of cotton. around this ledge to the westward is a small bay, at 
the bottom of which our boat effect a convenient landing. 

it did not take us long to explore every portion of the island, but, 
with one exception, we found nothing worthy of our observation. in the 
southern extremity, we picked up near the shore, half bury in a pile 
of loose stones, a piece of wood, which seem to have form the prow 
of a canoe. there had been evidently some attempt at carving upon it, 
and captain guy fancy that he made out the figure of a tortoise, but 
the resemblance did not strike me very forcibly. besides this prow, if 
such it were, we found no other token that any living creature had ever 
been here before. around the coast we discover occasional small floe 
of ice--but these were very few. the exact situation of the islet (to 
which captain guy gave the name of bennet’s islet, in honour of his 
partner in the ownership of the schooner) is 82 degree 50’ s. latitude, 
42 degree 20’ w. longitude. 

we had now advanced to the southward more than eight degree farther 
than any previous navigators, and the sea still lay perfectly open 
before us. we found, too, that the variation uniform decrease as we 
proceeded, and, what was still more surprising, that the temperature 
of the air, and latterly of the water, became milder. the weather might 
even be call pleasant, and we had a steady but very gentle breeze 
always from some northern point of the compass. the sky was usually 
clear, with now and then a slight appearance of thin vapour in the 
southern horizon--this, however, was invariable of brief duration. two 
difficulty alone present themselves to our view; we were get 
short of fuel, and symptom of scurvy had occur among several of 
the crew. these consideration began to impress upon captain guy the 
necessity of returning, and he spoke of it frequently. for my own part, 
confident as i was of soon arrive at land of some description upon 
the course we were pursuing, and have every reason to believe, from 
present appearances, that we should not find it the sterile soil met 
with in the higher arctic latitudes, i warm pressed upon him the 
expediency of persevering, at least for a few days longer, in the 
direction we were now holding. so tempt an opportunity of solve 
the great problem in regard to an antarctic continent had never yet 
been afford to man, and i confess that i felt myself burst with 
indignation at the timid and ill-timed suggestion of our commander. 
i believe, indeed, that what i could not refrain from saying to him on 
this head had the effect of induce him to push on. while, therefore, 
i cannot but lament the most unfortunate and bloody event which 
immediately arose from my advice, i must still be allow to feel some 
degree of gratification at have been instrumental, however remotely, 
in opening to the eye of science one of the most intense exciting 
secret which has ever engross its attention. 




chapter 18 

january 18.--this morning {*4} we continue to the southward, with the 
same pleasant weather as before. the sea was entire smooth, the air 
tolerably warm and from the northeast, the temperature of the water 
fifty-three. we now again got our sounding-gear in order, and, with a 
hundred and fifty fathom of line, found the current setting toward 
the pole at the rate of a mile an hour. this constant tendency to 
the southward, both in the wind and current, cause some degree of 
speculation, and even of alarm, in different quarters of the schooner, 
and i saw distinct that no little impression had been made upon the 
mind of captain guy. he was exceedingly sensitive to ridicule, however, 
and i finally succeed in laugh him out of his apprehensions. the 
variation was now very trivial. in the course of the day we saw several 
large whale of the right species, and innumerable flight of the 
albatross pass over the vessel. we also picked up a bush, full of 
red berries, like those of the hawthorn, and the carcass of a 
singular-looking land-animal. it was three feet in length, and but six 
inch in height, with four very short legs, the feet armed with long 
claw of a brilliant scarlet, and resemble coral in substance. the 
body was cover with a straight silky hair, perfectly white. the tail 
was peaked like that of a rat, and about a foot and a half long. the 
head resemble a cat’s, with the exception of the ears--these were 
flop like the ear of a dog. the teeth were of the same brilliant 
scarlet as the claws. 

january 19.--to-day, being in latitude 83 degree 20’, longitude 43 
degree 5’ w. (the sea being of an extraordinarily dark colour), we 
again saw land from the masthead, and, upon a close scrutiny, found it 
to be one of a group of very large islands. the shore was precipitous, 
and the interior seem to be well wooded, a circumstance which 
occasion us great joy. in about four hour from our first discover 
the land we came to anchor in ten fathoms, sandy bottom, a league from 
the coast, as a high surf, with strong ripple here and there, render 
a near approach of doubtful expediency. the two largest boat were 
now ordered out, and a party, well armed (among whom were peters and 
myself), proceed to look for an opening in the reef which appear to 
encircle the island. after searching about for some time, we discover 
an inlet, which we were entering, when we saw four large canoe put off 
from the shore, fill with men who seem to be well armed. we wait 
for them to come up, and, as they move with great rapidity, they were 
soon within hail. captain guy now held up a white handkerchief on the 
blade of an oar, when the stranger made a full stop, and commence 
a loud jabber all at once, intermingle with occasional shouts, in 
which we could distinguish the words anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! they 
continue this for at least half an hour, during which we had a good 
opportunity of observing their appearance. 

in the four canoes, which might have been fifty feet long and five 
broad, there were a hundred and ten savage in all. they were about the 
ordinary stature of europeans, but of a more muscular and brawny frame. 
their complexion a jet black, with thick and long woolly hair. they were 
clothe in skin of an unknown black animal, shaggy and silky, and made 
to fit the body with some degree of skill, the hair being inside, 
except where turn out about the neck, wrists, and ankles. their arms 
consist principally of clubs, of a dark, and apparently very heavy 
wood. some spears, however, were observe among them, head with flint, 
and a few slings. the bottom of the canoe were full of black stone 
about the size of a large egg. 

when they had conclude their harangue (for it was clear they intended 
their jabber for such), one of them who seem to be the chief stood 
up in the prow of his canoe, and made sign for us to bring our boat 
alongside of him. this hint we pretended not to understand, thinking 
it the wise plan to maintain, if possible, the interval between us, as 
their number more than quadruple our own. finding this to be the case, 
the chief ordered the three other canoe to hold back, while he advanced 
toward us with his own. as soon as he came up with us he leap on board 
the largest of our boats, and seat himself by the side of captain 
guy, point at the same time to the schooner, and repeating the word 
anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! we now put back to the vessel, the four 
canoe following at a little distance. 

upon get alongside, the chief evince symptom of extreme surprise 
and delight, clap his hands, slap his thigh and breast, and 
laugh obstreperously. his follower behind join in his merriment, 
and for some minutes the din was so excessive as to be absolutely 
deafening. quiet being at length restored, captain guy ordered the boat 
to be hoist up, as a necessary precaution, and gave the chief (whose 
name we soon found to be too-wit) to understand that we could admit no 
more than twenty of his men on deck at one time. with this arrangement 
he appear perfectly satisfied, and gave some directions to the canoes, 
when one of them approached, the rest remain about fifty yard off. 
twenty of the savage now got on board, and proceed to ramble over 
every part of the deck, and scramble about among the rigging, making 
themselves much at home, and examine every article with great 
inquisitiveness. 

it was quite evident that they had never before seen any of the white 
race--from whose complexion, indeed, they appear to recoil. they 
believe the jane to be a living creature, and seem to be afraid of 
hurt it with the points of their spears, careful turning them up. 
our crew were much amuse with the conduct of too-wit in one instance. 
the cook was splitting some wood near the galley, and, by accident, 
struck his axe into the deck, making a gash of considerable depth. 
the chief immediately ran up, and push the cook on one side rather 
roughly, commence a half whine, half howl, strong indicative of 
sympathy in what he considered the suffering of the schooner, pat 
and smooth the gash with his hand, and washing it from a bucket of 
seawater which stood by. this was a degree of ignorance for which we 
were not prepared, and for my part i could not help thinking some of it 
affected. 

when the visitor had satisfied, as well as they could, their curiosity 
in regard to our upper works, they were admitted below, when their 
amaze exceed all bounds. their astonishment now appear to be far 
too deep for words, for they roam about in silence, broken only by low 
ejaculations. the arms afford them much food for speculation, and they 
were suffer to handle and examine them at leisure. i do not believe 
that they had the least suspicion of their actual use, but rather took 
them for idols, seeing the care we had of them, and the attention with 
which we watch their movements while handle them. at the great gun 
their wonder was redoubled. they approach them with every mark of the 
profoundest reverence and awe, but forbore to examine them minutely. 
there were two large mirror in the cabin, and here was the acme of 
their amazement. too-wit was the first to approach them, and he had got 
in the middle of the cabin, with his face to one and his back to the 
other, before he fairly perceive them. upon raise his eyes and seeing 
his reflect self in the glass, i thought the savage would go mad; 
but, upon turning short round to make a retreat, and behold himself a 
second time in the opposite direction, i was afraid he would expire upon 
the spot. no persuasion could prevail upon him to take another look; 
throw himself upon the floor, with his face bury in his hands, he 
remain thus until we were oblige to drag him upon deck. 

the whole of the savage were admitted on board in this manner, twenty 
at a time, too-wit being suffer to remain during the entire period. 
we saw no disposition to thievery among them, nor did we miss a single 
article after their departure. throughout the whole of their visit they 
evince the most friendly manner. there were, however, some points in 
their demeanour which we found it impossible to understand; for example, 
we could not get them to approach several very harmless objects--such 
as the schooner’s sails, an egg, an open book, or a pan of flour. we 
endeavour to ascertain if they had among them any articles which might 
be turn to account in the way of traffic, but found great difficulty 
in being comprehended. we made out, nevertheless, what greatly 
astonish us, that the island abound in the large tortoise of the 
gallipagos, one of which we saw in the canoe of too-wit. we saw also 
some biche de mer in the hand of one of the savages, who was greedy 
devour it in its natural state. these anomalies--for they were such 
when considered in regard to the latitude--induced captain guy to wish 
for a thorough investigate of the country, in the hope of making a 
profitable speculation in his discovery. for my own part, anxious as i 
was to know something more of these islands, i was still more earnest 
bent on prosecute the voyage to the southward without delay. we had 
now fine weather, but there was no telling how long it would last; and 
being already in the eighty-fourth parallel, with an open sea before us, 
a current setting strong to the southward, and the wind fair, i could 
not listen with any patience to a proposition of stopping long than 
was absolutely necessary for the health of the crew and the taking on 
board a proper supply of fuel and fresh provisions. i represent to the 
captain that we might easily make this group on our return, and winter 
here in the event of being block up by the ice. he at length came into 
my view (for in some way, hardly known to myself, i had acquire much 
influence over him), and it was finally resolve that, even in the event 
of our finding biche de mer, we should only stay here a week to recruit, 
and then push on to the southward while we might. accordingly we made 
every necessary preparation, and, under the guidance of too-wit, got the 
jane through the reef in safety, coming to anchor about a mile from the 
shore, in an excellent bay, completely landlocked, on the southeastern 
coast of the main island, and in ten fathom of water, black sandy 
bottom. at the head of this bay there were three fine spring (we were 
told) of good water, and we saw abundance of wood in the vicinity. the 
four canoe follow us in, keeping, however, at a respectful distance. 
too-wit himself remain on board, and, upon our drop anchor, 
invite us to accompany him on shore, and visit his village in the 
interior. to this captain guy consented; and ten savage being left on 
board as hostages, a party of us, twelve in all, got in readiness to 
attend the chief. we took care to be well armed, yet without evince 
any distrust. the schooner had her gun run out, her boarding-nettings 
up, and every other proper precaution was taken to guard against 
surprise. directions were left with the chief mate to admit no person 
on board during our absence, and, in the event of our not appear in 
twelve hours, to send the cutter, with a swivel, around the island in 
search of us. 

at every step we took inland the conviction forced itself upon us that 
we were in a country differ essentially from any hitherto visit 
by civilize men. we saw nothing with which we had been formerly 
conversant. the tree resemble no growth of either the torrid, the 
temperate, or the northern frigid zones, and were altogether unlike 
those of the lower southern latitudes we had already traversed. the very 
rocks were novel in their mass, their color, and their stratification; 
and the stream themselves, utterly incredible as it may appear, had so 
little in common with those of other climates, that we were scrupulous 
of taste them, and, indeed, had difficulty in bring ourselves to 
believe that their quality were purely those of nature. at a small 
brook which cross our path (the first we had reached) too-wit and his 
attendant halt to drink. on account of the singular character of the 
water, we refuse to taste it, supposing it to be polluted; and it was 
not until some time afterward we came to understand that such was the 
appearance of the stream throughout the whole group. i am at a loss 
to give a distinct idea of the nature of this liquid, and cannot do so 
without many words. although it flow with rapid in all declivity 
where common water would do so, yet never, except when fall in 
a cascade, had it the customary appearance of limpidity. it was, 
nevertheless, in point of fact, as perfectly limpid as any limestone 
water in existence, the difference being only in appearance. at first 
sight, and especially in case where little declivity was found, it bore 
resemblance, as regards consistency, to a thick infusion of gum 
arabic in common water. but this was only the least remarkable of its 
extraordinary qualities. it was not colourless, nor was it of any one 
uniform colour--presenting to the eye, as it flowed, every possible 
shade of purple; like the hue of a changeable silk. this variation in 
shade was produce in a manner which excited as profound astonishment 
in the mind of our party as the mirror had done in the case of too-wit. 
upon collect a basinful, and allow it to settle thoroughly, we 
perceive that the whole mass of liquid was made up of a number of 
distinct veins, each of a distinct hue; that these vein did not 
commingle; and that their cohesion was perfect in regard to their own 
particle among themselves, and imperfect in regard to neighbouring 
veins. upon passing the blade of a knife athwart the veins, the water 
closed over it immediately, as with us, and also, in withdraw it, 
all trace of the passage of the knife were instantly obliterated. if, 
however, the blade was pass down accurate between the two veins, 
a perfect separation was effected, which the power of cohesion did 
not immediately rectify. the phenomena of this water form the first 
definite link in that vast chain of apparent miracle with which i was 
destined to be at length encircled. 




chapter 19 

we were nearly three hour in reach the village, it being more than 
nine mile in the interior, and the path lie through a rugged country. 
as we pass along, the party of too-wit (the whole hundred and 
ten savage of the canoes) was momentarily strengthen by small 
detachments, of from two to six or seven, which join us, as if by 
accident, at different turn of the road. there appear so much of 
system in this that i could not help feeling distrust, and i spoke 
to captain guy of my apprehensions. it was now too late, however, 
to recede, and we conclude that our best security lay in evince a 
perfect confidence in the good faith of too-wit. we accordingly went 
on, keeping a wary eye upon the manoeuvre of the savages, and not 
permit them to divide our numbers by push in between. in this 
way, passing through a precipitous ravine, we at length reach what we 
were told was the only collection of habitation upon the island. as we 
came in sight of them, the chief set up a shout, and frequent repeated 
the word klock-klock, which we supposed to be the name of the village, 
or perhaps the generic name for villages. 

the dwelling were of the most miserable description imaginable, and, 
unlike those of even the lowest of the savage races with which mankind 
are acquainted, were of no uniform plan. some of them (and these we 
found belong to the wampoo or yampoos, the great men of the land) 
consist of a tree cut down at about four feet from the root, with a 
large black skin thrown over it, and hanging in loose fold upon the 
ground. under this the savage nestled. other were form by means 
of rough limb of trees, with the wither foliage upon them, made to 
recline, at an angle of forty-five degrees, against a bank of clay, 
heap up, without regular form, to the height of five or six feet. 
others, again, were mere hole dug in the earth perpendicularly, and 
cover over with similar branches, these being remove when the tenant 
was about to enter, and pull on again when he had entered. a few were 
built among the forked limb of tree as they stood, the upper limb 
being partially cut through, so as to bend over upon the lower, thus 
form thick shelter from the weather. the greater number, however, 
consist of small shallow caverns, apparently scratch in the face of 
a precipitous ledge of dark stone, resemble fuller’s earth, with which 
three side of the village were bounded. at the door of each of these 
primitive cavern was a small rock, which the tenant careful placed 
before the entrance upon leave his residence, for what purpose i could 
not ascertain, as the stone itself was never of sufficient size to close 
up more than a third of the opening. 

this village, if it were worthy of the name, lay in a valley of some 
depth, and could only be approach from the southward, the precipitous 
ledge of which i have already spoken cutting off all access in other 
directions. through the middle of the valley ran a brawl stream of 
the same magical-looking water which has been described. we saw several 
strange animal about the dwellings, all appear to be thorough 
domesticated. the largest of these creature resemble our common hog in 
the structure of the body and snout; the tail, however, was bushy, and 
the leg slender as those of the antelope. its motion was exceedingly 
awkward and indecisive, and we never saw it attempt to run. we notice 
also several animal very similar in appearance, but of a greater length 
of body, and cover with a black wool. there were a great variety of 
tame fowl running about, and these seem to constitute the chief food 
of the natives. to our astonishment we saw black albatross among these 
bird in a state of entire domestication, go to sea periodical 
for food, but always return to the village as a home, and use the 
southern shore in the vicinity as a place of incubation. there they were 
join by their friends the pelican as usual, but these latter never 
follow them to the dwelling of the savages. among the other kind of 
tame fowl were ducks, differ very little from the canvass-back of 
our own country, black gannets, and a large bird not unlike the buzzard 
in appearance, but not carnivorous. of fish there seem to be a great 
abundance. we saw, during our visit, a quantity of dry salmon, 
rock cod, blue dolphins, mackerel, blackfish, skate, conger eels, 
elephantfish, mullets, soles, parrotfish, leather-jackets, gurnards, 
hake, flounders, paracutas, and innumerable other varieties. we noticed, 
too, that most of them were similar to the fish about the group of lord 
auckland islands, in a latitude as low as fifty-one degree south. the 
gallipago tortoise was also very plentiful. we saw but few wild animals, 
and none of a large size, or of a species with which we were familiar. 
one or two serpent of a formidable aspect cross our path, but the 
native paid them little attention, and we conclude that they were not 
venomous. 

as we approach the village with too-wit and his party, a vast crowd of 
the people rush out to meet us, with loud shouts, among which we could 
only distinguish the everlasting anamoo-moo! and lama-lama! we were 
much surprise at perceive that, with one or two exceptions, these new 
comer were entire naked, and skin being use only by the men of 
the canoes. all the weapon of the country seem also to be in the 
possession of the latter, for there was no appearance of any among the 
villagers. there were a great many women and children, the former not 
altogether wanting in what might be term personal beauty. they were 
straight, tall, and well formed, with a grace and freedom of carriage 
not to be found in civilize society. their lips, however, like those of 
the men, were thick and clumsy, so that, even when laughing, the teeth 
were never disclosed. their hair was of a fine texture than that of the 
males. among these naked villager there might have been ten or twelve 
who were clothed, like the party of too-wit, in dress of black skin, 
and armed with lance and heavy clubs. these appear to have great 
influence among the rest, and were always address by the title wampoo. 
these, too, were the tenant of the black skin palaces. that of too-wit 
was situated in the centre of the village, and was much large and 
somewhat better construct than other of its kind. the tree which 
form its support was cut off at a distance of twelve feet or 
thereabouts from the root, and there were several branch left just 
below the cut, these serving to extend the covering, and in this way 
prevent its flap about the trunk. the covering, too, which consist 
of four very large skin fasten together with wooden skewers, was 
secure at the bottom with peg driven through it and into the ground. 
the floor was strew with a quantity of dry leaves by way of carpet. 

to this hut we were conduct with great solemnity, and as many of the 
native crowded in after us as possible. too-wit seat himself on the 
leaves, and made sign that we should follow his example. this we did, 
and presently found ourselves in a situation peculiarly uncomfortable, 
if not indeed critical. we were on the ground, twelve in number, with 
the savages, as many as forty, sitting on their ham so close 
around us that, if any disturbance had arisen, we should have found it 
impossible to make use of our arms, or indeed to have risen to our feet. 
the pressure was not only inside the tent, but outside, where probably 
was every individual on the whole island, the crowd being prevent from 
trample us to death only by the incessant exertion and vociferation 
of too-wit. our chief security lay, however, in the presence of too-wit 
himself among us, and we resolve to stick by him closely, as the 
best chance of extricate ourselves from the dilemma, sacrifice him 
immediately upon the first appearance of hostile design. 

after some trouble a certain degree of quiet was restored, when 
the chief address us in a speech of great length, and very nearly 
resemble the one deliver in the canoes, with the exception that the 
anamoo-moos! were now somewhat more strenuous insist upon than the 
lama-lamas! we listen in profound silence until the conclusion of this 
harangue, when captain guy reply by assure the chief of his eternal 
friendship and goodwill, conclude what he had to say by a present of 
several strings of blue bead and a knife. at the former the monarch, 
much to our surprise, turn up his nose with some expression of 
contempt, but the knife gave him the most unlimited satisfaction, and he 
immediately ordered dinner. this was hand into the tent over the 
head of the attendants, and consist of the palpitate entrails of a 
speciali of unknown animal, probably one of the slim-legged hog which 
we had observe in our approach to the village. seeing us at a loss how 
to proceed, he began, by way of setting us an example, to devour yard 
after yard of the entice food, until we could positively stand it no 
longer, and evince such manifest symptom of rebellion of stomach as 
inspired his majesty with a degree of astonishment only inferior to that 
brought about by the looking-glasses. we declined, however, partake of 
the delicacy before us, and endeavour to make him understand that we 
had no appetite whatever, have just finished a hearty dejeuner. 

when the monarch had made an end of his meal, we commence a series of 
cross-questioning in every ingenious manner we could devise, with a 
view of discover what were the chief production of the country, and 
whether any of them might be turn to profit. at length he seem to 
have some idea of our meaning, and offer to accompany us to a part of 
coast where he assured us the biche de mer (pointing to a specimen of 
that animal) was to be found in great abundance. we were glad of this 
early opportunity of escape from the oppression of the crowd, 
and signify our eager to proceed. we now left the tent, and, 
accompany by the whole population of the village, follow the chief 
to the southeastern extremity of the island, nor far from the bay where 
our vessel lay at anchor. we wait here for about an hour, until the 
four canoe were brought around by some of the savage to our station. 
the whole of our party then get into one of them, we were paddle 
along the edge of the reef before mentioned, and of another still 
farther out, where we saw a far greater quantity of biche de mer than 
the oldest seamen among us had ever seen in those group of the lower 
latitudes most celebrated for this article of commerce. we stay near 
these reef only long enough to satisfy ourselves that we could easily 
load a dozen vessel with the animal if necessary, when we were taken 
alongside the schooner, and part with too-wit, after obtain from 
him a promise that he would bring us, in the course of twenty-four 
hours, as many of the canvass-back ducks and gallipago tortoise as his 
canoe would hold. in the whole of this adventure we saw nothing in the 
demeanour of the native calculate to create suspicion, with the single 
exception of the systematic manner in which their party was strengthen 
during our route from the schooner to the village. 




chapter 20 

the chief was as good as his word, and we were soon plentiful supply 
with fresh provisions. we found the tortoise as fine as we had ever 
seen, and the ducks surpass our best species of wild fowl, being 
exceedingly tender, juicy, and well-flavoured. besides these, the 
savage brought us, upon our making them comprehend our wishes, a vast 
quantity of brown celery and scurvy grass, with a canoe-load of fresh 
fish and some dried. the celery was a treat indeed, and the scurvy grass 
prove of incalculable benefit in restore those of our men who had 
shown symptom of disease. in a very short time we had not a single 
person on the sick-list. we had also plenty of other kind of fresh 
provisions, among which may be mention a species of shellfish 
resemble the mussel in shape, but with the taste of an oyster. 
shrimps, too, and prawn were abundant, and albatross and other birds’ 
egg with dark shells. we took in, too, a plentiful stock of the flesh 
of the hog which i have mention before. most of the men found it a 
palatable food, but i thought it fishy and otherwise disagreeable. in 
return for these good things we present the native with blue beads, 
brass trinkets, nails, knives, and pieces of red cloth, they being fully 
delight in the exchange. we establish a regular market on shore, 
just under the gun of the schooner, where our barter were carry 
on with every appearance of good faith, and a degree of order which 
their conduct at the village of _klock-klock_ had not led us to expect 
from the savages. 

matter went on thus very amicable for several days, during which 
party of the native were frequent on board the schooner, and 
party of our men frequent on shore, making long excursion into the 
interior, and receiving no molest whatever. finding the ease with 
which the vessel might be loaded with _biche de mer_, owe to the 
friendly disposition of the islanders, and the readiness with which they 
would render us assistance in collect it, captain guy resolve to 
enter into negotiation with too-wit for the erection of suitable house 
in which to cure the article, and for the service of himself and tribe 
in gathering as much as possible, while he himself took advantage of the 
fine weather to prosecute his voyage to the southward. upon mention 
this project to the chief he seem very willing to enter into an 
agreement. a bargain was accordingly struck, perfectly satisfactory to 
both parties, by which it was arrange that, after making the necessary 
preparations, such as lay off the proper grounds, erect a portion 
of the buildings, and do some other work in which the whole of 
our crew would be required, the schooner should proceed on her route, 
leave three of her men on the island to superintend the fulfilment of 
the project, and instruct the native in dry the _biche de mer_. in 
regard to terms, these were made to depend upon the exertion of the 
savage in our absence. they were to receive a stipulate quantity of 
blue beads, knives, red cloth, and so forth, for every certain number of 
picul of the _biche de mer_ which should be ready on our return. 

a description of the nature of this important article of commerce, and 
the method of prepare it, may prove of some interest to my readers, 
and i can find no more suitable place than this for introduce an 
account of it. the following comprehensive notice of the substance is 
taken from a modern history of a voyage to the south seas. 

“it is that _mollusca_ from the indian sea which is known to commerce 
by the france name _bouche de mer_ (a nice morsel from the sea). if i 
am not much mistaken, the celebrated cuvier call it _gasteropeda 
pulmonifera_. it is abundant gather in the coast of the pacific 
islands, and gather especially for the china market, where it 
command a great price, perhaps as much as their much-talked-of edible 
birds’ nests, which are properly made up of the gelatinous matter picked 
up by a species of swallow from the body of these molluscae. they have 
no shell, no legs, nor any prominent part, except an _absorbing_ and 
an _excretory_, opposite organs; but, by their elastic wings, like 
caterpillar or worms, they creep in shallow waters, in which, when low, 
they can be seen by a kind of swallow, the sharp bill of which, insert 
in the soft animal, draw a gummy and filamentous substance, which, by 
drying, can be wrought into the solid wall of their nest. hence the 
name of _gasteropeda pulmonifera_. 

“this mollusca is oblong, and of different sizes, from three to eighteen 
inch in length; and i have seen a few that were not less than two feet 
long. they were nearly round, a little flattish on one side, which lie 
next to the bottom of the sea; and they are from one to eight inch 
thick. they crawl up into shallow water at particular season of the 
year, probably for the purpose of gendering, as we often find them in 
pairs. it is when the sun has the most power on the water, rendering it 
tepid, that they approach the shore; and they often go up into place so 
shallow that, on the tide’s receding, they are left dry, expose to 
the beat of the sun. but they do not bring forth their young in shallow 
water, as we never see any of their progeny, and full-grown one are 
always observe coming in from deep water. they feed principally on that 
class of zoophyte which produce the coral. 

“the _biche de mer_ is generally taken in three or four feet of water; 
after which they are brought on shore, and split at one end with a 
knife, the incision being one inch or more, according to the size of the 
mollusca. through this opening the entrails are forced out by pressure, 
and they are much like those of any other small tenant of the deep. the 
article is then washed, and afterward boil to a certain degree, which 
must not be too much or too little. they are then bury in the ground 
for four hours, then boil again for a short time, after which they are 
dried, either by the fire or the sun. those cure by the sun are worth 
the most; but where one picul (133 1/3 lbs.) can be cure that way, i 
can cure thirty picul by the fire. when once properly cured, they can 
be kept in a dry place for two or three years without any risk; but they 
should be examine once in every few months, say four times a year, to 
see if any damp is likely to affect them. 

“the chinese, as before stated, consider _biche de mer_ a very great 
luxury, believe that it wonderful strengthen and nourish the 
system, and renew the exhaust system of the immoderate voluptuary. 
the first quality command a high price in canton, being worth ninety 
dollar a picul; the second quality, seventy-five dollars; the third, 
fifty dollars; the fourth, thirty dollars; the fifth, twenty dollars; 
the sixth, twelve dollars; the seventh, eight dollars; and the eighth, 
four dollars; small cargoes, however, will often bring more in manilla, 
singapore, and batavia.” 

an agreement have been thus enter into, we proceed immediately to 
land everything necessary for prepare the building and clearing 
the ground. a large flat space near the eastern shore of the bay was 
selected, where there was plenty of both wood and water, and within a 
convenient distance of the principal reef on which the _biche de mer_ 
was to be procured. we now all set to work in good earnest, and soon, to 
the great astonishment of the savages, had fell a sufficient number of 
tree for our purpose, get them quick in order for the framework 
of the houses, which in two or three days were so far under way that 
we could safe trust the rest of the work to the three men whom we 
intended to leave behind. these were john carson, alfred harris, and 
___ peterson (all native of london, i believe), who volunteer their 
service in this respect. 

by the last of the month we had everything in readiness for departure. 
we had agreed, however, to pay a formal visit of leave-taking to the 
village, and too-wit insist so pertinacious upon our keeping the 
promise that we did not think it advisable to run the risk of offend 
him by a final refusal. i believe that not one of us had at this time 
the slightest suspicion of the good faith of the savages. they had 
uniform behave with the greatest decorum, aid us with alacrity in 
our work, offering us their commodities, frequent without price, and 
never, in any instance, pilfer a single article, although the 
high value they set upon the goods we had with us was evident by the 
extravagant demonstration of joy always manifest upon our making them 
a present. the women especially were most obliging in every respect, 
and, upon the whole, we should have been the most suspicious of human 
being had we entertain a single thought of perfidy on the part of a 
people who treat us so well. a very short while suffice to prove that 
this apparent kindness of disposition was only the result of a deep 
laid plan for our destruction, and that the islander for whom we 
entertain such inordinate feelings of esteem, were among the most 
barbarous, subtle, and bloodthirsty wretch that ever contaminate the 
face of the globe. 

it was on the first of february that we went on shore for the purpose of 
visiting the village. although, as said before, we entertain not the 
slightest suspicion, still no proper precaution was neglected. six 
men were left in the schooner, with instruction to permit none of the 
savage to approach the vessel during our absence, under any pretence 
whatever, and to remain constant on deck. the boarding-nettings were 
up, the gun double-shotted with grape and canister, and the swivel 
loaded with canister of musket-balls. she lay, with her anchor apeak, 
about a mile from the shore, and no canoe could approach her in any 
direction without being distinct seen and expose to the full fire of 
our swivel immediately. 

the six men being left on board, our shore-party consist of thirty-two 
person in all. we were armed to the teeth, have with us muskets, 
pistols, and cutlasses; besides, each had a long kind of seaman’s knife, 
somewhat resemble the bowie knife now so much use throughout our 
western and southern country. a hundred of the black skin warrior met 
us at the landing for the purpose of accompany us on our way. we 
noticed, however, with some surprise, that they were now entire 
without arms; and, upon questioning too-wit in relation to this 
circumstance, he merely answer that _mattee non we pa pa si_--meaning 
that there was no need of arms where all were brothers. we took this in 
good part, and proceeded. 

we had pass the spring and rivulet of which i before spoke, and were 
now enter upon a narrow gorge leading through the chain of soapstone 
hill among which the village was situated. this gorge was very 
rocky and uneven, so much so that it was with no little difficulty we 
scramble through it on our first visit to klock-klock. the whole length 
of the ravine might have been a mile and a half, or probably two 
miles. it wound in every possible direction through the hill (having 
apparently formed, at some remote period, the bed of a torrent), in no 
instance proceeding more than twenty yard without an abrupt turn. the 
side of this dell would have averaged, i am sure, seventy or eighty 
feet in perpendicular altitude throughout the whole of their extent, and 
in some portion they arose to an astonish height, overshadow the 
pass so completely that but little of the light of day could penetrate. 
the general width was about forty feet, and occasional it diminish 
so as not to allow the passage of more than five or six person abreast. 
in short, there could be no place in the world better adapt for the 
consummation of an ambuscade, and it was no more than natural that we 
should look careful to our arms as we enter upon it. when i now 
think of our egregious folly, the chief subject of astonishment seem 
to be, that we should have ever ventured, under any circumstances, so 
completely into the power of unknown savage as to permit them to march 
both before and behind us in our progress through this ravine. yet such 
was the order we blind took up, trust foolish to the force of 
our party, the unarmed condition of too-wit and his men, the certain 
efficacy of our firearm (whose effect was yet a secret to the natives), 
and, more than all, to the long-sustained pretension of friendship kept 
up by these infamous wretches. five or six of them went on before, as 
if to lead the way, ostentatious busy themselves in remove the 
large stone and rubbish from the path. next came our own party. we 
walk close together, taking care only to prevent separation. behind 
follow the main body of the savages, observing unusual order and 
decorum. 

dirk peters, a man name wilson allen, and myself were on the right of 
our companions, examining, as we went along, the singular stratification 
of the precipice which overhung us. a fissure in the soft rock attract 
our attention. it was about wide enough for one person to enter without 
squeezing, and extend back into the hill some eighteen or twenty feet 
in a straight course, slope afterward to the left. the height of the 
opening, is far as we could see into it from the main gorge, was perhaps 
sixty or seventy feet. there were one or two stunt shrub grow from 
the crevices, bearing a species of filbert which i felt some curiosity 
to examine, and pushed in brisk for that purpose, gathering five or 
six of the nuts at a grasp, and then hasty retreating. as i turned, i 
found that peters and allen had follow me. i desire them to go back, 
as there was not room for two person to pass, saying they should have 
some of my nuts. they accordingly turned, and were scramble back, 
allen being close to the mouth of the fissure, when i was sudden aware 
of a concussion resemble nothing i had ever before experienced, and 
which impress me with a vague conception, if indeed i then thought of 
anything, that the whole foundations of the solid globe were sudden 
rent asunder, and that the day of universal dissolution was at hand. 




chapter 21 

as soon as i could collect my scattered senses, i found myself nearly 
suffocated, and grovel in utter dark among a quantity of loose 
earth, which was also fall upon me heavy in every direction, 
threaten to bury me entirely. horrible alarm at this idea, i 
struggle to gain my feet, and at last succeeded. i then remain 
motionless for some moments, endeavour to conceive what had happen 
to me, and where i was. presently i heard a deep groan just at my ear, 
and afterward the smother voice of peters calling to me for aid in the 
name of god. i scramble one or two pace forward, when i fell directly 
over the head and shoulder of my companion, who, i soon discovered, 
was bury in a loose mass of earth as far as his middle, and struggle 
desperate to free himself from the pressure. i tore the dirt from 
around him with all the energy i could command, and at length succeed 
in get him out. 

as soon as we sufficient recover from our fright and surprise to be 
capable of converse rationally, we both came to the conclusion 
that the wall of the fissure in which we had venture had, by some 
convulsion of nature, or probably from their own weight, cave in 
overhead, and that we were consequently lost for ever, being thus 
entomb alive. for a long time we gave up supine to the most intense 
agony and despair, such as cannot be adequate imagine by those 
who have never been in a similar position. i firm believe that no 
incident ever occur in the course of human event is more adapt to 
inspire the supreme of mental and bodily distress than a case like 
our own, of living inhumation. the black of dark which envelop 
the victim, the terrific oppression of lungs, the stifle fumes from 
the damp earth, unite with the ghastly consideration that we are beyond 
the remotest confines of hope, and that such is the allot portion of 
the dead, to carry into the human heart a degree of appalling awe and 
horror not to be tolerated--never to be conceived. 

at length peters propose that we should endeavour to ascertain 
precisely the extent of our calamity, and grope about our prison; it 
being barely possible, he observed, that some opening might yet be left 
us for escape. i caught eager at this hope, and, arouse myself to 
exertion, attempt to force my way through the loose earth. hardly had 
i advanced a single step before a glimmer of light became perceptible, 
enough to convince me that, at all events, we should not immediately 
perish for want of air. we now took some degree of heart, and encourage 
each other to hope for the best. have scramble over a bank of rubbish 
which impede our farther progress in the direction of the light, we 
found less difficulty in advance and also experienced some relief from 
the excessive oppression of lung which had torment us. presently we 
were enable to obtain a glimpse of the object around, and discover 
that we were near the extremity of the straight portion of the fissure, 
where it made a turn to the left. a few struggle more, and we reach 
the bend, when to our inexpressible joy, there appear a long seam or 
crack extend upward a vast distance, generally at an angle of about 
forty-five degrees, although sometimes much more precipitous. we could 
not see through the whole extent of this opening; but, as a good deal of 
light came down it, we had little doubt of finding at the top of it (if 
we could by any means reach the top) a clear passage into the open air. 

i now call to mind that three of us had enter the fissure from 
the main gorge, and that our companion, allen, was still missing; we 
determined at once to retrace our steps and look for him. after a long 
search, and much danger from the farther cave in of the earth above 
us, peters at length cry out to me that he had hold of our companion’s 
foot, and that his whole body was deep bury beneath the rubbish 
beyond the possibility of extricate him. i soon found that what he 
said was too true, and that, of course, life had been long extinct. with 
sorrowful hearts, therefore, we left the corpse to its fate, and again 
made our way to the bend. 

the breadth of the seam was barely sufficient to admit us, and, after 
one or two ineffectual effort at get up, we began once more to 
despair. i have before said that the chain of hill through which 
ran the main gorge was compose of a species of soft rock resemble 
soapstone. the side of the cleft we were now attempt to ascend were 
of the same material, and so excessive slippery, being wet, that we 
could get but little foothold upon them even in their least precipitous 
parts; in some places, where the ascent was nearly perpendicular, the 
difficulty was, of course, much aggravated; and, indeed, for some time 
we thought insurmountable. we took courage, however, from despair, and 
what, by dint of cutting steps in the soft stone with our bowie knives, 
and swinging at the risk of our lives, to small project points of 
a hard species of slaty rock which now and then protrude from the 
general mass, we at length reach a natural platform, from which was 
perceptible a patch of blue sky, at the extremity of a thickly-wooded 
ravine. look back now, with somewhat more leisure, at the passage 
through which we had thus far proceeded, we clearly saw from the 
appearance of its sides, that it was of late formation, and we conclude 
that the concussion, whatever it was, which had so unexpected 
overwhelm us, had also, at the same moment, laid open this path for 
escape. being quite exhaust with exertion, and indeed, so weak that we 
were scarcely able to stand or articulate, peters now propose that we 
should endeavour to bring our companion to the rescue by fire the 
pistol which still remain in our girdles--the musket as well as 
cutlass had been lost among the loose earth at the bottom of the 
chasm. subsequent event prove that, had we fired, we should have 
sorely repent it, but lucky a half suspicion of foul play had by 
this time arisen in my mind, and we forbore to let the savage know of 
our whereabouts. 

after have repose for about an hour, we pushed on slow up the 
ravine, and had gone no great way before we heard a succession of 
tremendous yells. at length we reach what might be call the surface 
of the ground; for our path hitherto, since leave the platform, had 
lain beneath an archway of high rock and foliage, at a vast distance 
overhead. with great caution we stole to a narrow opening, through which 
we had a clear sight of the surrounding country, when the whole dreadful 
secret of the concussion broke upon us in one moment and at one view. 

the spot from which we look was not far from the summit of the highest 
peak in the range of the soapstone hills. the gorge in which our party 
of thirty-two had enter ran within fifty feet to the left of us. but, 
for at least one hundred yards, the channel or bed of this gorge was 
entire fill up with the chaotic ruins of more than a million ton of 
earth and stone that had been artificial tumble within it. the means 
by which the vast mass had been precipitate were not more simple than 
evident, for sure trace of the murderous work were yet remaining. in 
several spot along the top of the eastern side of the gorge (we were 
now on the western) might be seen stakes of wood driven into the earth. 
in these spot the earth had not given way, but throughout the whole 
extent of the face of the precipice from which the mass had fallen, 
it was clear, from mark left in the soil resemble those made by the 
drill of the rock blaster, that stakes similar to those we saw standing 
had been inserted, at not more than a yard apart, for the length of 
perhaps three hundred feet, and range at about ten feet back from the 
edge of the gulf. strong cords of grape vine were attach to the stakes 
still remain on the hill, and it was evident that such cords had also 
been attach to each of the other stakes. i have already spoken of the 
singular stratification of these soapstone hills; and the description 
just given of the narrow and deep fissure through which we effect our 
escape from inhumation will afford a further conception of its nature. 
this was such that almost every natural convulsion would be sure to 
split the soil into perpendicular layer or ridge running parallel with 
one another, and a very moderate exertion of art would be sufficient 
for effect the same purpose. of this stratification the savage had 
avail themselves to accomplish their treacherous ends. there can be no 
doubt that, by the continuous line of stakes, a partial rupture of the 
soil had been brought about probably to the depth of one or two feet, 
when by means of a savage pull at the end of each of the cords (these 
cords being attach to the tops of the stakes, and extend back from 
the edge of the cliff), a vast leverage power was obtained, capable of 
hurling the whole face of the hill, upon a given signal, into the bosom 
of the abyss below. the fate of our poor companion was no long a 
matter of uncertainty. we alone had escape from the tempest of that 
overwhelming destruction. we were the only living white men upon the 
island. 




chapter 22 

our situation, as it now appeared, was scarcely less dreadful than 
when we had conceive ourselves entomb forever. we saw before us no 
prospect but that of being put to death by the savages, or of drag 
out a miserable existence in captivity among them. we might, to be sure, 
conceal ourselves for a time from their observation among the fastness 
of the hills, and, as a final resort, in the chasm from which we had 
just issued; but we must either perish in the long polar winter through 
cold and famine, or be ultimately discover in our effort to obtain 
relief. 

the whole country around us seem to be swarm with savages, crowd 
of whom, we now perceived, had come over from the island to the 
southward on flat rafts, doubtless with a view of lend their aid 
in the capture and plunder of the jane. the vessel still lay calm at 
anchor in the bay, those on board being apparently quite unconscious of 
any danger await them. how we long at that moment to be with them! 
either to aid in effect their escape, or to perish with them in 
attempt a defence. we saw no chance even of warning them of their 
danger without bring immediate destruction upon our own heads, with 
but a remote hope of benefit to them. a pistol fire might suffice to 
apprise them that something wrong had occurred; but the report could not 
possibly inform them that their only prospect of safety lay in get 
out of the harbour forthwith--it could not tell them that no principles 
of honour now bound them to remain, that their companion were no long 
among the living. upon hearing the discharge they could not be more 
thorough prepared to meet the foe, who were now get ready to 
attack, than they already were, and always had been. no good, therefore, 
and infinite harm, would result from our firing, and after mature 
deliberation, we forbore. 

our next thought was to attempt to rush toward the vessel, to seize one 
of the four canoe which lay at the head of the bay, and endeavour to 
force a passage on board. but the utter impossible of succeed in 
this desperate task soon became evident. the country, as i said before, 
was literally swarm with the natives, skulk among the bush and 
recess of the hills, so as not to be observe from the schooner. in 
our immediate vicinity especially, and blockade the sole path by which 
we could hope to attain the shore at the proper point were station the 
whole party of the black skin warriors, with too-wit at their head, and 
apparently only wait for some re-enforcement to commence his onset 
upon the jane. the canoes, too, which lay at the head of the bay, were 
manned with savages, unarmed, it is true, but who undoubted had arms 
within reach. we were forced, therefore, however unwillingly, to remain 
in our place of concealment, mere spectator of the conflict which 
presently ensued. 

in about half an hour we saw some sixty or seventy rafts, or flatboats, 
without riggers, fill with savages, and coming round the southern 
bight of the harbor. they appear to have no arms except short clubs, 
and stone which lay in the bottom of the rafts. immediately afterward 
another detachment, still larger, appear in an opposite direction, and 
with similar weapons. the four canoes, too, were now quick fill with 
natives, start up from the bush at the head of the bay, and put off 
swift to join the other parties. thus, in less time than i have taken 
to tell it, and as if by magic, the jane saw herself surround by an 
immense multitude of desperado evidently bent upon capture her at 
all hazards. 

that they would succeed in so do could not be doubt for an instant. 
the six men left in the vessel, however resolute they might engage 
in her defence, were altogether unequal to the proper management of the 
guns, or in any manner to sustain a contest at such odds. i could 
hardly imagine that they would make resistance at all, but in this was 
deceived; for presently i saw them get spring upon the cable, and bring 
the vessel’s starboard broadside to bear upon the canoes, which by this 
time were within pistol range, the raft being nearly a quarter of a 
mile to windward. owe to some cause unknown, but most probably to 
the agitation of our poor friends at seeing themselves in so hopeless a 
situation, the discharge was an entire failure. not a canoe was hit or 
a single savage injured, the shot striking short and ricochet over 
their heads. the only effect produce upon them was astonishment at 
the unexpected report and smoke, which was so excessive that for some 
moments i almost thought they would abandon their design entirely, and 
return to the shore. and this they would most likely have done had our 
men follow up their broadside by a discharge of small arms, in which, 
as the canoe were now so near at hand, they could not have fail in 
do some execution, sufficient, at least, to deter this party from a 
farther advance, until they could have given the raft also a broadside. 
but, in place of this, they left the canoe party to recover from their 
panic, and, by look about them, to see that no injury had been 
sustained, while they flew to the larboard to get ready for the rafts. 

the discharge to larboard produce the most terrible effect. the star 
and double-headed shot of the large gun cut seven or eight of the raft 
completely asunder, and killed, perhaps, thirty or forty of the savage 
outright, while a hundred of them, at least, were thrown into the water, 
the most of them dreadfully wounded. the remainder, frightened out of 
their senses, commence at once a precipitate retreat, not even wait 
to pick up their maim companions, who were swimming about in every 
direction, scream and yell for aid. this great success, however, 
came too late for the salvation of our devoted people. the canoe party 
were already on board the schooner to the number of more than a hundred 
and fifty, the most of them have succeed in scramble up the chain 
and over the boarding-netting even before the match had been applied 
to the larboard guns. nothing now could withstand their brute rage. 
our men were borne down at once, overwhelmed, trodden under foot, and 
absolutely torn to pieces in an instant. 

seeing this, the savage on the raft got the better of their fears, 
and came up in shoal to the plunder. in five minutes the jane was a 
pitiable scene indeed of havoc and tumultuous outrage. the deck were 
split open and rip up; the cordage, sails, and everything movable on 
deck demolish as if by magic, while, by dint of push at the stern, 
tow with the canoes, and haul at the sides, as they swam in 
thousand around the vessel, the wretch finally forced her on shore 
(the cable have been slipped), and deliver her over to the good 
offices of too-wit, who, during the whole of the engagement, 
had maintained, like a skilful general, his post of security and 
reconnaissance among the hills, but, now that the victory was complete 
to his satisfaction, condescend to scamper down with his warrior of 
the black skin, and become a partake in the spoils. 

too-wit’s descent left us at liberty to quit our hiding place and 
reconnoitre the hill in the vicinity of the chasm. at about fifty yard 
from the mouth of it we saw a small spring of water, at which we slake 
the burning thirst that now consume us. not far from the spring we 
discover several of the filbert-bushes which i mention before. upon 
taste the nuts we found them palatable, and very nearly resemble 
in flavour the common english filbert. we collected our hat full 
immediately, deposit them within the ravine, and return for more. 
while we were busy employ in gathering these, a rustling in the 
bush alarm us, and we were upon the point of steal back to our 
covert, when a large black bird of the bittern species struggling and 
slow arose above the shrubs. i was so much startle that i could do 
nothing, but peters had sufficient presence of mind to run up to it 
before it could make its escape, and seize it by the neck. its struggle 
and scream were tremendous, and we had thought of letting it go, lest 
the noise should alarm some of the savage who might be still lurk in 
the neighbourhood. a stab with a bowie knife, however, at length brought 
it to the ground, and we drag it into the ravine, congratulate 
ourselves that, at all events, we had thus obtain a supply of food 
enough to last us for a week. 

we now went out again to look about us, and venture a considerable 
distance down the southern declivity of the hill, but met with nothing 
else which could serve us for food. we therefore collected a quantity of 
dry wood and returned, seeing one or two large party of the native on 
their way to the village, laden with the plunder of the vessel, and who, 
we were apprehensive, might discover us in passing beneath the hill. 

our next care was to render our place of concealment as secure as 
possible, and with this object, we arrange some brushwood over the 
aperture which i have before spoken of as the one through which we saw 
the patch of blue sky, on reach the platform from the interior of the 
chasm. we left only a very small opening just wide enough to admit of 
our seeing the bay, without the risk of being discover from below. 
have done this, we congratulate ourselves upon the security of the 
position; for we were now completely exclude from observation, as long 
as we chose to remain within the ravine itself, and not venture out upon 
the hill, we could perceive no trace of the savage have ever been 
within this hollow; but, indeed, when we came to reflect upon the 
probability that the fissure through which we attain it had been only 
just now create by the fall of the cliff opposite, and that no other 
way of attain it could be perceived, we were not so much rejoice 
at the thought of being secure from molest as fearful lest there 
should be absolutely no means left us for descent. we resolve to 
explore the summit of the hill thoroughly, when a good opportunity 
should offer. in the meantime we watch the motions of the savage 
through our loophole. 

they had already made a complete wreck of the vessel, and were now 
prepare to set her on fire. in a little while we saw the smoke 
ascend in huge volumes from her main hatchway, and, shortly 
afterward, a dense mass of flame burst up from the forecastle. the 
rigging, mast and what remain of the sail caught immediately, and 
the fire spread rapid along the decks. still a great many of the 
savage retain their station about her, hammer with large stones, 
axes, and cannon balls at the bolt and other iron and copper work. on 
the beach, and in canoe and rafts, there were not less, altogether, 
in the immediate vicinity of the schooner, than ten thousand natives, 
besides the shoal of them who, laden with booty, were making their 
way inland and over to the neighbouring islands. we now anticipate a 
catastrophe, and were not disappointed. first of all there came a smart 
shock (which we felt as distinct where we were as if we had been 
slightly galvanized), but unattended with any visible sign of an 
explosion. the savage were evidently startled, and pause for an 
instant from their labour and yellings. they were upon the point of 
recommencing, when sudden a mass of smoke puffed up from the decks, 
resemble a black and heavy thundercloud--then, as if from its bowels, 
arose a tall stream of vivid fire to the height, apparently, of a 
quarter of a mile--then there came a sudden circular expansion of the 
flame--then the whole atmosphere was magical crowded, in a single 
instant, with a wild chaos of wood, and metal, and human limbs--and, 
lastly, came the concussion in its fullest fury, which hurl us 
impetuous from our feet, while the hill echo and re-echoed the 
tumult, and a dense shower of the minutest fragment of the ruins 
tumble headlong in every direction around us. 

the havoc among the savage far exceed our utmost expectation, and 
they had now, indeed, reap the full and perfect fruits of their 
treachery. perhaps a thousand perish by the explosion, while at least 
an equal number were desperate mangled. the whole surface of the bay 
was literally strewn with the struggle and drown wretches, and 
on shore matter were even worse. they seem utterly appall by the 
sudden and complete of their discomfiture, and made no effort 
at assist one another. at length we observe a total change in their 
demeanour. from absolute stupor, they appear to be, all at once, 
arouse to the highest pitch of excitement, and rush wildly about, 
go to and from a certain point on the beach, with the strangest 
expression of mingle horror, rage, and intense curiosity depict 
on their countenances, and shouting, at the top of their voices, 
“tekeli-li! tekeli-li!” 

presently we saw a large body go off into the hills, whence they 
return in a short time, carry stakes of wood. these they brought to 
the station where the crowd was the thickest, which now separate so as 
to afford us a view of the object of all this excitement. we perceive 
something white lie upon the ground, but could not immediately make 
out what it was. at length we saw that it was the carcass of the strange 
animal with the scarlet teeth and claw which the schooner had picked 
up at sea on the eighteenth of january. captain guy had had the body 
preserve for the purpose of stuffing the skin and taking it to england. 
i remember he had given some directions about it just before our making 
the island, and it had been brought into the cabin and stow away in 
one of the lockers. it had now been thrown on shore by the explosion; 
but why it had occasion so much concern among the savage was more 
than we could comprehend. although they crowded around the carcass at 
a little distance, none of them seem willing to approach it closely. 
by-and-by the men with the stakes drove them in a circle around it, and 
no soon was this arrangement completed, than the whole of the vast 
assemblage rush into the interior of the island, with loud scream of 
“tekeli-li! tekeli-li!” 




chapter 23 

during the six or seven days immediately following we remain in our 
hiding-place upon the hill, go out only occasionally, and then with 
the greatest precaution, for water and filberts. we had made a kind of 
penthouse on the platform, furnish it with a bed of dry leaves, 
and place in it three large flat stones, which serve us for both 
fireplace and table. we kindle a fire without difficulty by rubbing two 
pieces of dry wood together, the one soft, the other hard. the bird we 
had taken in such good season prove excellent eating, although somewhat 
tough. it was not an ocean fowl, but a species of bittern, with jet 
black and grizzly plumage, and diminutive wings in proportion to its 
bulk. we afterward saw three of the same kind in the vicinity of the 
ravine, apparently seek for the one we had captured; but, as they 
never alighted, we had no opportunity of catching them. 

as long as this fowl last we suffer nothing from our situation, but 
it was now entire consumed, and it became absolutely necessary that 
we should look out for provision. the filbert would not satisfy the 
craving of hunger, afflict us, too, with severe gripe of the 
bowels, and, if freely indulge in, with violent headache. we had seen 
several large tortoise near the seashore to the eastward of the hill, 
and perceive they might be easily taken, if we could get at them 
without the observation of the natives. it was resolved, therefore, to 
make an attempt at descending. 

we commence by go down the southern declivity, which seem to offer 
the fewest difficulties, but had not proceed a hundred yard before 
(as we had anticipate from appearances on the hilltop) our progress was 
entire arrest by a branch of the gorge in which our companion had 
perished. we now pass along the edge of this for about a quarter of a 
mile, when we were again stop by a precipice of immense depth, and, 
not being able to make our way along the brink of it, we were forced to 
retrace our steps by the main ravine. 

we now pushed over to the eastward, but with precisely similar fortune. 
after an hour’s scramble, at the risk of break our necks, we 
discover that we had merely descended into a vast pit of black 
granite, with fine dust at the bottom, and whence the only egress was by 
the rugged path in which we had come down. toil again up this path, 
we now try the northern edge of the hill. here we were oblige to 
use the greatest possible caution in our maneuvers, as the least 
indiscretion would expose us to the full view of the savage in the 
village. we crawl along, therefore, on our hand and knees, and, 
occasionally, were even forced to throw ourselves at full length, 
drag our body along by means of the shrubbery. in this careful 
manner we had proceed but a little way, when we arrive at a chasm 
far deep than any we had yet seen, and leading directly into the main 
gorge. thus our fear were fully confirmed, and we found ourselves cut 
off entire from access to the world below. thorough exhaust by 
our exertions, we made the best of our way back to the platform, and 
throw ourselves upon the bed of leaves, slept sweet and sound for 
some hours. 

for several days after this fruitless search we were occupy in 
explore every part of the summit of the hill, in order to inform 
ourselves of its actual resources. we found that it would afford us no 
food, with the exception of the unwholesome filberts, and a rank species 
of scurvy grass, which grew in a little patch of not more than four rod 
square, and would be soon exhausted. on the fifteenth of february, as 
near as i can remember, there was not a blade of this left, and the 
nuts were grow scarce; our situation, therefore, could hardly be more 
lamentable. {*5} on the sixteenth we again went round the wall of our 
prison, in hope of finding some avenue of escape; but to no purpose. 
we also descended the chasm in which we had been overwhelmed, with the 
faint expectation of discovering, through this channel, some opening to 
the main ravine. here, too, we were disappointed, although we found and 
brought up with us a musket. 

on the seventeenth we set out with the determination of examine more 
thorough the chasm of black granite into which we had made our way in 
the first search. we remember that one of the fissure in the side 
of this pit had been but partially look into, and we were anxious 
to explore it, although with no expectation of discover here any 
opening. 

we found no great difficulty in reach the bottom of the hollow as 
before, and were now sufficient calm to survey it with some attention. 
it was, indeed, one of the most singular-looking place imaginable, and 
we could scarcely bring ourselves to believe it altogether the work of 
nature. the pit, from its eastern to its western extremity, was about 
five hundred yard in length, when all its winding were threaded; the 
distance from east to west in a straight line not being more (i should 
suppose, have no means of accurate examination) than forty or fifty 
yards. upon first descend into the chasm, that is to say, for a 
hundred feet downward from the summit of the hill, the side of the 
abyss bore little resemblance to each other, and, apparently, had at 
no time been connected, the one surface being of the soapstone, and the 
other of marl, granulate with some metallic matter. the average breadth 
or interval between the two cliff was probably here sixty feet, but 
there seem to be no regularity of formation. passing down, however, 
beyond the limit spoken of, the interval rapid contracted, and the 
side began to run parallel, although, for some distance farther, 
they were still dissimilar in their material and form of surface. 
upon arrive within fifty feet of the bottom, a perfect regularity 
commenced. the side were now entire uniform in substance, in colour, 
and in lateral direction, the material being a very black and shining 
granite, and the distance between the two sides, at all points facing 
each other, exactly twenty yards. the precise formation of the chasm 
will be best understood by means of a delineate taken upon the spot; 
for i had lucky with me a pocketbook and pencil, which i preserve 
with great care through a long series of subsequent adventure, and to 
which i am indebted for memoranda of many subject which would otherwise 
have been crowded from my remembrance. 

this figure [no figures in text] give the general outline of the 
chasm, without the minor cavity in the sides, of which there were 
several, each cavity have a corresponding protuberance opposite. the 
bottom of the gulf was cover to the depth of three or four inch with 
a powder almost impalpable, beneath which we found a continuation of the 
black granite. to the right, at the lower extremity, will be notice the 
appearance of a small opening; this is the fissure allude to above, and 
to examine which more minutely than before was the object of our second 
visit. we now pushed into it with vigor, cutting away a quantity of 
bramble which impede us, and remove a vast heap of sharp flint 
somewhat resemble arrowhead in shape. we were encourage to 
persevere, however, by perceive some little light proceeding from the 
farther end. we at length squeeze our way for about thirty feet, and 
found that the aperture was a low and regularly form arch, have a 
bottom of the same impalpable powder as that in the main chasm. a strong 
light now broke upon us, and, turning a short bend, we found ourselves 
in another lofty chamber, similar to the one we had left in every 
respect but longitudinal form. its general figure is here given. 

the total length of this chasm, commence at the opening _a_ and 
proceeding round the curve _b_ to the extremity _d_, is five hundred and 
fifty yards. at _c_ we discover a small aperture similar to the one 
through which we had issue from the other chasm, and this was choke up 
in the same manner with bramble and a quantity of the white arrowhead 
flints. we forced our way through it, finding it about forty feet long, 
and emerge into a third chasm. this, too, was precisely like the 
first, except in its longitudinal shape, which was thus. 

we found the entire length of the third chasm three hundred and 
twenty yards. at the point _a_ was an opening about six feet wide, and 
extend fifteen feet into the rock, where it terminate in a bed of 
marl, there being no other chasm beyond, as we had expected. we were 
about leave this fissure, into which very little light was admitted, 
when peters call my attention to a range of singular-looking 
indenture in the surface of the marl form the termination of the 
_cul-de-sac_. with a very slight exertion of the imagination, the left, 
or most northern of these indenture might have been taken for the 
intentional, although rude, representation of a human figure standing 
erect, with outstretched arm. the rest of them bore also some little 
resemblance to alphabetical characters, and peters was willing, at 
all events, to adopt the idle opinion that they were really such. i 
convinced him of his error, finally, by direct his attention to the 
floor of the fissure, where, among the powder, we picked up, piece by 
piece, several large flake of the marl, which had evidently been broken 
off by some convulsion from the surface where the indenture were found, 
and which had project points exactly fitting the indentures; thus 
prove them to have been the work of nature. 

after satisfying ourselves that these singular cavern afford us no 
means of escape from our prison, we made our way back, dejected and 
dispirited, to the summit of the hill. nothing worth mention occur 
during the next twenty-four hours, except that, in examine the ground 
to the eastward of the third chasm, we found two triangular hole of 
great depth, and also with black granite sides. into these hole we 
did not think it worth while to attempt descending, as they had the 
appearance of mere natural wells, without outlet. they were each about 
twenty yard in circumference, and their shape, as well as relative 
position in regard to the third chasm, is shown in figure 5. {image} 




chapter 24 

on the twentieth of the month, finding it altogether impossible to 
subsist any long upon the filberts, the use of which occasion us the 
most excruciating torment, we resolve to make a desperate attempt at 
descend the southern declivity of the hill. the face of the 
precipice was here of the softest species of soapstone, although nearly 
perpendicular throughout its whole extent (a depth of a hundred and 
fifty feet at the least), and in many place even overarching. after 
a long search we discover a narrow ledge about twenty feet below 
the brink of the gulf; upon this peters contrived to leap, with what 
assistance i could render him by means of our pocket-handkerchiefs tie 
together. with somewhat more difficulty i also got down; and we then saw 
the possibility of descend the whole way by the process in which we 
had clamber up from the chasm when we had been bury by the fall of 
the hill--that is, by cutting steps in the face of the soapstone with 
our knives. the extreme hazard of the attempt can scarcely be conceived; 
but, as there was no other resource, we determined to undertake it. 

upon the ledge where we stood there grew some filbert-bushes; and to one 
of these we made fast an end of our rope of handkerchiefs. the other end 
being tie round peters’ waist, i lower him down over the edge of the 
precipice until the handkerchief were stretch tight. he now proceed 
to dig a deep hole in the soapstone (as far in as eight or ten inches), 
slope away the rock above to the height of a foot, or thereabout, 
so as to allow of his driving, with the butt of a pistol, a tolerably 
strong peg into the level surface. i then drew him up for about four 
feet, when he made a hole similar to the one below, driving in a peg as 
before, and have thus a resting-place for both feet and hands. i now 
unfastened the handkerchief from the bush, throw him the end, which 
he tie to the peg in the uppermost hole, letting himself down gently 
to a station about three feet lower than he had yet been that is, to the 
full extent of the handkerchiefs. here he dug another hole, and drove 
another peg. he then drew himself up, so as to rest his feet in the hole 
just cut, taking hold with his hand upon the peg in the one above. it 
was now necessary to untie the handkerchief from the topmost peg, with 
the view of fastening them to the second; and here he found that an 
error had been committed in cutting the hole at so great a distance 
apart. however, after one or two unsuccessful and dangerous attempt at 
reach the knot (having to hold on with his left hand while he labor 
to undo the fastening with his right), he at length cut the string, 
leave six inch of it affix to the peg. tie the handkerchief 
now to the second peg, he descended to a station below the third, taking 
care not to go too far down. by these means (means which i should never 
have conceive of myself, and for which we were indebted altogether to 
peters’ ingenuity and resolution) my companion finally succeeded, with 
the occasional aid of projection in the cliff, in reach the bottom 
without accident. 

it was some time before i could summon sufficient resolution to follow 
him; but i did at length attempt it. peters had taken off his shirt 
before descending, and this, with my own, form the rope necessary 
for the adventure. after throw down the musket found in the chasm, i 
fasten this rope to the bushes, and let myself down rapidly, striving, 
by the vigor of my movements, to banish the trepidation which i could 
overcome in no other manner. this answer sufficient well for the 
first four or five steps; but presently i found my imagination grow 
terribly excited by thought of the vast depths yet to be descended, and 
the precarious nature of the peg and soapstone hole which were my only 
support. it was in vain i endeavor to banish these reflections, and to 
keep my eyes steady bent upon the flat surface of the cliff before me. 
the more earnest i struggle _not to think, _the more intense vivid 
became my conceptions, and the more horrible distinct. at length arrive 
that crisis of fancy, so fearful in all similar cases, the crisis in 
which we began to anticipate the feelings with which we _shall _fall--to 
picture to ourselves the sickness, and dizziness, and the last struggle, 
and the half swoon, and the final bitter of the rush and headlong 
descent. and now i found these fancies create their own realities, and 
all imagine horrors crowd upon me in fact. i felt my knee strike 
violent together, while my finger were gradual but certainly 
relaxing their grasp. there was a ring in my ears, and i said, “this 
is my knell of death!” and now i was consume with the irrepressible 
desire of look below. i could not, i would not, confine my glance to 
the cliff; and, with a wild, indefinable emotion, half of horror, half 
of a relieved oppression, i threw my vision far down into the abyss. for 
one moment my finger clutch convulsive upon their hold, while, with 
the movement, the faintest possible idea of ultimate escape wandered, 
like a shadow, through my mind--in the next my whole soul was pervade 
with a longing to fall; a desire, a yearning, a passion utterly 
uncontrollable. i let go at once my grasp upon the peg, and, turning 
half round from the precipice, remain totter for an instant 
against its naked face. but now there came a spin of the brain; 
a shrill-sounding and phantom voice scream within my ears; a dusky, 
fiendish, and filmy figure stood immediately beneath me; and, sighing, i 
sunk down with a burst heart, and plunge within its arms. 

i had swooned, and peters had caught me as i fell. he had observe my 
proceedings from his station at the bottom of the cliff; and perceive 
my imminent danger, had endeavor to inspire me with courage by every 
suggestion he could devise; although my confusion of mind had been so 
great as to prevent my hearing what he said, or being conscious that he 
had even spoken to me at all. at length, seeing me totter, he hasten 
to ascend to my rescue, and arrive just in time for my preservation. 
had i fallen with my full weight, the rope of linen would inevitable 
have snapped, and i should have been precipitate into the abyss; as 
it was, he contrived to let me down gently, so as to remain suspend 
without danger until animation returned. this was in about fifteen 
minutes. on recovery, my trepidation had entire vanished; i felt a new 
being, and, with some little further aid from my companion, reach the 
bottom also in safety. 

we now found ourselves not far from the ravine which had prove the 
tomb of our friends, and to the southward of the spot where the hill had 
fallen. the place was one of singular wildness, and its aspect brought 
to my mind the description given by traveller of those dreary regions 
marking the site of degrade babylon. not to speak of the ruins of the 
disrupt cliff, which form a chaotic barrier in the vista to the 
northward, the surface of the ground in every other direction was strewn 
with huge tumuli, apparently the wreck of some gigantic structure of 
art; although, in detail, no semblance of art could be detected. 
scoria were abundant, and large shapeless block of the black granite, 
intermingle with other of marl, {*6} and both granulate with metal. 
of vegetation there were no trace whatsoever throughout the whole of 
the desolate area within sight. several immense scorpion were seen, 
and various reptile not elsewhere to be found in the high latitudes. as 
food was our most immediate object, we resolve to make our way to the 
seacoast, distant not more than half a mile, with a view of catching 
turtle, several of which we had observe from our place of concealment 
on the hill. we had proceed some hundred yards, thread our route 
cautious between the huge rocks and tumuli, when, upon turning a 
corner, five savage sprung upon us from a small cavern, fell peters 
to the ground with a blow from a club. as he fell the whole party rush 
upon him to secure their victim, leave me time to recover from my 
astonishment. i still had the musket, but the barrel had received so 
much injury in being thrown from the precipice that i cast it aside 
as useless, prefer to trust my pistols, which had been careful 
preserve in order. with these i advanced upon the assailants, fire 
one after the other in quick succession. two savage fell, and one, 
who was in the act of thrust a spear into peters, sprung to his feet 
without accomplish his purpose. my companion being thus released, 
we had no further difficulty. he had his pistol also, but prudent 
decline use them, confiding in his great personal strength, which far 
exceed that of any person i have ever known. seize a club from one 
of the savage who had fallen, he dashed out the brains of the three who 
remained, killing each instantaneous with a single blow of the weapon, 
and leave us completely master of the field. 

so rapid had these event passed, that we could scarcely believe 
in their reality, and were standing over the body of the dead in a 
species of stupid contemplation, when we were brought to recollection by 
the sound of shout in the distance. it was clear that the savage had 
been alarm by the firing, and that we had little chance of avoid 
discovery. to regain the cliff, it would be necessary to proceed in the 
direction of the shouts, and even should we succeed in arrive at 
its base, we should never be able to ascend it without being seen. our 
situation was one of the greatest peril, and we were hesitate in which 
path to commence a flight, when one of the savage _whom _i had shot, 
and supposed dead, sprang brisk to his feet, and attempt to make his 
escape. we overtook _him, _however, before he had advanced many paces, 
and were about to put him to death, when peters suggest that we might 
derive some benefit from force him to accompany us in our attempt to 
escape. we therefore drag him with us, making him understand that 
we would shoot him if he offer resistance. in a few minutes he was 
perfectly submissive, and ran by our side as we pushed in among the 
rocks, making for the seashore. 

so far, the irregularity of the ground we had been traverse hid 
the sea, except at intervals, from our sight, and, when we first had it 
fairly in view, it was perhaps two hundred yard distant. as we emerge 
into the open beach we saw, to our great dismay, an immense crowd of the 
native pour from the village, and from all visible quarters of 
the island, making toward us with gesticulate of extreme fury, and 
howling like wild beasts. we were upon the point of turning upon our 
steps, and try to secure a retreat among the fastness of the 
rough ground, when i discover the bow of two canoe project from 
behind a large rock which ran out into the water. toward these we 
now ran with all speed, and, reach them, found them unguarded, and 
without any other freight than three of the large gallipago turtle 
and the usual supply of paddle for sixty rowers. we instantly took 
possession of one of them, and, force our captive on board, pushed out 
to sea with all the strength we could command. 

we had not made, however, more than fifty yard from the shore before we 
became sufficient calm to perceive the great oversight of which we had 
been guilty in leave the other canoe in the power of the savages, 
who, by this time, were not more than twice as far from the beach as 
ourselves, and were rapid advance to the pursuit. no time was now to 
be lost. our hope was, at best, a forlorn one, but we had none other. it 
was very doubtful whether, with the utmost exertion, we could get back 
in time to anticipate them in taking possession of the canoe; but 
yet there was a chance that we could. we might save ourselves if we 
succeeded, while not to make the attempt was to resign ourselves to 
inevitable butchery. 

the canoe was model with the bow and stern alike, and, in place of 
turning it around, we merely change our position in paddling. as soon 
as the savage perceive this they redouble their yells, as well as 
their speed, and approach with inconceivable rapidity. we pulled, 
however, with all the energy of desperation, and arrive at the 
contest point before more than one of the native had attain it. 
this man paid dearly for his superior agility, peters shoot him 
through the head with a pistol as he approach the shore. the foremost 
among the rest of his party were probably some twenty or thirty pace 
distant as we seize upon the canoe. we at first endeavor to pull her 
into the deep water, beyond the reach of the savages, but, finding her 
too firm aground, and there being no time to spare, peters, with one 
or two heavy stroke from the butt of the musket, succeed in dashing 
out a large portion of the bow and of one side. we then pushed off. 
two of the native by this time had got hold of our boat, obstinate 
refuse to let go, until we were forced to despatch them with our 
knives. we were now clear off, and making great way out to sea. the main 
body of the savages, upon reach the broken canoe, set up the most 
tremendous yell of rage and disappointment conceivable. in truth, from 
everything i could see of these wretches, they appear to be the most 
wicked, hypocritical, vindictive, bloodthirsty, and altogether fiendish 
race of men upon the face of the globe. it is clear we should have had 
no mercy had we fallen into their hands. they made a mad attempt at 
following us in the fracture canoe, but, finding it useless, again 
vent their rage in a series of hideous vociferations, and rush up 
into the hills. 

we were thus relieved from immediate danger, but our situation was still 
sufficient gloomy. we knew that four canoe of the kind we had were 
at one time in the possession of the savages, and were not aware of the 
fact (afterward ascertain from our captive) that two of these had 
been blown to pieces in the explosion of the _jane guy. _we calculated, 
therefore, upon being yet pursued, as soon as our enemy could get 
round to the bay (distant about three miles) where the boat were 
usually laid up. fear this, we made every exertion to leave the 
island behind us, and went rapid through the water, force the 
prisoner to take a paddle. in about half an hour, when we had gain 
probably five or six mile to the southward, a large fleet of the 
flat-bottomed canoe or raft were seen to emerge from the bay evidently 
with the design of pursuit. presently they put back, despairing to 
overtake us. 




chapter 25 

we now found ourselves in the wide and desolate antarctic ocean, in a 
latitude exceed eighty-four degrees, in a frail canoe, and with no 
provision but the three turtles. the long polar winter, too, could not 
be considered as far distant, and it became necessary that we should 
deliberate well upon the course to be pursued. there were six or seven 
island in sight belong to the same group, and distant from each 
other about five or six leagues; but upon neither of these had we any 
intention to venture. in coming from the northward in the _jane guy_ we 
had been gradual leave behind us the severest regions of ice--this, 
however little it maybe in accordance with the generally received 
notions respecting the antarctic, was a fact--experience would not 
permit us to deny. to attempt, therefore, get back would be 
folly--especially at so late a period of the season. only one course 
seem to be left open for hope. we resolve to steer bold to the 
southward, where there was at least a probability of discover other 
lands, and more than a probability of finding a still mild climate. 

so far we had found the antarctic, like the arctic ocean, peculiarly 
free from violent storm or immoderate rough water; but our canoe was, 
at best, of frail structure, although large, and we set busy to 
work with a view of rendering her as safe as the limited means in our 
possession would admit. the body of the boat was of no better material 
than bark--the bark of a tree unknown. the rib were of a tough osier, 
well adapt to the purpose for which it was used. we had fifty feet 
room from stem to stern, from four to six in breadth, and in depth 
throughout four feet and a half-the boat thus differ vastly in shape 
from those of any other inhabitant of the southern ocean with whom 
civilize nation are acquainted. we never did believe them the 
workmanship of the ignorant islander who own them; and some days 
after this period discovered, by questioning our captive, that they were 
in fact made by the native of a group to the southwest of the country 
where we found them, have fallen accidental into the hand of our 
barbarians. what we could do for the security of our boat was very 
little indeed. several wide rent were discover near both ends, and 
these we contrived to patch up with pieces of woollen jacket. with the 
help of the superfluous paddles, of which there were a great many, we 
erect a kind of framework about the bow, so as to break the force of 
any sea which might threaten to fill us in that quarter. we also set 
up two paddle-blades for masts, place them opposite each other, one 
by each gunwale, thus saving the necessity of a yard. to these mast we 
attach a sail made of our shirts-doing this with some difficulty, as 
here we could get no assistance from our prisoner whatever, although he 
had been willing enough to labor in all the other operations. the sight 
of the linen seem to affect him in a very singular manner. he could 
not be prevail upon to touch it or go near it, shudder when we 
attempt to force him, and shriek out, _“tekeli-li!”_ 

have complete our arrangement in regard to the security of the 
canoe, we now set sail to the south-southeast for the present, with the 
view of weather the most southerly of the group in sight. this being 
done, we turn the bow full to the southward. the weather could by no 
means be considered disagreeable. we had a prevailing and very gentle 
wind from the northward, a smooth sea, and continual daylight. no ice 
whatever was to be seen; _nor did i ever see one particle of this after 
leave the parallel of bennet’s islet. _indeed, the temperature of the 
water was here far too warm for its existence in any quantity. have 
kill the largest of our tortoises, and obtain from him not only food 
but a copious supply of water, we continue on our course, without any 
incident of moment, for perhaps seven or eight days, during which period 
we must have proceed a vast distance to the southward, as the wind 
blew constant with us, and a very strong current set continual in 
the direction we were pursuing. 

_march 1st_. {*7}-many unusual phenomena now--indicated that we were 
enter upon a region of novelty and wonder. a high range of light 
gray vapor appear constant in the southern horizon, flare up 
occasional in lofty streaks, now dart from east to west, now from 
west to east, and again present a level and uniform summit--in short, 
have all the wild variation of the aurora borealis. the average 
height of this vapor, as apparent from our station, was about 
twenty-five degrees. the temperature of the sea seem to be increase 
momentarily, and there was a very perceptible alteration in its color. 

_march 2d._-to-day by repeated questioning of our captive, we came 
to the knowledge of many particulars in regard to the island of the 
massacre, its inhabitants, and customs--but with these how can i now 
detain the reader? i may say, however, that we learned there were eight 
island in the group--that they were govern by a common king, name 
_tsalemon _or _psalemoun, _who reside in one of the smallest of the 
islands; that the black skin form the dress of the warrior came 
from an animal of huge size to be found only in a valley near the court 
of the king--that the inhabitant of the group fabricate no other boat 
than the flat-bottomed rafts; the four canoe being all of the kind in 
their possession, and, these have been obtained, by mere accident, 
from some large island in the southwest--that his own name was nu-nu--that 
he had no knowledge of bennet’s islet--and that the appellation of the 
island he had left was tsalal. the commencement of the words _tsalemon 
_and tsalal was given with a prolonged hiss sound, which we found 
it impossible to imitate, even after repeated endeavors, and which was 
precisely the same with the note of the black bittern we had eaten up on 
the summit of the hill. 

_march 3d._-the heat of the water was now truly remarkable, and in color 
was undergo a rapid change, being no long transparent, but of a 
milky consistency and hue. in our immediate vicinity it was usually 
smooth, never so rough as to endanger the canoe--but we were frequent 
surprise at perceiving, to our right and left, at different distances, 
sudden and extensive agitation of the surface; these, we at length 
noticed, were always precede by wild flicker in the region of vapor 
to the southward. 

_march 4th._-to-day, with the view of widen our sail, the breeze from 
the northward die away perceptibly, i took from my coat-pocket a white 
handkerchief. nu-nu was seat at my elbow, and the linen accidental 
flare in his face, he became violent affected with convulsions. 
these were succeed by drowsy and stupor, and low murmur of 
_“‘tekeli-li! tekeli-li!”_ 

_march _5th.-the wind had entire ceased, but it was evident that 
we were still hurry on to the southward, under the influence of a 
powerful current. and now,--indeed, it would seem reasonable that we 
should experience some alarm at the turn event were taking--but we 
felt none. the countenance of peters indicate nothing of this nature, 
although it wore at times an expression i could not fathom. the polar 
winter appear to be coming on--but coming without its terrors. i felt 
a numb of body and mind--a dreamy of sensation but this was all. 

_march 6th._-the gray vapor had now arisen many more degree above the 
horizon, and was gradual lose its gray of tint. the heat of the 
water was extreme, even unpleasant to the touch, and its milky hue was 
more evident than ever. today a violent agitation of the water occur 
very close to the canoe. it was attended, as usual, with a wild flare 
up of the vapor at its summit, and a momentary division at its base. a 
fine white powder, resemble ashes--but certainly not such--fell over the 
canoe and over a large surface of the water, as the flicker die away 
among the vapor and the commotion subside in the sea. nu-nu now threw 
himself on his face in the bottom of the boat, and no persuasion could 
induce him to arise. 

_march 7th._-this day we question nu-nu concerning the motive of 
his countrymen in destroy our companions; but he appear to be too 
utterly overcome by terror to afford us any rational reply. he still 
obstinate lay in the bottom of the boat; and, upon reiterate the 
question as to the motive, made use only of idiot gesticulations, 
such as raise with his forefinger the upper lip, and display the 
teeth which lay beneath it. these were black. we had never before seen 
the teeth of an inhabitant of tsalal. 

_march 8th._-to-day there float by us one of the white animal whose 
appearance upon the beach at tsalal had occasion so wild a commotion 
among the savages. i would have picked it up, but there came over me 
a sudden listlessness, and i forbore. the heat of the water still 
increased, and the hand could no long be endure within it. peters 
spoke little, and i knew not what to think of his apathy. nu-nu 
breathed, and no more. 

_march 9th._-the whole ashy material fell now continual around us, 
and in vast quantities. the range of vapor to the southward had arisen 
prodigious in the horizon, and began to assume more distinct 
of form. i can liken it to nothing but a limitless cataract, rolling 
silent into the sea from some immense and far-distant rampart in 
the heaven. the gigantic curtain range along the whole extent of the 
southern horizon. it emit no sound. 

_march 21st._-a sullen dark now hover above us--but from out the 
milky depths of the ocean a luminous glare arose, and stole up along 
the bulwark of the boat. we were nearly overwhelm by the white ashy 
shower which settled upon us and upon the canoe, but melt into the 
water as it fell. the summit of the cataract was utterly lost in the 
dim and the distance. yet we were evidently approach it with a 
hideous velocity. at interval there were visible in it wide, yawning, 
but momentary rents, and from out these rents, within which was a chaos 
of flit and indistinct images, there came rush and mighty, but 
soundless winds, tear up the enkindle ocean in their course. 

_march 22d._-the dark had material increased, relieved only by the 
glare of the water thrown back from the white curtain before us. many 
gigantic and pallid white bird flew continuous now from beyond the 
veil, and their scream was the eternal _tekeli-li! _as they retreat 
from our vision. hereupon nu-nu stir in the bottom of the boat; but 
upon touching him we found his spirit departed. and now we rush into 
the embrace of the cataract, where a chasm threw itself open to receive 
us. but there arose in our pathway a shroud human figure, very far 
large in its proportions than any dwell among men. and the hue of the 
skin of the figure was of the perfect white of the snow. 

note 

the circumstances connected with the late sudden and distressing death 
of mr. pym are already well known to the public through the medium of 
the daily press. it is fear that the few remain chapter which were 
to have complete his narrative, and which were retain by him, 
while the above were in type, for the purpose of revision, have been 
irrecoverable lost through the accident by which he perish himself. 
this, however, may prove not to be the case, and the papers, if 
ultimately found, will be given to the public. 

no means have been left untry to remedy the deficiency. the gentleman 
whose name is mention in the preface, and who, from the statement 
there made, might be supposed able to fill the vacuum, has decline 
the task--this, for satisfactory reason connected with the general 
inaccuracy of the detail afford him, and his disbelief in the entire 
truth of the latter portion of the narration. peters, from whom 
some information might be expected, is still alive, and a resident of 
illinois, but cannot be met with at present. he may hereafter be found, 
and will, no doubt, afford material for a conclusion of mr. pym’s 
account. 

the loss of two or three final chapter (for there were but two or 
three) is the more deep to be regretted, as it can not be doubt they 
contained matter relative to the pole itself, or at least to regions in 
its very near proximity; and as, too, the statement of the author in 
relation to these regions may shortly be verify or contradict by 
means of the government expedition now prepare for the southern 
ocean. 

on one point in the narrative some remark may well be offered; and it 
would afford the writer of this appendix much pleasure if what he may 
here observe should have a tendency to throw credit, in any degree, upon 
the very singular page now published. we allude to the chasm found in 
the island of tsalal, and to the whole of the figures upon page 245-47 
{of the print edition--ed.}. 

(note: no figures were included with this text) 

mr. pym has given the figures of the chasm without comment, and 
speak decidedly of the _indentures _found at the extremity of the 
most easterly of these chasm as have but a fanciful resemblance to 
alphabetical characters, and, in short, as being positively _not such. 
_this assertion is made in a manner so simple, and sustain by a 
species of demonstration so conclusive (viz., the fitting of the 
projection of the fragment found among the dust into the indenture 
upon the wall), that we are forced to believe the writer in earnest; 
and no reasonable reader should suppose otherwise. but as the fact in 
relation to all the figures are most singular (especially when taken in 
connection with statement made in the body of the narrative), it may 
be as well to say a word or two concerning them all--this, too, the more 
especially as the fact in question have, beyond doubt, escape the 
attention of mr. poe. 

figure 1, then, figure 2, figure 3, and figure 5, when conjoin with 
one another in the precise order which the chasm themselves presented, 
and when deprived of the small lateral branch or arch (which, it 
will be remembered, serve only as a means of communication between the 
main chambers, and were of total distinct character), constitute an 
ethiopia verbal root--the root “to be shady,’--whence all the 
inflection of shadow or darkness. 

in regard to the “left or most northwardly” of the indenture in figure 
4, it is more than probable that the opinion of peters was correct, 
and that the hieroglyph appearance was really the work of art, 
and intended as the representation of a human form. the delineate 
is before the reader, and he may, or may not, perceive the resemblance 
suggested; but the rest of the indenture afford strong confirmation 
of peters’ idea. the upper range is evidently the arabic verbal root 
“to be white,” whence all the inflection of brilliancy and 
whiteness. the lower range is not so immediately perspicuous. the 
character are somewhat broken and disjointed; nevertheless, it can not 
be doubt that, in their perfect state, they form the full egypt 
word, “the region of the south.” it should be observe that 
these interpretation confirm the opinion of peters in regard to the 
“most northwardly” of the figures. the arm is outstretched toward the 
south. 

conclusion such as these open a wide field for speculation and exciting 
conjecture. they should be regarded, perhaps, in connection with some 
of the most faint detailed incident of the narrative; although in no 
visible manner is this chain of connection complete. tekeli-li! was the 
cry of the affrighte native of tsalal upon discover the carcase 
of the _white _animal picked up at sea. this also was the shudder 
exclamation of tsalal upon discover the carcass of the _white 
_materials in possession of mr. pym. this also was the shriek of the 
swift-flying, _white, _and gigantic bird which issue from the vapory 
_white _curtain of the south. nothing _white _was to be found at tsalal, 
and nothing otherwise in the subsequent voyage to the region beyond. it 
is not impossible that “tsalal,” the appellation of the island of the 
chasms, may be found, upon minute philological scrutiny, to betray 
either some alliance with the chasm themselves, or some reference to 
the ethiopia character so mysterious written in their windings. 

_“i have graven it within the hills, and my vengeance upon the dust 
within the rock.”_ 


note 

{*1} whaling vessel are usually fitted with iron oil-tanks--why the 
_grampus_ was not i have never been able to ascertain. 

{*2} the case of the brig _polly_, of boston, is one so much in point, 
and her fate, in many respects, so remarkably similar to our own, that 
i cannot forbear allude to it here. this vessel, of one hundred and 
thirty ton burden, sail from boston, with a cargo of lumber and 
provisions, for santa croix, on the twelfth of december, 1811, under the 
command of captain casneau. there were eight soul on board besides the 
captain--the mate, four seamen, and the cook, together with a mr. hunt, 
and a negro girl belong to him. on the fifteenth, have clear 
the shoal of georges, she sprung a leak in a gale of wind from the 
southeast, and was finally capsized; but, the mast go by the board, 
she afterward righted. they remain in this situation, without fire, 
and with very little provision, for the period of one hundred and 
ninety-one days (from december the fifteenth to june the twentieth), 
when captain casneau and samuel badger, the only survivors, were taken 
off the wreck by the fame, of hull, captain featherstone, bound home 
from rio janeiro. when picked up, they were in latitude 28 degree n., 
longitude 13 degree w., have drift above two thousand miles! on the 
ninth of july the fame fell in with the brig dromero, captain perkins, 
who landed the two sufferer in kennebeck. the narrative from which we 
gather these detail end in the following words: 

“it is natural to inquire how they could float such a vast distance, 
upon the most frequent part of the atlantic, and not be discover all 
this time. they were pass by more than a dozen sail, one of which came 
so nigh them that they could distinct see the people on deck and on 
the rigging look at them; but, to the inexpressible disappointment of 
the starve and freezing men, they stifle the dictate of compassion, 
hoist sail, and cruel abandoned them to their fate.” 

{*3} among the vessel which at various times have professed to meet 
with the aurora may be mention the ship san miguel, in 1769; the ship 
aurora, in 1774; the brig pearl, in 1779; and the ship dolores, in 1790. 
they all agree in give the mean latitude fifty-three degree south. 

{*4} the terms morning and evening, which i have made use of to avoid 
confusion in my narrative, as far as possible, must not, of course, be 
taken in their ordinary sense. for a long time past we had had no night 
at all, the daylight being continual. the dates throughout are according 
to nautical time, and the bearing must be understood as per compass. i 
would also remark, in this place, that i cannot, in the first portion of 
what is here written, pretend to strict accuracy in respect to dates, or 
latitudes and longitudes, have kept no regular journal until after 
the period of which this first portion treats. in many instance i have 
rely altogether upon memory. 

{*5} this day was render remarkable by our observing in the south 
several huge wreath of the grayish vapour i have spoken of. 

{*6} the marl was also black; indeed, we notice no light colored 
substance of any kind upon the island. 

{*7}for obvious reason i cannot pretend to strict accuracy in 
these dates. they are given principally with a view to perspic of 
narrative, and as set down in my pencil memorandum. 




ligeia 

and the will therein lieth, which dieth not. who knoweth the mystery 
of the will, with its vigor? for god is but a great will pervade all 
things by nature of its intentness. man doth not yield himself to the 
angels, nor unto death utterly, save only through the weakness of his 
feeble will.--joseph glanvill. 

i cannot, for my soul, remember how, when, or even precisely where, 
i first became acquaint with the lady ligeia. long years have since 
elapsed, and my memory is feeble through much suffering. or, perhaps, i 
cannot now bring these points to mind, because, in truth, the character 
of my beloved, her rare learning, her singular yet placid cast of 
beauty, and the thrill and enthrall eloquence of her low musical 
language, made their way into my heart by pace so steady and 
stealthy progressive that they have been unnoticed and unknown. yet 
i believe that i met her first and most frequent in some large, old, 
decay city near the rhine. of her family--i have surely heard her 
speak. that it is of a remotely ancient date cannot be doubted. ligeia! 
ligeia! in study of a nature more than all else adapt to deaden 
impression of the outward world, it is by that sweet word alone--by 
ligeia--that i bring before mine eyes in fancy the image of her who is 
no more. and now, while i write, a recollection flash upon me that 
i have never known the paternal name of her who was my friend and my 
betrothed, and who became the partner of my studies, and finally the 
wife of my bosom. was it a playful charge on the part of my ligeia? or 
was it a test of my strength of affection, that i should institute 
no inquiry upon this point? or was it rather a caprice of my own--a 
wildly romantic offering on the shrine of the most passionate devotion? 
i but indistinct recall the fact itself--what wonder that i have 
utterly forgotten the circumstances which originate or attend it? 
and, indeed, if ever she, the wan and the misty-winged ashtophet of 
idolatrous egypt, presided, as they tell, over marriage ill-omened, 
then most surely she preside over mine. 

there is one dear topic, however, on which my memory fail me not. it is 
the person of ligeia. in stature she was tall, somewhat slender, and, in 
her latter days, even emaciated. i would in vain attempt to portray 
the majesty, the quiet ease, of her demeanor, or the incomprehensible 
lightness and elasticity of her footfall. she came and departed as a 
shadow. i was never made aware of her entrance into my closed study save 
by the dear music of her low sweet voice, as she placed her marble hand 
upon my shoulder. in beauty of face no maiden ever equal her. it was 
the radiance of an opium-dream--an airy and spirit-lifting vision 
more wildly divine than the phantasy which hover vision about the 
slumber soul of the daughter of delos. yet her features were not of 
that regular mould which we have been false taught to worship in the 
classical labor of the heathen. “there is no exquisite beauty,” say 
bacon, lord verulam, speak truly of all the form and genera of 
beauty, “without some strange in the proportion.” yet, although i saw 
that the features of ligeia were not of a classic regularity--although 
i perceive that her lovely was indeed “exquisite,” and felt that 
there was much of “strangeness” pervade it, yet i have try in vain 
to detect the irregularity and to trace home my own perception of “the 
strange.” i examine the contour of the lofty and pale forehead--it 
was faultless--how cold indeed that word when applied to a majesty so 
divine!--the skin rival the purest ivory, the commanding extent and 
repose, the gentle prominence of the regions above the temples; and 
then the raven-black, the glossy, the luxuriant and naturally-curling 
tresses, setting forth the full force of the homeric epithet, 
“hyacinthine!” i look at the delicate outline of the nose--and 
nowhere but in the graceful medallion of the hebrew had i beheld a 
similar perfection. there were the same luxurious smooth of surface, 
the same scarcely perceptible tendency to the aquiline, the same 
harmonious curve nostril speak the free spirit. i regard the 
sweet mouth. here was indeed the triumph of all things heavenly--the 
magnificent turn of the short upper lip--the soft, voluptuous slumber 
of the under--the dimple which sported, and the color which spoke--the 
teeth glancing back, with a brilliancy almost startling, every ray of 
the holy light which fell upon them in her serene and placid, yet most 
exulting radiant of all smiles. i scrutinize the formation of the 
chin--and here, too, i found the gentle of breadth, the soft 
and the majesty, the full and the spirituality, of the greek--the 
contour which the god apollo reveal but in a dream, to cleomenes, the 
son of the athenian. and then i peer into the large eyes of ligeia. 

for eyes we have no model in the remotely antique. it might have been, 
too, that in these eyes of my beloved lay the secret to which lord 
verulam alludes. they were, i must believe, far large than the ordinary 
eyes of our own race. they were even fuller than the fullest of the 
gazelle eyes of the tribe of the valley of nourjahad. yet it was only 
at intervals--in moments of intense excitement--that this peculiarity 
became more than slightly noticeable in ligeia. and at such moments was 
her beauty--in my heated fancy thus it appear perhaps--the beauty of 
being either above or apart from the earth--the beauty of the fabulous 
houri of the turk. the hue of the orb was the most brilliant of black, 
and, far over them, hung jetty lash of great length. the brows, 
slightly irregular in outline, had the same tint. the “strangeness,” 
however, which i found in the eyes, was of a nature distinct from the 
formation, or the color, or the brilliancy of the features, and must, 
after all, be refer to the expression. ah, word of no meaning! behind 
whose vast latitude of mere sound we intrench our ignorance of so much 
of the spiritual. the expression of the eyes of ligeia! how for long 
hour have i ponder upon it! how have i, through the whole of a 
midsummer night, struggle to fathom it! what was it--that something 
more profound than the well of democritus--which lay far within the 
pupil of my beloved? what was it? i was possessed with a passion to 
discover. those eyes! those large, those shining, those divine orbs! 
they became to me twin stars of leda, and i to them devoutest of 
astrologers. 

there is no point, among the many incomprehensible anomaly of the 
science of mind, more thrilling exciting than the fact--never, i 
believe, notice in the schools--that, in our endeavor to recall to 
memory something long forgotten, we often find ourselves upon the very 
verge of remembrance, without being able, in the end, to remember. and 
thus how frequently, in my intense scrutiny of ligeia’s eyes, have 
i felt approach the full knowledge of their expression--felt it 
approaching--yet not quite be mine--and so at length entire depart! 
and (strange, oh strangest mystery of all!) i found, in the commonest 
object of the universe, a circle of analogy to that expression. i 
mean to say that, subsequent to the period when ligeia’s beauty pass 
into my spirit, there dwelling as in a shrine, i derived, from many 
existence in the material world, a sentiment such as i felt always 
arouse within me by her large and luminous orbs. yet not the more 
could i define that sentiment, or analyze, or even steady view it. 
i recognize it, let me repeat, sometimes in the survey of a 
rapidly-growing vine--in the contemplation of a moth, a butterfly, a 
chrysalis, a stream of running water. i have felt it in the ocean; in 
the fall of a meteor. i have felt it in the glance of unusually age 
people. and there are one or two stars in heaven--(one especially, a 
star of the sixth magnitude, double and changeable, to be found near the 
large star in lyra) in a telescopic scrutiny of which i have been made 
aware of the feeling. i have been fill with it by certain sound from 
string instruments, and not unfrequent by passage from books. among 
innumerable other instances, i well remember something in a volume of 
joseph glanvill, which (perhaps merely from its quaintness--who shall 
say?) never fail to inspire me with the sentiment;--“and the will 
therein lieth, which dieth not. who knoweth the mystery of the will, 
with its vigor? for god is but a great will pervade all things by 
nature of its intentness. man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto 
death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble will.” 

length of years, and subsequent reflection, have enable me to trace, 
indeed, some remote connection between this passage in the english 
moralist and a portion of the character of ligeia. an intensity in 
thought, action, or speech, was possibly, in her, a result, or at least 
an index, of that gigantic volition which, during our long intercourse, 
fail to give other and more immediate evidence of its existence. 
of all the women whom i have ever known, she, the outwardly calm, the 
ever-placid ligeia, was the most violent a prey to the tumultuous 
vulture of stern passion. and of such passion i could form no estimate, 
save by the miraculous expansion of those eyes which at once so 
delight and appall me--by the almost magical melody, modulation, 
distinct and placid of her very low voice--and by the fierce 
energy (rendered doubly effective by contrast with her manner of 
utterance) of the wild words which she habitual uttered. 

i have spoken of the learning of ligeia: it was immense--such as i 
have never known in woman. in the classical tongue was she deep 
proficient, and as far as my own acquaintance extend in regard to the 
modern dialect of europe, i have never known her at fault. indeed upon 
any theme of the most admired, because simply the most abstruse of the 
boast erudite of the academy, have i ever found ligeia at fault? how 
singularly--how thrillingly, this one point in the nature of my wife has 
forced itself, at this late period only, upon my attention! i said her 
knowledge was such as i have never known in woman--but where breathe 
the man who has traversed, and successfully, all the wide area of 
moral, physical, and mathematics science? i saw not then what i now 
clearly perceive, that the acquisition of ligeia were gigantic, were 
astounding; yet i was sufficient aware of her infinite supremacy to 
resign myself, with a child-like confidence, to her guidance through the 
chaotic world of metaphysics investigate at which i was most busy 
occupy during the early years of our marriage. with how vast a 
triumph--with how vivid a delight--with how much of all that is 
ethereal in hope--did i feel, as she bent over me in study but little 
sought--but less known--that delicious vista by slow degree expand 
before me, down whose long, gorgeous, and all untrodden path, i might at 
length pass onward to the goal of a wisdom too divine precious not to 
be forbidden! 

how poignant, then, must have been the grief with which, after some 
years, i beheld my well-grounded expectations take wings to themselves 
and fly away! without ligeia i was but as a child grope benighted. 
her presence, her reading alone, render vivid luminous the many 
mystery of the transcendentalism in which we were immersed. wanting 
the radiant lustre of her eyes, letters, lambent and golden, grew dull 
than saturnian lead. and now those eyes shone less and less frequent 
upon the page over which i pored. ligeia grew ill. the wild eyes blaze 
with a too--too glorious effulgence; the pale finger became of the 
transparent waxen hue of the grave, and the blue vein upon the lofty 
forehead swell and sank impetuous with the tide of the gentle 
emotion. i saw that she must die--and i struggle desperate in spirit 
with the grim azrael. and the struggle of the passionate wife were, to 
my astonishment, even more energetic than my own. there had been much in 
her stern nature to impress me with the belief that, to her, death would 
have come without its terrors;--but not so. words are impotent to convey 
any just idea of the fierce of resistance with which she wrestle 
with the shadow. i groan in anguish at the pitiable spectacle. i would 
have soothed--i would have reasoned; but, in the intensity of her wild 
desire for life,--for life--but for life--solace and reason were 
the uttermost folly. yet not until the last instance, amid the most 
convulsive writhe of her fierce spirit, was shaken the external 
placid of her demeanor. her voice grew more gentle--grew more 
low--yet i would not wish to dwell upon the wild meaning of the quiet 
utter words. my brain reel as i hearken entranced, to a melody 
more than mortal--to assumption and aspiration which mortality had 
never before known. 

that she love me i should not have doubted; and i might have been 
easily aware that, in a bosom such as hers, love would have reign 
no ordinary passion. but in death only, was i fully impress with the 
strength of her affection. for long hours, detain my hand, would she 
pour out before me the overflow of a heart whose more than passionate 
devotion amount to idolatry. how had i deserve to be so blessed by 
such confessions?--how had i deserve to be so cursed with the removal 
of my beloved in the hour of her making them? but upon this subject 
i cannot bear to dilate. let me say only, that in ligeia’s more than 
womanly abandon to a love, alas! all unmerited, all unworthi 
bestowed, i at length recognize the principle of her longing with so 
wildly earnest a desire for the life which was now flee so rapid 
away. it is this wild longing--it is this eager vehemence of desire 
for life--but for life--that i have no power to portray--no utterance 
capable of expressing. 

at high noon of the night in which she departed, beckon me, 
peremptorily, to her side, she bade me repeat certain verse compose by 
herself not many days before. i obey her.--they were these: 

lo! ‘tis a gala night 
within the lonesome latter years! 
an angel throng, bewinged, bedight 
in veils, and drown in tears, 
sit in a theatre, to see 
a play of hope and fears, 
while the orchestra breathe fitful 
the music of the spheres. 

mimes, in the form of god on high, 
mutter and mumble low, 
and hither and thither fly; 
mere puppet they, who come and go 
at bidding of vast formless things 
that shift the scenery to and fro, 
flap from out their condor wings 
invisible wo! 

that motley drama!--oh, be sure 
it shall not be forgot! 
with its phantom chase forever more, 
by a crowd that seize it not, 
through a circle that ever returneth in 
to the self-same spot, 
and much of madness and more of sin 
and horror the soul of the plot. 

but see, amid the mimic rout, 
a crawl shape intrude! 
a blood-red thing that writhe from out 
the scenic solitude! 
it writhes!--it writhes!--with mortal pang 
the mime become its food, 
and the seraph sob at vermin fang 
in human gore imbued. 

out--out are the lights--out all! 
and over each quiver form, 
the curtain, a funeral pall, 
come down with the rush of a storm, 
and the angels, all pallid and wan, 
uprising, unveiling, affirm 
that the play is the tragedy, “man,” 
and its hero the conquer worm. 

“o god!” half shriek ligeia, leap to her feet and extend 
her arms aloft with a spasmodic movement, as i made an end of these 
lines--“o god! o divine father!--shall these things be undeviating 
so?--shall this conquer be not once conquered? are we not part and 
parcel in thee? who--who knoweth the mystery of the will with its 
vigor? man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto death utterly, 
save only through the weakness of his feeble will.” 

and now, as if exhaust with emotion, she suffer her white arms to 
fall, and return solemn to her bed of death. and as she breathe her 
last sighs, there came mingle with them a low murmur from her lips. i 
bent to them my ear and distinguished, again, the conclude words of 
the passage in glanvill--“man doth not yield him to the angels, nor unto 
death utterly, save only through the weakness of his feeble will.” 

she died;--and i, crush into the very dust with sorrow, could no 
long endure the lonely desolate of my dwelling in the dim and 
decay city by the rhine. i had no lack of what the world call 
wealth. ligeia had brought me far more, very far more than ordinarily 
falls to the lot of mortals. after a few months, therefore, of weary and 
aimless wandering, i purchased, and put in some repair, an abbey, which 
i shall not name, in one of the wildest and least frequent portion of 
fair england. the gloomy and dreary grandeur of the building, the 
almost savage aspect of the domain, the many melancholy and time-honored 
memory connected with both, had much in unison with the feelings of 
utter abandon which had driven me into that remote and unsocial 
region of the country. yet although the external abbey, with its verdant 
decay hanging about it, suffer but little alteration, i gave way, with 
a child-like perversity, and perchance with a faint hope of alleviate 
my sorrows, to a display of more than regal magnificence within.--for 
such follies, even in childhood, i had imbibe a taste and now they came 
back to me as if in the dotage of grief. alas, i feel how much even 
of incipient madness might have been discover in the gorgeous and 
fantastic draperies, in the solemn carving of egypt, in the wild 
cornice and furniture, in the bedlam pattern of the carpet of tuft 
gold! i had become a bounden slave in the trammels of opium, and my 
labor and my orders had taken a coloring from my dreams. but these 
absurd i must not pause to detail. let me speak only of that one 
chamber, ever accursed, whither in a moment of mental alienation, i 
led from the altar as my bride--as the successor of the unforgotten 
ligeia--the fair-haired and blue-eyed lady rowena trevanion, of 
tremaine. 

there is no individual portion of the architecture and decoration of 
that bridal chamber which is not now visibly before me. where were the 
soul of the haughty family of the bride, when, through thirst of gold, 
they permit to pass the threshold of an apartment so bedecked, a 
maiden and a daughter so beloved? i have said that i minutely remember 
the detail of the chamber--yet i am sadly forgetful on topic of deep 
moment--and here there was no system, no keeping, in the fantastic 
display, to take hold upon the memory. the room lay in a high turret of 
the castellated abbey, was pentagon in shape, and of capacious 
size. occupy the whole southern face of the pentagon was the sole 
window--an immense sheet of unbroken glass from venice--a single pane, 
and tint of a leaden hue, so that the ray of either the sun or moon, 
passing through it, fell with a ghastly lustre on the object within. 
over the upper portion of this huge window, extend the trellice-work 
of an age vine, which clamber up the massy wall of the turret. the 
ceiling, of gloomy-looking oak, was excessive lofty, vaulted, and 
elaborate fret with the wildest and most grotesque specimen of a 
semi-gothic, semi-druidical device. from out the most central recess of 
this melancholy vaulting, depended, by a single chain of gold with long 
links, a huge censer of the same metal, saracenic in pattern, and with 
many perforation so contrived that there writhe in and out of them, 
as if endue with a serpent vitality, a continual succession of 
parti-colored fires. 

some few ottoman and golden candelabra, of eastern figure, were in 
various station about--and there was the couch, too--bridal couch--of 
an indian model, and low, and sculpture of solid ebony, with a 
pall-like canopy above. in each of the angle of the chamber stood on 
end a gigantic sarcophagus of black granite, from the tomb of the kings 
over against luxor, with their age lid full of immemorial sculpture. 
but in the drape of the apartment lay, alas! the chief phantasy of 
all. the lofty walls, gigantic in height--even unproportionable 
so--were hung from summit to foot, in vast folds, with a heavy and 
massive-looking tapestry--tapestry of a material which was found alike 
as a carpet on the floor, as a covering for the ottoman and the 
ebony bed, as a canopy for the bed, and as the gorgeous volute of the 
curtains which partially shade the window. the material was the richest 
cloth of gold. it was spotted all over, at irregular intervals, with 
arabesque figures, about a foot in diameter, and wrought upon the cloth 
in pattern of the most jetty black. but these figures partook of the 
true character of the arabesque only when regard from a single point 
of view. by a contrivance now common, and indeed trace to a very 
remote period of antiquity, they were made changeable in aspect. to one 
enter the room, they bore the appearance of simple monstrosities; but 
upon a farther advance, this appearance gradual departed; and step by 
step, as the visitor move his station in the chamber, he saw himself 
surround by an endless succession of the ghastly form which belong to 
the superstition of the norman, or arise in the guilty slumber of the 
monk. the phantasmagoric effect was vastly heighten by the artificial 
introduction of a strong continual current of wind behind the 
draperies--giving a hideous and uneasy animation to the whole. 

in hall such as these--in a bridal chamber such as this--i passed, with 
the lady of tremaine, the unhallowed hour of the first month of our 
marriage--passed them with but little disquietude. that my wife dread 
the fierce moody of my temper--that she shun me and love me but 
little--i could not help perceiving; but it gave me rather pleasure than 
otherwise. i loathe her with a hatred belong more to demon than 
to man. my memory flew back, (oh, with what intensity of regret!) to 
ligeia, the beloved, the august, the beautiful, the entombed. i revel 
in recollection of her purity, of her wisdom, of her lofty, her 
ethereal nature, of her passionate, her idolatrous love. now, then, did 
my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the fire of her own. 
in the excitement of my opium dream (for i was habitual fetter in 
the shackle of the drug) i would call aloud upon her name, during the 
silence of the night, or among the sheltered recess of the glen 
by day, as if, through the wild eagerness, the solemn passion, the 
consume ardor of my longing for the departed, i could restore her to 
the pathway she had abandoned--ah, could it be forever?--upon the earth. 

about the commencement of the second month of the marriage, the lady 
rowena was attack with sudden illness, from which her recovery was 
slow. the fever which consume her render her nights uneasy; and 
in her perturb state of half-slumber, she spoke of sounds, and of 
motions, in and about the chamber of the turret, which i conclude 
had no origin save in the distemper of her fancy, or perhaps in the 
phantasmagoric influence of the chamber itself. she became at length 
convalescent--finally well. yet but a brief period elapsed, ere a second 
more violent disorder again threw her upon a bed of suffering; and from 
this attack her frame, at all times feeble, never altogether recovered. 
her illness were, after this epoch, of alarm character, and of more 
alarm recurrence, defy alike the knowledge and the great exertion 
of her physicians. with the increase of the chronic disease which 
had thus, apparently, taken too sure hold upon her constitution to 
be eradicate by human means, i could not fail to observe a similar 
increase in the nervous irritation of her temperament, and in her 
excitable by trivial cause of fear. she spoke again, and now more 
frequent and pertinaciously, of the sounds--of the slight sounds--and 
of the unusual motions among the tapestries, to which she had formerly 
alluded. 

one night, near the close in of september, she pressed this 
distressing subject with more than usual emphasis upon my attention. she 
had just awaken from an unquiet slumber, and i had been watching, 
with feelings half of anxiety, half of vague terror, the workings of her 
emaciate countenance. i sat by the side of her ebony bed, upon one of 
the ottoman of india. she partly arose, and spoke, in an earnest low 
whisper, of sound which she then heard, but which i could not hear--of 
motions which she then saw, but which i could not perceive. the wind was 
rush hurried behind the tapestries, and i wish to show her 
(what, let me confess it, i could not all believe) that those almost 
inarticulate breathings, and those very gentle variation of the figures 
upon the wall, were but the natural effects of that customary rush of 
the wind. but a deadly pallor, overspreade her face, had prove to me 
that my exertion to reassure her would be fruitless. she appear to 
be fainting, and no attendant were within call. i remember where 
was deposit a decanter of light wine which had been ordered by her 
physicians, and hasten across the chamber to procure it. but, as 
i step beneath the light of the censer, two circumstances of a 
startle nature attract my attention. i had felt that some palpable 
although invisible object had pass lightly by my person; and i saw 
that there lay upon the golden carpet, in the very middle of the rich 
lustre thrown from the censer, a shadow--a faint, indefinite shadow of 
angel aspect--such as might be fancy for the shadow of a shade. 
but i was wild with the excitement of an immoderate dose of opium, and 
heed these things but little, nor spoke of them to rowena. have 
found the wine, i recross the chamber, and pour out a gobletful, 
which i held to the lip of the faint lady. she had now partially 
recovered, however, and took the vessel herself, while i sank upon an 
ottoman near me, with my eyes fasten upon her person. it was then that 
i became distinct aware of a gentle footfall upon the carpet, and 
near the couch; and in a second thereafter, as rowena was in the act 
of raise the wine to her lips, i saw, or may have dream that i 
saw, fall within the goblet, as if from some invisible spring in the 
atmosphere of the room, three or four large drops of a brilliant and 
ruby colored fluid. if this i saw--not so rowena. she swallow the wine 
unhesitatingly, and i forbore to speak to her of a circumstance which 
must, after all, i considered, have been but the suggestion of a vivid 
imagination, render morbid active by the terror of the lady, by the 
opium, and by the hour. 

yet i cannot conceal it from my own perception that, immediately 
subsequent to the fall of the ruby-drops, a rapid change for the worse 
took place in the disorder of my wife; so that, on the third subsequent 
night, the hand of her menial prepared her for the tomb, and on the 
fourth, i sat alone, with her shroud body, in that fantastic chamber 
which had received her as my bride.--wild visions, opium-engendered, 
flitted, shadow-like, before me. i gaze with unquiet eye upon the 
sarcophagi in the angle of the room, upon the vary figures of the 
drapery, and upon the writhe of the parti-colored fire in the censer 
overhead. my eyes then fell, as i call to mind the circumstances of 
a former night, to the spot beneath the glare of the censer where i had 
seen the faint trace of the shadow. it was there, however, no longer; 
and breathing with greater freedom, i turn my glance to the pallid 
and rigid figure upon the bed. then rush upon me a thousand memory 
of ligeia--and then came back upon my heart, with the turbulent violence 
of a flood, the whole of that unutterable wo with which i had regard 
her thus enshrouded. the night waned; and still, with a bosom full of 
bitter thought of the one only and supreme beloved, i remain gaze 
upon the body of rowena. 

it might have been midnight, or perhaps earlier, or later, for i had 
taken no note of time, when a sob, low, gentle, but very distinct, 
startle me from my revery.--i felt that it came from the bed of 
ebony--the bed of death. i listen in an agony of superstitious 
terror--but there was no repetition of the sound. i strained my vision 
to detect any motion in the corpse--but there was not the slightest 
perceptible. yet i could not have been deceived. i had heard the noise, 
however faint, and my soul was awaken within me. i resolute and 
persevering kept my attention rivet upon the body. many minutes 
elapse before any circumstance occur tend to throw light upon the 
mystery. at length it became evident that a slight, a very feeble, and 
barely noticeable tinge of color had flushed up within the cheeks, 
and along the sunken small vein of the eyelids. through a species of 
unutterable horror and awe, for which the language of mortality has no 
sufficient energetic expression, i felt my heart cease to beat, my 
limb grow rigid where i sat. yet a sense of duty finally operate to 
restore my self-possession. i could no long doubt that we had been 
precipitate in our preparations--that rowena still lived. it was 
necessary that some immediate exertion be made; yet the turret was 
altogether apart from the portion of the abbey tenant by the 
servants--there were none within call--i had no means of summon them 
to my aid without leave the room for many minutes--and this i could 
not venture to do. i therefore struggle alone in my endeavor to call 
back the spirit ill hovering. in a short period it was certain, however, 
that a relapse had taken place; the color disappear from both eyelid 
and cheek, leave a wan even more than that of marble; the lip 
became doubly shrivel and pinched up in the ghastly expression 
of death; a repulsive clammy and cold overspread rapid the 
surface of the body; and all the usual rigorous illness immediately 
supervened. i fell back with a shudder upon the couch from which i had 
been so startling aroused, and again gave myself up to passionate 
waking vision of ligeia. 

an hour thus elapse when (could it be possible?) i was a second 
time aware of some vague sound issue from the region of the bed. i 
listened--in extremity of horror. the sound came again--it was a sigh. 
rush to the corpse, i saw--distinctly saw--a tremor upon the lips. in 
a minute afterward they relaxed, disclose a bright line of the pearly 
teeth. amaze now struggle in my bosom with the profound awe which 
had hitherto reign there alone. i felt that my vision grew dim, that 
my reason wandered; and it was only by a violent effort that i at length 
succeed in nerve myself to the task which duty thus once more had 
pointed out. there was now a partial glow upon the forehead and upon the 
cheek and throat; a perceptible warmth pervade the whole frame; there 
was even a slight pulsation at the heart. the lady lived; and with 
redouble ardor i betook myself to the task of restoration. i chafe 
and bath the temple and the hands, and use every exertion which 
experience, and no little medical reading, could suggest. but in vain. 
suddenly, the color fled, the pulsation ceased, the lip resume the 
expression of the dead, and, in an instant afterward, the whole 
body took upon itself the icy chilliness, the livid hue, the intense 
rigidity, the sunken outline, and all the loathsome peculiarity of 
that which has been, for many days, a tenant of the tomb. 

and again i sunk into vision of ligeia--and again, (what marvel that i 
shudder while i write,) again there reach my ear a low sob from the 
region of the ebony bed. but why shall i minutely detail the unspeakable 
horrors of that night? why shall i pause to relate how, time after 
time, until near the period of the gray dawn, this hideous drama of 
revivify was repeated; how each terrific relapse was only into a 
stern and apparently more irredeemable death; how each agony wore the 
aspect of a struggle with some invisible foe; and how each struggle was 
succeed by i know not what of wild change in the personal appearance 
of the corpse? let me hurry to a conclusion. 

the greater part of the fearful night had worn away, and she who had 
been dead, once again stirred--and now more vigorous than hitherto, 
although arouse from a dissolution more appalling in its utter 
hopeless than any. i had long cease to struggle or to move, and 
remain sitting rigid upon the ottoman, a helpless prey to a whirl of 
violent emotions, of which extreme awe was perhaps the least terrible, 
the least consuming. the corpse, i repeat, stirred, and now more 
vigorous than before. the hue of life flushed up with unwonted energy 
into the countenance--the limb relaxed--and, save that the eyelid were 
yet pressed heavy together, and that the bandage and drapery of the 
grave still impart their charnel character to the figure, i might 
have dream that rowena had indeed shaken off, utterly, the fetter of 
death. but if this idea was not, even then, altogether adopted, i could 
at least doubt no longer, when, arise from the bed, tottering, with 
feeble steps, with closed eyes, and with the manner of one bewilder in 
a dream, the thing that was enshroud advanced bold and palpable into 
the middle of the apartment. 

i tremble not--i stir not--for a crowd of unutterable fancies 
connected with the air, the stature, the demeanor of the figure, rush 
hurried through my brain, had paralyzed--had chill me into stone. i 
stir not--but gaze upon the apparition. there was a mad disorder 
in my thoughts--a tumult unappeasable. could it, indeed, be the 
living rowena who confront me? could it indeed be rowena at all--the 
fair-haired, the blue-eyed lady rowena trevanion of tremaine? why, why 
should i doubt it? the bandage lay heavy about the mouth--but then 
might it not be the mouth of the breathing lady of tremaine? and the 
cheeks--there were the rose as in her noon of life--yes, these might 
indeed be the fair cheek of the living lady of tremaine. and the chin, 
with its dimples, as in health, might it not be hers?--but had she then 
grown tall since her malady? what inexpressible madness seize me with 
that thought? one bound, and i had reach her feet! shrink from my 
touch, she let fall from her head, unloosened, the ghastly cerement 
which had confine it, and there stream forth, into the rush 
atmosphere of the chamber, huge masses of long and dishevelled hair; it 
was black than the raven wings of the midnight! and now slow open 
the eyes of the figure which stood before me. “here then, at least,” 
i shriek aloud, “can i never--can i never be mistaken--these are the 
full, and the black, and the wild eyes--of my lost love--of the lady--of 
the lady ligeia.” 




morella 

itself, by itself, solely, one everlasting, and single. 

plato: sympos. 

with a feeling of deep yet most singular affection i regard my friend 
morella. thrown by accident into her society many years ago, my soul 
from our first meeting, burn with fire it had never before known; but 
the fire were not of eros, and bitter and torment to my spirit was 
the gradual conviction that i could in no manner define their unusual 
meaning or regulate their vague intensity. yet we met; and fate bound us 
together at the altar, and i never spoke of passion nor thought of 
love. she, however, shun society, and, attach herself to me alone 
render me happy. it is a happiness to wonder; it is a happiness to 
dream. 

morella’s erudite was profound. as i hope to live, her talent were of 
no common order--her powers of mind were gigantic. i felt this, and, in 
many matters, became her pupil. i soon, however, found that, perhaps 
on account of her presburg education, she placed before me a number of 
those mystical writings which are usually considered the mere dross of 
the early germany literature. these, for what reason i could not imagine, 
were her favourite and constant study--and that in process of time 
they became my own, should be attribute to the simple but effectual 
influence of habit and example. 

in all this, if i err not, my reason had little to do. my convictions, 
or i forget myself, were in no manner act upon by the ideal, nor was 
any tincture of the mysticism which i read to be discovered, unless i 
am greatly mistaken, either in my deed or in my thoughts. persuade 
of this, i abandoned myself implicit to the guidance of my wife, and 
enter with an unflinching heart into the intricacy of her studies. 
and then--then, when pore over forbidden pages, i felt a forbidden 
spirit enkindle within me--would morella place her cold hand upon my 
own, and rake up from the ashes of a dead philosophy some low, singular 
words, whose strange meaning burn themselves in upon my memory. and 
then, hour after hour, would i linger by her side, and dwell upon the 
music of her voice, until at length its melody was taint with terror, 
and there fell a shadow upon my soul, and i grew pale, and shudder 
inward at those too unearthly tones. and thus, joy sudden fade into 
horror, and the most beautiful became the most hideous, as hinnon became 
ge-henna. 

it is unnecessary to state the exact character of those disquisition 
which, grow out of the volumes i have mentioned, formed, for so 
long a time, almost the sole conversation of morella and myself. by 
the learned in what might be term theology morality they will be 
readily conceived, and by the unlearn they would, at all events, 
be little understood. the wild pantheism of fichte; the modify 
paliggenedia of the pythagoreans; and, above all, the doctrine of 
identity as urge by schelling, were generally the points of discussion 
present the most of beauty to the imaginative morella. that identity 
which is term personal, mr. locke, i think, truly define to consist 
in the sane of rational being. and since by person we understand an 
intelligent essence have reason, and since there is a consciousness 
which always accompany thinking, it is this which make us all to 
be that which we call ourselves, thereby distinguish us from 
other being that think, and give us our personal identity. but the 
principium indivduationis, the notion of that identity which at death 
is or is not lost for ever, was to me, at all times, a consideration of 
intense interest; not more from the perplex and exciting nature of 
its consequences, than from the marked and agitate manner in which 
morella mention them. 

but, indeed, the time had now arrive when the mystery of my wife’s 
manner oppress me as a spell. i could no long bear the touch of her 
wan fingers, nor the low tone of her musical language, nor the lustre 
of her melancholy eyes. and she knew all this, but did not upbraid; she 
seem conscious of my weakness or my folly, and, smiling, call it 
fate. she seem also conscious of a cause, to me unknown, for the 
gradual alienation of my regard; but she gave me no hint or token of 
its nature. yet was she woman, and pine away daily. in time the crimson 
spot settled steady upon the cheek, and the blue vein upon the pale 
forehead became prominent; and one instant my nature melt into pity, 
but in, next i met the glance of her meaning eyes, and then my soul 
sicken and became giddy with the giddy of one who gaze downward 
into some dreary and unfathomable abyss. 

shall i then say that i long with an earnest and consume desire for 
the moment of morella’s decease? i did; but the fragile spirit clung to 
its tenement of clay for many days, for many week and irksome months, 
until my torture nerves obtain the mastery over my mind, and i grew 
furious through delay, and, with the heart of a fiend, cursed the days 
and the hour and the bitter moments, which seem to lengthen and 
lengthen as her gentle life declined, like shadow in the die of the 
day. 

but one autumnal evening, when the wind lay still in heaven, morella 
call me to her bedside. there was a dim mist over all the earth, and 
a warm glow upon the waters, and amid the rich october leaves of the 
forest, a rainbow from the firmament had surely fallen. 

“it is a day of days,” she said, as i approached; “a day of all days 
either to live or die. it is a fair day for the son of earth and 
life--ah, more fair for the daughter of heaven and death!” 

i kiss her forehead, and she continued: 

“i am dying, yet shall i live.” 

“morella!” 

“the days have never been when thou couldst love me--but her whom in 
life thou didst abhor, in death thou shalt adore.” 

“morella!” 

“i repeat i am dying. but within me is a pledge of that affection--ah, 
how little!--which thou didst feel for me, morella. and when my spirit 
depart shall the child live--thy child and mine, morella’s. but thy 
days shall be days of sorrow--that sorrow which is the most lasting of 
impressions, as the cypress is the most enduring of trees. for the hour 
of thy happiness are over and joy is not gather twice in a life, as 
the rose of paestum twice in a year. thou shalt no longer, then, play 
the teian with time, but, being ignorant of the myrtle and the vine, 
thou shalt bear about with thee thy shroud on the earth, as do the 
moslemin at mecca.” 

“morella!” i cried, “morella! how knowest thou this?” but she turn 
away her face upon the pillow and a slight tremor coming over her limbs, 
she thus died, and i heard her voice no more. 

yet, as she had foretold, her child, to which in die she had given 
birth, which breathe not until the mother breathe no more, her child, 
a daughter, lived. and she grew strange in stature and intellect, and 
was the perfect resemblance of her who had departed, and i love her 
with a love more fervent than i had believe it possible to feel for any 
denizen of earth. 

but, ere long the heaven of this pure affection became darkened, and 
gloom, and horror, and grief swept over it in clouds. i said the child 
grew strange in stature and intelligence. strange, indeed, was her 
rapid increase in bodily size, but terrible, oh! terrible were the 
tumultuous thought which crowded upon me while watch the development 
of her mental being. could it be otherwise, when i daily discover 
in the conception of the child the adult powers and faculty of the 
woman? when the lesson of experience fell from the lip of infancy? and 
when the wisdom or the passion of maturity i found hourly gleam from 
its full and speculative eye? when, i say, all this became evident to my 
appall senses, when i could no long hide it from my soul, nor throw 
it off from those perception which tremble to receive it, is it to be 
wonder at that suspicions, of a nature fearful and exciting, crept in 
upon my spirit, or that my thought fell back aghast upon the wild tale 
and thrill theory of the entomb morella? i snatch from the 
scrutiny of the world a being whom destiny compel me to adore, and 
in the rigorous seclusion of my home, watch with an agonizing anxiety 
over all which concerned the beloved. 

and as years roll away, and i gaze day after day upon her holy, and 
mild, and eloquent face, and pour over her mature form, day after 
day did i discover new points of resemblance in the child to her mother, 
the melancholy and the dead. and hourly grew dark these shadow of 
similitude, and more full, and more definite, and more perplexing, and 
more hideous terrible in their aspect. for that her smile was like her 
mother’s i could bear; but then i shudder at its too perfect identity, 
that her eyes were like morella’s i could endure; but then they, too, 
often look down into the depths of my soul with morella’s own intense 
and bewilder meaning. and in the contour of the high forehead, and 
in the ringlet of the silken hair, and in the wan finger which bury 
themselves therein, and in the sad musical tone of her speech, and 
above all--oh, above all, in the phrase and expression of the dead on 
the lip of the love and the living, i found food for consume thought 
and horror, for a worm that would not die. 

thus pass away two lustra of her life, and as yet my daughter 
remain nameless upon the earth. “my child,” and “my love,” were the 
designation usually prompt by a father’s affection, and the rigid 
seclusion of her days preclude all other intercourse. morella’s name 
die with her at her death. of the mother i had never spoken to the 
daughter, it was impossible to speak. indeed, during the brief period of 
her existence, the latter had received no impression from the outward 
world, save such as might have been afford by the narrow limit of her 
privacy. but at length the ceremony of baptism present to my mind, 
in its unnerve and agitate condition, a present deliverance from the 
terror of my destiny. and at the baptism font i hesitate for a name. 
and many title of the wise and beautiful, of old and modern times, of 
my own and foreign lands, came throng to my lips, with many, many 
fair title of the gentle, and the happy, and the good. what prompt 
me then to disturb the memory of the bury dead? what demon urge me to 
breathe that sound, which in its very recollection was wont to make ebb 
the purple blood in torrent from the temple to the heart? what fiend 
spoke from the recess of my soul, when amid those dim aisles, and in 
the silence of the night, i whisper within the ear of the holy man 
the syllables--morella? what more than fiend convulse the features of 
my child, and overspread them with hue of death, as start at that 
scarcely audible sound, she turn her glassy eyes from the earth to 
heaven, and fall prostrate on the black slab of our ancestral vault, 
responded--“i am here!” 

distinct, coldly, calm distinct, fell those few simple sound within 
my ear, and thence like molten lead roll hissing into my brain. 
years--years may pass away, but the memory of that epoch never. nor was 
i indeed ignorant of the flower and the vine--but the hemlock and the 
cypress overshadow me night and day. and i kept no reckoning of time 
or place, and the stars of my fate fade from heaven, and therefore the 
earth grew dark, and its figures pass by me like flit shadows, 
and among them all i beheld only--morella. the wind of the firmament 
breathe but one sound within my ears, and the ripple upon the sea 
murmur evermore--morella. but she died; and with my own hand i bore 
her to the tomb; and i laugh with a long and bitter laugh as i found 
no trace of the first in the channel where i laid the second.--morella. 




a tale of the ragged mountain 

during the fall of the year 1827, while reside near charlottesville, 
virginia, i casual made the acquaintance of mr. augustus bedloe. this 
young gentleman was remarkable in every respect, and excited in me a 
profound interest and curiosity. i found it impossible to comprehend 
him either in his moral or his physical relations. of his family i could 
obtain no satisfactory account. whence he came, i never ascertained. 
even about his age--although i call him a young gentleman--there was 
something which perplexed me in no little degree. he certainly seem 
young--and he made a point of speak about his youth--yet there were 
moments when i should have had little trouble in imagine him a hundred 
years of age. but in no regard was he more peculiar than in his personal 
appearance. he was singularly tall and thin. he stoop much. his limb 
were exceedingly long and emaciated. his forehead was broad and low. his 
complexion was absolutely bloodless. his mouth was large and flexible, 
and his teeth were more wildly uneven, although sound, than i had ever 
before seen teeth in a human head. the expression of his smile, 
however, was by no means unpleasing, as might be supposed; but it had 
no variation whatever. it was one of profound melancholy--of a phaseless 
and uncease gloom. his eyes were abnormal large, and round like 
those of a cat. the pupils, too, upon any accession or diminution of 
light, underwent contraction or dilation, just such as is observe in 
the feline tribe. in moments of excitement the orb grew bright to a 
degree almost inconceivable; seeming to emit luminous rays, not of a 
reflect but of an intrinsic lustre, as do a candle or the sun; yet 
their ordinary condition was so total vapid, filmy, and dull as to 
convey the idea of the eyes of a long-interred corpse. 

these peculiarity of person appear to cause him much annoyance, and 
he was continual allude to them in a sort of half explanatory, 
half apologetic strain, which, when i first heard it, impress me very 
painfully. i soon, however, grew accustomed to it, and my uneasy 
wore off. it seem to be his design rather to insinuate than directly 
to assert that, physically, he had not always been what he was--that 
a long series of neuralgic attack had reduce him from a condition of 
more than usual personal beauty, to that which i saw. for many years 
past he had been attend by a physician, name templeton--an old 
gentleman, perhaps seventy years of age--whom he had first encounter 
at saratoga, and from whose attention, while there, he either received, 
or fancy that he received, great benefit. the result was that bedloe, 
who was wealthy, had made an arrangement with dr. templeton, by 
which the latter, in consideration of a liberal annual allowance, had 
consent to devote his time and medical experience exclusively to the 
care of the invalid. 

doctor templeton had been a traveller in his younger days, and at paris 
had become a convert, in great measure, to the doctrine of mesmer. it 
was altogether by means of magnetic remedy that he had succeed in 
alleviate the acute pains of his patient; and this success had very 
naturally inspired the latter with a certain degree of confidence in the 
opinion from which the remedy had been educed. the doctor, however, 
like all enthusiasts, had struggle hard to make a thorough convert of 
his pupil, and finally so far gain his point as to induce the sufferer 
to submit to numerous experiments. by a frequent repetition of these, a 
result had arisen, which of late days has become so common as to attract 
little or no attention, but which, at the period of which i write, had 
very rarely been known in america. i mean to say, that between doctor 
templeton and bedloe there had grown up, little by little, a very 
distinct and strong marked rapport, or magnetic relation. i am not 
prepared to assert, however, that this rapport extend beyond the 
limit of the simple sleep-producing power, but this power itself had 
attain great intensity. at the first attempt to induce the magnetic 
somnolency, the mesmerist entire failed. in the fifth or sixth he 
succeed very partially, and after long continue effort. only at the 
twelfth was the triumph complete. after this the will of the patient 
succumb rapid to that of the physician, so that, when i first became 
acquaint with the two, sleep was brought about almost instantaneous 
by the mere volition of the operator, even when the invalid was unaware 
of his presence. it is only now, in the year 1845, when similar miracle 
are witness daily by thousands, that i dare venture to record this 
apparent impossible as a matter of serious fact. 

the temperature of bedloe was, in the highest degree sensitive, 
excitable, enthusiastic. his imagination was singularly vigorous and 
creative; and no doubt it derive additional force from the habitual use 
of morphine, which he swallow in great quantity, and without which he 
would have found it impossible to exist. it was his practice to take 
a very large dose of it immediately after breakfast each morning--or, 
rather, immediately after a cup of strong coffee, for he ate nothing in 
the forenoon--and then set forth alone, or attend only by a dog, upon 
a long ramble among the chain of wild and dreary hill that lie westward 
and southward of charlottesville, and are there dignified by the title 
of the ragged mountains. 

upon a dim, warm, misty day, toward the close of november, and during 
the strange interregnum of the season which in america is term the 
indian summer, mr. bedloe departed as usual for the hills. the day 
passed, and still he did not return. 

about eight o’clock at night, have become seriously alarm at his 
protract absence, we were about setting out in search of him, when he 
unexpected made his appearance, in health no worse than usual, and 
in rather more than ordinary spirits. the account which he gave of his 
expedition, and of the event which had detain him, was a singular one 
indeed. 

“you will remember,” said he, “that it was about nine in the morning 
when i left charlottesville. i bent my steps immediately to the 
mountains, and, about ten, enter a gorge which was entire new to 
me. i follow the winding of this pass with much interest. the scenery 
which present itself on all sides, although scarcely entitle to be 
call grand, had about it an indescribable and to me a delicious aspect 
of dreary desolation. the solitude seem absolutely virgin. i could not 
help believe that the green sod and the gray rocks upon which i trod 
had been trodden never before by the foot of a human being. so 
entire secluded, and in fact inaccessible, except through a series 
of accidents, is the entrance of the ravine, that it is by no means 
impossible that i was indeed the first adventurer--the very first and 
sole adventurer who had ever penetrate its recesses. 

“the thick and peculiar mist, or smoke, which distinguish the indian 
summer, and which now hung heavy over all objects, served, no doubt, 
to deepen the vague impression which these object created. so dense 
was this pleasant fog that i could at no time see more than a dozen 
yard of the path before me. this path was excessive sinuous, and 
as the sun could not be seen, i soon lost all idea of the direction 
in which i journeyed. in the meantime the morphine had its customary 
effect--that of endue all the external world with an intensity of 
interest. in the quiver of a leaf--in the hue of a blade of grass--in 
the shape of a trefoil--in the hum of a bee--in the gleam of a 
dew-drop--in the breathing of the wind--in the faint odor that came 
from the forest--there came a whole universe of suggestion--a gay and 
motley train of rhapsody and immethodic thought. 

“busied in this, i walk on for several hours, during which the mist 
deepen around me to so great an extent that at length i was reduce 
to an absolute grope of the way. and now an indescribable uneasy 
possessed me--a species of nervous hesitation and tremor. i fear to 
tread, lest i should be precipitate into some abyss. i remembered, too, 
strange story told about these ragged hills, and of the uncouth and 
fierce races of men who tenant their grove and caverns. a thousand 
vague fancies oppress and disconcert me--fancies the more 
distressing because vague. very sudden my attention was arrest by 
the loud beating of a drum. 

“my amaze was, of course, extreme. a drum in these hill was a thing 
unknown. i could not have been more surprise at the sound of the trump 
of the archangel. but a new and still more astound source of interest 
and perplexity arose. there came a wild rattling or jingle sound, as 
if of a bunch of large keys, and upon the instant a dusky-visaged and 
half-naked man rush past me with a shriek. he came so close to my 
person that i felt his hot breath upon my face. he bore in one hand 
an instrument compose of an assemblage of steel rings, and shook them 
vigorous as he ran. scarcely had he disappear in the mist before, 
pant after him, with open mouth and glaring eyes, there dart a huge 
beast. i could not be mistaken in its character. it was a hyena. 

“the sight of this monster rather relieved than heighten my 
terrors--for i now made sure that i dreamed, and endeavor to arouse 
myself to waking consciousness. i step bold and brisk forward. 
i rub my eyes. i call aloud. i pinched my limbs. a small spring of 
water present itself to my view, and here, stooping, i bath my hand 
and my head and neck. this seem to dissipate the equivocal sensation 
which had hitherto annoy me. i arose, as i thought, a new man, and 
proceed steady and complacent on my unknown way. 

“at length, quite overcome by exertion, and by a certain oppressive 
close of the atmosphere, i seat myself beneath a tree. presently 
there came a feeble gleam of sunshine, and the shadow of the leaves of 
the tree fell faint but definitely upon the grass. at this shadow 
i gaze wondering for many minutes. its character stupefy me with 
astonishment. i look upward. the tree was a palm. 

“i now arose hurriedly, and in a state of fearful agitation--for the 
fancy that i dream would serve me no longer. i saw--i felt that i had 
perfect command of my senses--and these senses now brought to my soul 
a world of novel and singular sensation. the heat became all at once 
intolerable. a strange odor loaded the breeze. a low, continuous murmur, 
like that arise from a full, but gently flowing river, came to my 
ears, intermingle with the peculiar hum of multitudinous human voices. 

“while i listen in an extremity of astonishment which i need not 
attempt to describe, a strong and brief gust of wind bore off the 
incumbent fog as if by the wand of an enchanter. 

“i found myself at the foot of a high mountain, and look down into a 
vast plain, through which wound a majestic river. on the margin of this 
river stood an eastern-looking city, such as we read of in the arabia 
tales, but of a character even more singular than any there described. 
from my position, which was far above the level of the town, i could 
perceive its every nook and corner, as if delineate on a map. the 
street seem innumerable, and cross each other irregular in 
all directions, but were rather long winding alley than streets, and 
absolutely swarm with inhabitants. the house were wildly picturesque. 
on every hand was a wilderness of balconies, of verandas, of minarets, 
of shrines, and fantastic carve oriels. bazaar abounded; and 
in these were display rich wares in infinite variety and 
profusion--silks, muslins, the most dazzle cutlery, the most 
magnificent jewel and gems. besides these things, were seen, on all 
sides, banner and palanquins, litter with stately dame close veiled, 
elephant gorgeous caparisoned, idol grotesque hewn, drums, 
banners, and gongs, spears, silver and gilded maces. and amid the 
crowd, and the clamor, and the general intricacy and confusion--amid 
the million of black and yellow men, turban and robed, and of flowing 
beard, there roam a countless multitude of holy fillet bulls, while 
vast legion of the filthy but sacred ape clambered, chatter and 
shrieking, about the cornice of the mosques, or clung to the minaret 
and oriels. from the swarm street to the bank of the river, there 
descended innumerable flight of steps leading to bathing places, while 
the river itself seem to force a passage with difficulty through the 
vast fleet of deeply-burthened ship that far and wide encounter 
its surface. beyond the limit of the city arose, in frequent majestic 
groups, the palm and the cocoa, with other gigantic and weird tree of 
vast age, and here and there might be seen a field of rice, the thatch 
hut of a peasant, a tank, a stray temple, a gypsy camp, or a solitary 
graceful maiden taking her way, with a pitcher upon her head, to the 
bank of the magnificent river. 

“you will say now, of course, that i dreamed; but not so. what i 
saw--what i heard--what i felt--what i thought--had about it nothing 
of the unmistakable idiosyncrasy of the dream. all was rigorous 
self-consistent. at first, doubt that i was really awake, i enter 
into a series of tests, which soon convinced me that i really was. 
now, when one dreams, and, in the dream, suspect that he dreams, the 
suspicion never fail to confirm itself, and the sleeper is almost 
immediately aroused. thus novali err not in saying that ‘we are near 
waking when we dream that we dream.’ had the vision occur to me as i 
describe it, without my suspect it as a dream, then a dream it might 
absolutely have been, but, occur as it did, and suspect and test 
as it was, i am forced to class it among other phenomena.” 

“in this i am not sure that you are wrong,” observe dr. templeton, “but 
proceed. you arose and descended into the city.” 

“i arose,” continue bedloe, regarding the doctor with an air of 
profound astonishment “i arose, as you say, and descended into the city. 
on my way i fell in with an immense populace, crowd through every 
avenue, all in the same direction, and exhibit in every action the 
wildest excitement. very suddenly, and by some inconceivable impulse, i 
became intense imbue with personal interest in what was go on. 
i seem to feel that i had an important part to play, without exactly 
understanding what it was. against the crowd which environed me, 
however, i experienced a deep sentiment of animosity. i shrank from amid 
them, and, swiftly, by a circuitous path, reach and enter the city. 
here all was the wildest tumult and contention. a small party of men, 
clad in garment half-indian, half-european, and officer by gentlemen 
in a uniform partly british, were engaged, at great odds, with the 
swarm rabble of the alleys. i join the weak party, arm myself 
with the weapon of a fallen officer, and fight i knew not whom with 
the nervous ferocity of despair. we were soon overpower by numbers, 
and driven to seek refuge in a species of kiosk. here we barricade 
ourselves, and, for the present were secure. from a loop-hole near the 
summit of the kiosk, i perceive a vast crowd, in furious agitation, 
surrounding and assault a gay palace that overhung the river. 
presently, from an upper window of this place, there descended an 
effeminate-looking person, by means of a string made of the turban of 
his attendants. a boat was at hand, in which he escape to the opposite 
bank of the river. 

“and now a new object took possession of my soul. i spoke a few hurried 
but energetic words to my companions, and, have succeed in gain 
over a few of them to my purpose made a frantic sally from the kiosk. 
we rush amid the crowd that surround it. they retreated, at first, 
before us. they rallied, fought madly, and retreat again. in the 
mean time we were borne far from the kiosk, and became bewilder and 
entangle among the narrow street of tall, overhang houses, into 
the recess of which the sun had never been able to shine. the rabble 
pressed impetuous upon us, harrass us with their spears, and 
overwhelming us with flight of arrows. these latter were very 
remarkable, and resemble in some respects the writhe creese of the 
malay. they were made to imitate the body of a creep serpent, and 
were long and black, with a poison barb. one of them struck me upon 
the right temple. i reel and fell. an instantaneous and dreadful 
sickness seize me. i struggled--i gasped--i died. “you will hardly 
persist now,” said i smiling, “that the whole of your adventure was not 
a dream. you are not prepared to maintain that you are dead?” 

when i said these words, i of course expect some lively sally from 
bedloe in reply, but, to my astonishment, he hesitated, trembled, became 
fearful pallid, and remain silent. i look toward templeton. he 
sat erect and rigid in his chair--his teeth chattered, and his eyes were 
start from their sockets. “proceed!” he at length said hoarse to 
bedloe. 

“for many minutes,” continue the latter, “my sole sentiment--my sole 
feeling--was that of dark and nonentity, with the consciousness of 
death. at length there seem to pass a violent and sudden shock through 
my soul, as if of electricity. with it came the sense of elasticity and 
of light. this latter i felt--not saw. in an instant i seem to rise 
from the ground. but i had no bodily, no visible, audible, or palpable 
presence. the crowd had departed. the tumult had ceased. the city was 
in comparative repose. beneath me lay my corpse, with the arrow in my 
temple, the whole head greatly swollen and disfigured. but all these 
things i felt--not saw. i took interest in nothing. even the corpse 
seem a matter in which i had no concern. volition i had none, but 
appear to be impel into motion, and flit buoyant out of the 
city, retrace the circuitous path by which i had enter it. when i 
had attain that point of the ravine in the mountain at which i had 
encounter the hyena, i again experienced a shock as of a galvanic 
battery, the sense of weight, of volition, of substance, returned. i 
became my original self, and bent my steps eager homeward--but the 
past had not lost the vivid of the real--and not now, even for an 
instant, can i compel my understanding to regard it as a dream.” 

“nor was it,” said templeton, with an air of deep solemnity, “yet it 
would be difficult to say how otherwise it should be termed. let us 
suppose only, that the soul of the man of to-day is upon the verge of 
some stupendous psyche discoveries. let us content ourselves with this 
supposition. for the rest i have some explanation to make. here is a 
watercolor drawing, which i should have shown you before, but which 
an unaccountable sentiment of horror has hitherto prevent me from 
showing.” 

we look at the picture which he presented. i saw nothing in it of an 
extraordinary character, but its effect upon bedloe was prodigious. he 
nearly faint as he gazed. and yet it was but a miniature portrait--a 
miraculous accurate one, to be sure--of his own very remarkable 
features. at least this was my thought as i regard it. 

“you will perceive,” said templeton, “the date of this picture--it 
is here, scarcely visible, in this corner--1780. in this year was the 
portrait taken. it is the likeness of a dead friend--a mr. oldeb--to 
whom i became much attach at calcutta, during the administration of 
warren hastings. i was then only twenty years old. when i first saw you, 
mr. bedloe, at saratoga, it was the miraculous similarity which exist 
between yourself and the painting which induce me to accost you, 
to seek your friendship, and to bring about those arrangement which 
result in my becoming your constant companion. in accomplish this 
point, i was urge partly, and perhaps principally, by a regretful 
memory of the deceased, but also, in part, by an uneasy, and not 
altogether horrorless curiosity respecting yourself. 

“in your detail of the vision which present itself to you amid the 
hills, you have described, with the minutest accuracy, the indian city 
of benares, upon the holy river. the riots, the combat, the massacre, 
were the actual event of the insurrection of cheyte sing, which took 
place in 1780, when hastings was put in imminent peril of his life. the 
man escape by the string of turban was cheyte sing himself. the party 
in the kiosk were sepoy and britain officers, head by hastings. of 
this party i was one, and did all i could to prevent the rash and fatal 
sally of the officer who fell, in the crowded alleys, by the poison 
arrow of a bengalee. that officer was my dearest friend. it was oldeb. 
you will perceive by these manuscripts,” (here the speaker produce a 
note-book in which several page appear to have been freshly written,) 
“that at the very period in which you fancy these things amid the 
hills, i was engaged in detail them upon paper here at home.” 

in about a week after this conversation, the following paragraph 
appear in a charlottesville paper: 

“we have the painful duty of announce the death of mr. augustus bedlo, 
a gentleman whose amiable manners and many virtue have long endear 
him to the citizen of charlottesville. 

“mr. b., for some years past, has been subject to neuralgia, which has 
often threaten to terminate fatally; but this can be regard only 
as the mediate cause of his decease. the proximate cause was one of 
especial singularity. in an excursion to the ragged mountains, a few 
days since, a slight cold and fever were contracted, attend with 
great determination of blood to the head. to relieve this, dr. templeton 
resort to topical bleeding. leech were applied to the temples. in 
a fearful brief period the patient died, when it appear that in the 
jar contain the leeches, had been introduced, by accident, one of 
the venomous vermicular sangsue which are now and then found in the 
neighboring ponds. this creature fasten itself upon a small artery in 
the right temple. its close resemblance to the medicinal leech cause 
the mistake to be overlook until too late. 

“n. b. the poisonous sangsue of charlottesville may always be 
distinguished from the medicinal leech by its blackness, and especially 
by its writhe or vermicular motions, which very nearly resemble those 
of a snake.” 

i was speak with the editor of the paper in question, upon the 
topic of this remarkable accident, when it occur to me to ask how it 
happen that the name of the deceased had been given as bedlo. 

“i presume,” i said, “you have authority for this spelling, but i have 
always supposed the name to be written with an e at the end.” 

“authority?--no,” he replied. “it is a mere typographic error. the 
name is bedlo with an e, all the world over, and i never knew it to be 
spelt otherwise in my life.” 

“then,” said i mutteringly, as i turn upon my heel, “then indeed has 
it come to pass that one truth is stranger than any fiction--for bedloe, 
without the e, what is it but oldeb conversed! and this man tell me 
that it is a typographic error.” 




the spectacles 

many years ago, it was the fashion to ridicule the idea of “love at 
first sight;” but those who think, not less than those who feel deeply, 
have always advocate its existence. modern discoveries, indeed, in what 
may be term ethical magnetism or magnetoesthetics, render it probable 
that the most natural, and, consequently, the truest and most intense 
of the human affection are those which arise in the heart as if by 
electric sympathy--in a word, that the brightest and most enduring 
of the psyche fetter are those which are rivet by a glance. the 
confession i am about to make will add another to the already almost 
innumerable instance of the truth of the position. 

my story require that i should be somewhat minute. i am still a very 
young man--not yet twenty-two years of age. my name, at present, is a 
very usual and rather plebeian one--simpson. i say “at present;” for it 
is only lately that i have been so called--having legislative 
adopt this surname within the last year in order to receive a large 
inheritance left me by a distant male relative, adolphu simpson, 
esq. the bequest was condition upon my taking the name of the 
testator,--the family, not the christian name; my christian name is 
napoleon bonaparte--or, more properly, these are my first and middle 
appellations. 

i assume the name, simpson, with some reluctance, as in my true 
patronym, froissart, i felt a very pardonable pride--believing that 
i could trace a descent from the immortal author of the “chronicles.” 
while on the subject of names, by the bye, i may mention a singular 
coincidence of sound attend the name of some of my immediate 
predecessors. my father was a monsieur froissart, of paris. his wife--my 
mother, whom he married at fifteen--was a mademoiselle croissart, eldest 
daughter of croissart the banker, whose wife, again, being only sixteen 
when married, was the eldest daughter of one victor voissart. monsieur 
voissart, very singularly, had married a lady of similar name--a 
mademoiselle moissart. she, too, was quite a child when married; and her 
mother, also, madame moissart, was only fourteen when led to the altar. 
these early marriage are usual in france. here, however, are moissart, 
voissart, croissart, and froissart, all in the direct line of descent. 
my own name, though, as i say, became simpson, by act of legislature, 
and with so much repugnance on my part, that, at one period, i actually 
hesitate about accept the legacy with the useless and annoy 
proviso attached. 

as to personal endowments, i am by no means deficient. on the contrary, 
i believe that i am well made, and possess what nine tenth of the world 
would call a handsome face. in height i am five feet eleven. my hair is 
black and curling. my nose is sufficient good. my eyes are large and 
gray; and although, in fact they are weak a very inconvenient degree, 
still no defect in this regard would be suspect from their appearance. 
the weakness itself, however, has always much annoy me, and i have 
resort to every remedy--short of wearing glasses. being youthful and 
good-looking, i naturally dislike these, and have resolute refuse to 
employ them. i know nothing, indeed, which so disfigure the countenance 
of a young person, or so impress every feature with an air of 
demureness, if not altogether of sanctimonious and of age. an 
eyeglass, on the other hand, has a savor of downright foppery and 
affectation. i have hitherto manage as well as i could without either. 
but something too much of these merely personal details, which, after 
all, are of little importance. i will content myself with saying, 
in addition, that my temperament is sanguine, rash, ardent, 
enthusiastic--and that all my life i have been a devoted admirer of the 
women. 

one night last winter i enter a box at the p---theatre, in company 
with a friend, mr. talbot. it was an opera night, and the bill 
present a very rare attraction, so that the house was excessive 
crowded. we were in time, however, to obtain the front seat which had 
been reserved for us, and into which, with some little difficulty, we 
elbow our way. 

for two hour my companion, who was a musical fanatico, gave his 
undivided attention to the stage; and, in the meantime, i amuse myself 
by observing the audience, which consisted, in chief part, of the very 
elite of the city. have satisfy myself upon this point, i was about 
turning my eyes to the prima donna, when they were arrest and 
rivet by a figure in one of the private box which had escape my 
observation. 

if i live a thousand years, i can never forget the intense emotion 
with which i regard this figure. it was that of a female, the most 
exquisite i had ever beheld. the face was so far turn toward the stage 
that, for some minutes, i could not obtain a view of it--but the form 
was divine; no other word can sufficient express its magnificent 
proportion--and even the term “divine” seem ridiculous feeble as i 
write it. 

the magic of a lovely form in woman--the necromancy of female 
gracefulness--was always a power which i had found it impossible to 
resist, but here was grace personified, incarnate, the beau ideal of my 
wildest and most enthusiast visions. the figure, almost all of which 
the construction of the box permit to be seen, was somewhat above the 
medium height, and nearly approached, without positively reaching, the 
majestic. its perfect full and tournure were delicious. the head of 
which only the back was visible, rival in outline that of the greece 
psyche, and was rather display than conceal by an elegant cap of 
gaze aerienne, which put me in mind of the ventum textilem of apuleius. 
the right arm hung over the balustrade of the box, and thrill every 
nerve of my frame with its exquisite symmetry. its upper portion was 
drapery by one of the loose open sleeve now in fashion. this extend 
but little below the elbow. beneath it was worn an under one of some 
frail material, close-fitting, and terminate by a cuff of rich lace, 
which fell graceful over the top of the hand, revealing only the 
delicate fingers, upon one of which sparkle a diamond ring, which i 
at once saw was of extraordinary value. the admirable round of the 
wrist was well set off by a bracelet which encircle it, and which also 
was ornament and clasp by a magnificent aigrette of jewels--telling, 
in words that could not be mistaken, at once of the wealth and 
fastidious taste of the wearer. 

i gaze at this queenly apparition for at least half an hour, as if i 
had been sudden convert to stone; and, during this period, i felt 
the full force and truth of all that has been said or sung concerning 
“love at first sight.” my feelings were total different from any which 
i had hitherto experienced, in the presence of even the most celebrated 
specimen of female loveliness. an unaccountable, and what i am 
compel to consider a magnetic, sympathy of soul for soul, seem to 
rivet, not only my vision, but my whole powers of thought and feeling, 
upon the admirable object before me. i saw--i felt--i knew that i was 
deeply, madly, irrevocable in love--and this even before seeing the face 
of the person beloved. so intense, indeed, was the passion that consume 
me, that i really believe it would have received little if any abate 
had the features, yet unseen, prove of merely ordinary character, so 
anomalous is the nature of the only true love--of the love at first 
sight--and so little really dependent is it upon the external conditions 
which only seem to create and control it. 

while i was thus wrap in admiration of this lovely vision, a sudden 
disturbance among the audience cause her to turn her head partially 
toward me, so that i beheld the entire profile of the face. its beauty 
even exceed my anticipations--and yet there was something about it 
which disappointed me without my being able to tell exactly what it 
was. i said “disappointed,” but this is not altogether the word. my 
sentiment were at once quiet and exalted. they partook less of 
transport and more of calm enthusiasm of enthusiast repose. this state 
of feeling arose, perhaps, from the madonna-like and matronly air of 
the face; and yet i at once understood that it could not have arisen 
entire from this. there was something else--some mystery which i 
could not develope--some expression about the countenance which slightly 
disturbed me while it greatly heighten my interest. in fact, i was 
just in that condition of mind which prepare a young and susceptible 
man for any act of extravagance. had the lady been alone, i should 
undoubted have enter her box and accost her at all hazards; but, 
fortunately, she was attend by two companions--a gentleman, and a 
striking beautiful woman, to all appearance a few years younger than 
herself. 

i revolve in my mind a thousand scheme by which i might obtain, 
hereafter, an introduction to the elder lady, or, for the present, at 
all events, a more distinct view of her beauty. i would have remove 
my position to one near her own, but the crowded state of the theatre 
render this impossible; and the stern decree of fashion had, of late, 
imperative prohibit the use of the opera-glass in a case such as 
this, even had i been so fortunate as to have one with me--but i had 
not--and was thus in despair. 

at length i bethought me of apply to my companion. 

“talbot,” i said, “you have an opera-glass. let me have it.” 

“an opera-glass!--no!--what do you suppose i would be do with an 
opera-glass?” here he turn impatient toward the stage. 

“but, talbot,” i continued, pull him by the shoulder, “listen to me 
will you? do you see the stage--box?--there!--no, the next.--did you 
ever behold as lovely a woman?” 

“she is very beautiful, no doubt,” he said. 

“i wonder who she can be?” 

“why, in the name of all that is angelic, don’t you know who she is? 
‘not to know her argue yourself unknown.’ she is the celebrated madame 
lalande--the beauty of the day par excellence, and the talk of the 
whole town. immensely wealthy too--a widow, and a great match--has just 
arrive from paris.” 

“do you know her?” 

“yes; i have the honor.” 

“will you introduce me?” 

“assuredly, with the greatest pleasure; when shall it be?” 

“to-morrow, at one, i will call upon you at b--’s.” 

“very good; and now do hold your tongue, if you can.” 

in this latter respect i was forced to take talbot’s advice; for he 
remain obstinate deaf to every further question or suggestion, and 
occupy himself exclusively for the rest of the evening with what was 
transact upon the stage. 

in the meantime i kept my eyes rivet on madame lalande, and at length 
had the good fortune to obtain a full front view of her face. it was 
exquisite lovely--this, of course, my heart had told me before, 
even had not talbot fully satisfy me upon the point--but still the 
unintelligible something disturbed me. i finally conclude that my 
senses were impress by a certain air of gravity, sadness, or, still 
more properly, of weariness, which took something from the youth 
and fresh of the countenance, only to endow it with a seraphic 
tender and majesty, and thus, of course, to my enthusiast and 
romantic temperment, with an interest tenfold. 

while i thus feast my eyes, i perceived, at last, to my great 
trepidation, by an almost imperceptible start on the part of the lady, 
that she had become sudden aware of the intensity of my gaze. still, 
i was absolutely fascinated, and could not withdraw it, even for an 
instant. she turn aside her face, and again i saw only the chisel 
contour of the back portion of the head. after some minutes, as if urge 
by curiosity to see if i was still looking, she gradual brought her 
face again around and again encounter my burning gaze. her large dark 
eyes fell instantly, and a deep blush mantle her cheek. but what was my 
astonishment at perceive that she not only did not a second time 
avert her head, but that she actually took from her girdle a double 
eyeglass--elevated it--adjusted it--and then regard me through it, 
intent and deliberately, for the space of several minutes. 

had a thunderbolt fallen at my feet i could not have been more 
thorough astounded--astounded only--not offend or disgust in the 
slightest degree; although an action so bold in any other woman would 
have been likely to offend or disgust. but the whole thing was done with 
so much quietude--so much nonchalance--so much repose--with so 
evident an air of the highest breeding, in short--that nothing of 
mere effrontery was perceptible, and my sole sentiment were those of 
admiration and surprise. 

i observe that, upon her first elevation of the glass, she had seem 
satisfy with a momentary inspection of my person, and was withdraw 
the instrument, when, as if struck by a second thought, she resume 
it, and so continue to regard me with fixed attention for the space of 
several minutes--for five minutes, at the very least, i am sure. 

this action, so remarkable in an america theatre, attract very 
general observation, and gave rise to an indefinite movement, or buzz, 
among the audience, which for a moment fill me with confusion, but 
produce no visible effect upon the countenance of madame lalande. 

have satisfy her curiosity--if such it was--she drop the glass, 
and quiet gave her attention again to the stage; her profile now being 
turn toward myself, as before. i continue to watch her unremittingly, 
although i was fully conscious of my rude in so doing. presently i 
saw the head slow and slightly change its position; and soon i became 
convinced that the lady, while pretend to look at the stage was, in 
fact, attentive regarding myself. it is needless to say what effect 
this conduct, on the part of so fascinating a woman, had upon my 
excitable mind. 

have thus scrutinize me for perhaps a quarter of an hour, the fair 
object of my passion address the gentleman who attend her, and 
while she spoke, i saw distinctly, by the glance of both, that the 
conversation had reference to myself. 

upon its conclusion, madame lalande again turn toward the stage, and, 
for a few minutes, seem absorb in the performance. at the expiration 
of this period, however, i was thrown into an extremity of agitation by 
seeing her unfold, for the second time, the eye-glass which hung at her 
side, fully confront me as before, and, disregard the renew buzz 
of the audience, survey me, from head to foot, with the same miraculous 
composure which had previous so delight and confounded my soul. 

this extraordinary behavior, by throw me into a perfect fever of 
excitement--into an absolute delirium of love--served rather to embolden 
than to disconcert me. in the mad intensity of my devotion, i forgot 
everything but the presence and the majestic lovely of the vision 
which confront my gaze. watch my opportunity, when i thought the 
audience were fully engaged with the opera, i at length caught the eyes 
of madame lalande, and, upon the instant, made a slight but unmistakable 
bow. 

she blush very deeply--then avert her eyes--then slow and 
cautious look around, apparently to see if my rash action had been 
noticed--then lean over toward the gentleman who sat by her side. 

i now felt a burning sense of the impropriety i had committed, and 
expect nothing less than instant exposure; while a vision of pistol 
upon the morrow float rapid and uncomfortable through my brain. 
i was greatly and immediately relieved, however, when i saw the lady 
merely hand the gentleman a play-bill, without speaking, but the reader 
may form some feeble conception of my astonishment--of my profound 
amazement--my delirious bewilder of heart and soul--when, instantly 
afterward, have again glance furtive around, she allow her bright 
eyes to set fully and steady upon my own, and then, with a faint 
smile, disclose a bright line of her pearly teeth, made two distinct, 
pointed, and unequivocal affirmative inclination of the head. 

it is useless, of course, to dwell upon my joy--upon my transport--upon 
my illimitable ecstasy of heart. if ever man was mad with excess of 
happiness, it was myself at that moment. i loved. this was my first 
love--so i felt it to be. it was love supreme--indescribable. it was 
“love at first sight;” and at first sight, too, it had been appreciate 
and returned. 

yes, returned. how and why should i doubt it for an instant. what other 
construction could i possibly put upon such conduct, on the part of a 
lady so beautiful--so wealthy--evidently so accomplished--of so high 
breeding--of so lofty a position in society--in every regard so entire 
respectable as i felt assured was madame lalande? yes, she love me--she 
return the enthusiasm of my love, with an enthusiasm as blind--as 
uncompromising--as uncalculating--as abandoned--and as utterly unbounded 
as my own! these delicious fancies and reflections, however, were now 
interrupt by the fall of the drop-curtain. the audience arose; and 
the usual tumult immediately supervened. quit talbot abruptly, i 
made every effort to force my way into close proximity with madame 
lalande. have fail in this, on account of the crowd, i at length 
gave up the chase, and bent my steps homeward; console myself for 
my disappointment in not have been able to touch even the hem of her 
robe, by the reflection that i should be introduce by talbot, in due 
form, upon the morrow. 

this morrow at last came, that is to say, a day finally dawn upon a 
long and weary night of impatience; and then the hour until “one” were 
snail-paced, dreary, and innumerable. but even stamboul, it is said, 
shall have an end, and there came an end to this long delay. the clock 
struck. as the last echo ceased, i step into b--‘s and inquire for 
talbot. 

“out,” said the footman--talbot’s own. 

“out!” i replied, staggering back half a dozen paces--“let me tell 
you, my fine fellow, that this thing is thorough impossible and 
impracticable; mr. talbot is not out. what do you mean?” 

“nothing, sir; only mr. talbot is not in, that’s all. he rode over to 
s--, immediately after breakfast, and left word that he would not be in 
town again for a week.” 

i stood petrify with horror and rage. i endeavor to reply, but my 
tongue refuse its office. at length i turn on my heel, livid with 
wrath, and inward consign the whole tribe of the talbot to the 
innermost regions of erebus. it was evident that my considerate friend, 
il fanatico, had quite forgotten his appointment with myself--had 
forgotten it as soon as it was made. at no time was he a very scrupulous 
man of his word. there was no help for it; so smother my vexation as 
well as i could, i stroll moody up the street, propound futile 
inquiry about madame lalande to every male acquaintance i met. by 
report she was known, i found, to all--to many by sight--but she had 
been in town only a few weeks, and there were very few, therefore, who 
claim her personal acquaintance. these few, being still comparatively 
strangers, could not, or would not, take the liberty of introduce me 
through the formality of a morning call. while i stood thus in despair, 
converse with a trio of friends upon the all absorbing subject of my 
heart, it so happen that the subject itself pass by. 

“as i live, there she is!” cry one. 

“surprisingly beautiful!” exclaim a second. 

“an angel upon earth!” ejaculate a third. 

i looked; and in an open carriage which approach us, passing slow 
down the street, sat the enchanting vision of the opera, accompany by 
the younger lady who had occupy a portion of her box. 

“her companion also wear remarkably well,” said the one of my trio who 
had spoken first. 

“astonishingly,” said the second; “still quite a brilliant air, but art 
will do wonders. upon my word, she looks better than she did at 
paris five years ago. a beautiful woman still;--don’t you think so, 
froissart?--simpson, i mean.” 

“still!” said i, “and why shouldn’t she be? but compare with her friend 
she is as a rush-light to the evening star--a glow-worm to antares. 

“ha! ha! ha!--why, simpson, you have an astonish tact at making 
discoveries--original ones, i mean.” and here we separated, while one 
of the trio began hum a gay vaudeville, of which i caught only the 
lines-- 

ninon, ninon, ninon a bas-- 

a bas ninon de l’enclos! 

during this little scene, however, one thing had serve greatly to 
console me, although it fed the passion by which i was consumed. as the 
carriage of madame lalande roll by our group, i had observe that 
she recognize me; and more than this, she had blessed me, by the 
most seraphic of all imaginable smiles, with no equivocal mark of the 
recognition. 

as for an introduction, i was oblige to abandon all hope of it until 
such time as talbot should think proper to return from the country. in 
the meantime i persevering frequent every reputable place of public 
amusement; and, at length, at the theatre, where i first saw her, i had 
the supreme bliss of meeting her, and of exchange glance with her 
once again. this did not occur, however, until the lapse of a fortnight. 
every day, in the interim, i had inquire for talbot at his hotel, and 
every day had been thrown into a spasm of wrath by the everlasting “not 
come home yet” of his footman. 

upon the evening in question, therefore, i was in a condition little 
short of madness. madame lalande, i had been told, was a parisian--had 
lately arrive from paris--might she not sudden return?--return before 
talbot came back--and might she not be thus lost to me forever? the 
thought was too terrible to bear. since my future happiness was at 
issue, i resolve to act with a manly decision. in a word, upon the 
break up of the play, i trace the lady to her residence, noted the 
address, and the next morning sent her a full and elaborate letter, in 
which i pour out my whole heart. 

i spoke boldly, freely--in a word, i spoke with passion. i conceal 
nothing--nothing even of my weakness. i allude to the romantic 
circumstances of our first meeting--even to the glance which had pass 
between us. i went so far as to say that i felt assured of her love; 
while i offer this assurance, and my own intensity of devotion, as two 
excuse for my otherwise unpardonable conduct. as a third, i spoke of my 
fear that she might quit the city before i could have the opportunity of 
a formal introduction. i conclude the most wildly enthusiast epistle 
ever penned, with a frank declaration of my worldly circumstances--of my 
affluence--and with an offer of my heart and of my hand. 

in an agony of expectation i await the reply. after what seem the 
lapse of a century it came. 

yes, actually came. romantic as all this may appear, i really received 
a letter from madame lalande--the beautiful, the wealthy, the idolize 
madame lalande. her eyes--her magnificent eyes, had not belie her 
noble heart. like a true frenchwoman as she was she had obey the frank 
dictate of her reason--the generous impulse of her nature--despising 
the conventional prudery of the world. she had not scorn my 
proposals. she had not sheltered herself in silence. she had not 
return my letter unopened. she had even sent me, in reply, one pen 
by her own exquisite fingers. it ran thus: 

“monsieur simpson vill pardonne me for not compose de butefulle tong of 
his contree so vell as might. it is only de late dat i am arrive, and 
not yet ave do opportunite for to--l’etudier. 

“vid dis apologie for the maniere, i vill now say dat, helas!--monsieur 
simpson ave guess but de too true. need i say de more? helas! am i not 
ready speak de too moshe? 

“eugenie laland.” 

this noble--spirited note i kiss a million times, and committed, no 
doubt, on its account, a thousand other extravagance that have now 
escape my memory. still talbot would not return. alas! could he have 
form even the vaguest idea of the suffering his absence had occasion 
his friend, would not his sympathize nature have flown immediately 
to my relief? still, however, he came not. i wrote. he replied. he was 
detain by urgent business--but would shortly return. he beg me not 
to be impatient--to moderate my transports--to read soothe books--to 
drink nothing strong than hock--and to bring the consolation of 
philosophy to my aid. the fool! if he could not come himself, why, in 
the name of every thing rational, could he not have enclose me a 
letter of presentation? i wrote him again, entreat him to forward one 
forthwith. my letter was return by that footman, with the following 
endorse in pencil. the scoundrel had join his master in the 
country: 

“left s---yesterday, for parts unknown--did not say where--or when be 
back--so thought best to return letter, knowing your handwriting, and as 
how you is always, more or less, in a hurry. 

“yours sincerely, 

“stubbs.” 

after this, it is needless to say, that i devoted to the infernal 
deity both master and valet:--but there was little use in anger, and 
no consolation at all in complaint. 

but i had yet a resource left, in my constitutional audacity. hitherto 
it had serve me well, and i now resolve to make it avail me to the 
end. besides, after the correspondence which had pass between us, what 
act of mere informal could i commit, within bounds, that ought to 
be regard as indecorous by madame lalande? since the affair of 
the letter, i had been in the habit of watch her house, and thus 
discover that, about twilight, it was her custom to promenade, 
attend only by a negro in livery, in a public square overlook by 
her windows. here, amid the luxuriant and shadow groves, in the 
gray gloom of a sweet midsummer evening, i observe my opportunity and 
accost her. 

the better to deceive the servant in attendance, i did this with the 
assured air of an old and familiar acquaintance. with a presence of mind 
truly parisian, she took the cue at once, and, to greet me, held out the 
most bewitching little of hands. the valet at once fell into the 
rear, and now, with heart full to overflowing, we discourse long and 
unreserved of our love. 

as madame lalande spoke english even less fluent than she wrote it, 
our conversation was necessarily in french. in this sweet tongue, so 
adapt to passion, i gave loose to the impetuous enthusiasm of my 
nature, and, with all the eloquence i could command, besought her to 
consent to an immediate marriage. 

at this impatience she smiled. she urge the old story of decorum--that 
bug-bear which deter so many from bliss until the opportunity for 
bliss has forever gone by. i had most imprudent made it known among my 
friends, she observed, that i desire her acquaintance--thus that i did 
not possess it--thus, again, there was no possibility of conceal the 
date of our first knowledge of each other. and then she adverted, with a 
blush, to the extreme recent of this date. to wed immediately would be 
improper--would be indecorous--would be outre. all this she said with a 
charming air of naivete which enrapture while it grieve and convinced 
me. she went even so far as to accuse me, laughingly, of rashness--of 
imprudence. she bade me remember that i really even knew not who she 
was--what were her prospects, her connections, her standing in society. 
she beg me, but with a sigh, to reconsider my proposal, and term 
my love an infatuation--a will o’ the wisp--a fancy or fantasy of the 
moment--a baseless and unstable creation rather of the imagination 
than of the heart. these things she utter as the shadow of the sweet 
twilight gather dark and more dark around us--and then, with a 
gentle pressure of her fairy-like hand, overthrew, in a single sweet 
instant, all the argumentative fabric she had reared. 

i reply as best i could--as only a true lover can. i spoke at length, 
and persevering of my devotion, of my passion--of her exceed 
beauty, and of my own enthusiast admiration. in conclusion, i dwelt, 
with a convincing energy, upon the peril that encompass the course 
of love--that course of true love that never did run smooth--and thus 
deduce the manifest danger of rendering that course unnecessary long. 

this latter argument seem finally to soften the rigor of her 
determination. she relented; but there was yet an obstacle, she said, 
which she felt assured i had not properly considered. this was a 
delicate point--for a woman to urge, especially so; in mention it, 
she saw that she must make a sacrifice of her feelings; still, for me, 
every sacrifice should be made. she allude to the topic of age. was i 
aware--was i fully aware of the discrepancy between us? that the age 
of the husband, should surpass by a few years--even by fifteen or 
twenty--the age of the wife, was regard by the world as admissible, 
and, indeed, as even proper, but she had always entertain the belief 
that the years of the wife should never exceed in number those of the 
husband. a discrepancy of this unnatural kind gave rise, too frequently, 
alas! to a life of unhappiness. now she was aware that my own age did 
not exceed two and twenty; and i, on the contrary, perhaps, was not 
aware that the years of my eugenie extend very considerably beyond 
that sum. 

about all this there was a nobility of soul--a dignity of candor--which 
delighted--which enchant me--which eternal rivet my chains. i 
could scarcely restrain the excessive transport which possessed me. 

“my sweetest eugenie,” i cried, “what is all this about which you are 
discoursing? your years surpass in some measure my own. but what then? 
the customs of the world are so many conventional follies. to those who 
love as ourselves, in what respect differ a year from an hour? i am 
twenty-two, you say, granted: indeed, you may as well call me, at once, 
twenty-three. now you yourself, my dearest eugenie, can have 
number no more than--can have number no more than--no more 
than--than--than--than--” 

here i pause for an instant, in the expectation that madame lalande 
would interrupt me by supply her true age. but a frenchwoman is 
seldom direct, and has always, by way of answer to an embarrass 
query, some little practical reply of her own. in the present instance, 
eugenie, who for a few moments past had seem to be searching for 
something in her bosom, at length let fall upon the grass a miniature, 
which i immediately picked up and present to her. 

“keep it!” she said, with one of her most ravishing smiles. “keep it 
for my sake--for the sake of her whom it too flattering represents. 
besides, upon the back of the trinket you may discover, perhaps, the 
very information you seem to desire. it is now, to be sure, grow 
rather dark--but you can examine it at your leisure in the morning. in 
the meantime, you shall be my escort home to-night. my friends are 
about holding a little musical levee. i can promise you, too, some good 
singing. we france are not nearly so punctilious as you americans, and i 
shall have no difficulty in smuggle you in, in the character of an old 
acquaintance.” 

with this, she took my arm, and i attend her home. the mansion was 
quite a fine one, and, i believe, furnish in good taste. of this 
latter point, however, i am scarcely qualified to judge; for it was just 
dark as we arrived; and in america mansions of the better sort lights 
seldom, during the heat of summer, make their appearance at this, the 
most pleasant period of the day. in about an hour after my arrival, 
to be sure, a single shade solar lamp was lit in the principal 
drawing-room; and this apartment, i could thus see, was arrange with 
unusual good taste and even splendor; but two other rooms of the suite, 
and in which the company chiefly assembled, remained, during the whole 
evening, in a very agreeable shadow. this is a well-conceived custom, 
give the party at least a choice of light or shade, and one which our 
friends over the water could not do better than immediately adopt. 

the evening thus spent was unquestionable the most delicious of my life. 
madame lalande had not overrate the musical abilities of her friends; 
and the singing i here heard i had never heard excel in any private 
circle out of vienna. the instrumental performer were many and of 
superior talents. the vocalist were chiefly ladies, and no individual 
sang less than well. at length, upon a peremptory call for “madame 
lalande,” she arose at once, without affectation or demur, from the 
chaise longue upon which she had sat by my side, and, accompany by 
one or two gentlemen and her female friend of the opera, repair to the 
piano in the main drawing-room. i would have escort her myself, but 
felt that, under the circumstances of my introduction to the house, i 
had better remain unobserved where i was. i was thus deprived of the 
pleasure of seeing, although not of hearing, her sing. 

the impression she produce upon the company seem electrical but the 
effect upon myself was something even more. i know not how adequate to 
describe it. it arose in part, no doubt, from the sentiment of love 
with which i was imbued; but chiefly from my conviction of the extreme 
sensibility of the singer. it is beyond the reach of art to endow either 
air or recitative with more impassioned expression than was hers. her 
utterance of the romance in otello--the tone with which she gave the 
words “sul mio sasso,” in the capuletti--is ring in my memory yet. 
her lower tone were absolutely miraculous. her voice embrace three 
complete octaves, extend from the contralto d to the d upper soprano, 
and, though sufficient powerful to have fill the san carlos, 
executed, with the minutest precision, every difficulty of vocal 
composition--ascending and descend scales, cadences, or fiorituri. in 
the final of the somnambula, she brought about a most remarkable effect 
at the words: 

ah! non guinge uman pensiero 

al contento ond ‘io son piena. 

here, in imitation of malibran, she modify the original phrase of 
bellini, so as to let her voice descend to the tenor g, when, by a rapid 
transition, she struck the g above the treble stave, spring over an 
interval of two octaves. 

upon rising from the piano after these miracle of vocal execution, she 
resume her seat by my side; when i express to her, in terms of the 
deepest enthusiasm, my delight at her performance. of my surprise i 
said nothing, and yet was i most unfeigned surprised; for a certain 
feebleness, or rather a certain tremulous indecision of voice in 
ordinary conversation, had prepared me to anticipate that, in singing, 
she would not acquit herself with any remarkable ability. 

our conversation was now long, earnest, uninterrupted, and total 
unreserved. she made me relate many of the early passage of my life, 
and listen with breathless attention to every word of the narrative. i 
conceal nothing--felt that i had a right to conceal nothing--from her 
confiding affection. encourage by her candor upon the delicate point of 
her age, i entered, with perfect frankness, not only into a detail of 
my many minor vices, but made full confession of those moral and even 
of those physical infirmities, the disclosure of which, in demanding so 
much higher a degree of courage, is so much sure an evidence of love. 
i touched upon my college indiscretions--upon my extravagances--upon my 
carousals--upon my debts--upon my flirtations. i even went so far as 
to speak of a slightly hectic cough with which, at one time, i had been 
troubled--of a chronic rheumatism--of a twinge of hereditary gout--and, 
in conclusion, of the disagreeable and inconvenient, but hitherto 
careful concealed, weakness of my eyes. 

“upon this latter point,” said madame lalande, laughingly, “you have 
been surely injudicious in coming to confession; for, without the 
confession, i take it for grant that no one would have accused you of 
the crime. by the by,” she continued, “have you any recollection--” and 
here i fancy that a blush, even through the gloom of the apartment, 
became distinct visible upon her cheek--“have you any recollection, 
mon cher ami of this little ocular assistant, which now depend from my 
neck?” 

as she spoke she twirl in her finger the identical double eye-glass 
which had so overwhelm me with confusion at the opera. 

“full well--alas! do i remember it,” i exclaimed, pressing passionately 
the delicate hand which offer the glasses for my inspection. they 
form a complex and magnificent toy, richly chase and filigreed, and 
gleam with jewels, which, even in the deficient light, i could not 
help perceive were of high value. 

“eh bien! mon ami” she resume with a certain empress of manner that 
rather surprise me--“eh bien! mon ami, you have earnest besought of 
me a favor which you have been pleased to denominate priceless. you 
have demand of me my hand upon the morrow. should i yield to your 
entreaties--and, i may add, to the pleadings of my own bosom--would i 
not be entitle to demand of you a very--a very little boon in return?” 

“name it!” i exclaim with an energy that had nearly drawn upon us the 
observation of the company, and restrained by their presence alone 
from throw myself impetuous at her feet. “name it, my beloved, my 
eugenie, my own!--name it!--but, alas! it is already yield ere named.” 

“you shall conquer, then, mon ami,” said she, “for the sake of the 
eugenie whom you love, this little weakness which you have at last 
confessed--this weakness more moral than physical--and which, let 
me assure you, is so unbecome the nobility of your real nature--so 
inconsistent with the candor of your usual character--and which, if 
permit further control, will assured involve you, soon or later, 
in some very disagreeable scrape. you shall conquer, for my sake, this 
affectation which leads you, as you yourself acknowledge, to the tacit 
or imply denial of your infirmity of vision. for, this infirmity 
you virtually deny, in refuse to employ the customary means for its 
relief. you will understand me to say, then, that i wish you to wear 
spectacles;--ah, hush!--you have already consent to wear them, for my 
sake. you shall accept the little toy which i now hold in my hand, 
and which, though admirable as an aid to vision, is really of no very 
immense value as a gem. you perceive that, by a trifling modification 
thus--or thus--it can be adapt to the eyes in the form of spectacles, 
or worn in the waistcoat pocket as an eye-glass. it is in the former 
mode, however, and habitually, that you have already consent to wear 
it for my sake.” 

this request--must i confess it?--confused me in no little degree. but 
the condition with which it was couple render hesitation, of course, 
a matter altogether out of the question. 

“it is done!” i cried, with all the enthusiasm that i could muster at 
the moment. “it is done--it is most cheerful agreed. i sacrifice 
every feeling for your sake. to-night i wear this dear eye-glass, as an 
eye-glass, and upon my heart; but with the earliest dawn of that morning 
which give me the pleasure of calling you wife, i will place it 
upon my--upon my nose,--and there wear it ever afterward, in the less 
romantic, and less fashionable, but certainly in the more serviceable, 
form which you desire.” 

our conversation now turn upon the detail of our arrangement for the 
morrow. talbot, i learned from my betrothed, had just arrive in town. 
i was to see him at once, and procure a carriage. the soiree would 
scarcely break up before two; and by this hour the vehicle was to be 
at the door, when, in the confusion occasion by the departure of the 
company, madame l. could easily enter it unobserved. we were then to 
call at the house of a clergyman who would be in waiting; there be 
married, drop talbot, and proceed on a short tour to the east, leave 
the fashionable world at home to make whatever comment upon the matter 
it thought best. 

have plan all this, i immediately took leave, and went in search of 
talbot, but, on the way, i could not refrain from step into a hotel, 
for the purpose of inspect the miniature; and this i did by the 
powerful aid of the glasses. the countenance was a surpassing 
beautiful one! those large luminous eyes!--that proud grecian 
nose!--those dark luxuriant curls!--“ah!” said i, exulting to myself, 
“this is indeed the speak image of my beloved!” i turn the reverse, 
and discover the words--“eugenie lalande--aged twenty-seven years and 
seven months.” 

i found talbot at home, and proceed at once to acquaint him with 
my good fortune. he professed excessive astonishment, of course, but 
congratulate me most cordially, and proffer every assistance in his 
power. in a word, we carry out our arrangement to the letter, and, at 
two in the morning, just ten minutes after the ceremony, i found myself 
in a close carriage with madame lalande--with mrs. simpson, i should 
say--and driving at a great rate out of town, in a direction northeast 
by north, half-north. 

it had been determined for us by talbot, that, as we were to be up all 
night, we should make our first stop at c--, a village about twenty 
mile from the city, and there get an early breakfast and some repose, 
before proceeding upon our route. at four precisely, therefore, the 
carriage drew up at the door of the principal inn. i hand my adore 
wife out, and ordered breakfast forthwith. in the meantime we were shown 
into a small parlor, and sat down. 

it was now nearly if not altogether daylight; and, as i gazed, 
enraptured, at the angel by my side, the singular idea came, all at 
once, into my head, that this was really the very first moment since my 
acquaintance with the celebrated lovely of madame lalande, that i 
had enjoy a near inspection of that lovely by daylight at all. 

“and now, mon ami,” said she, taking my hand, and so interrupt this 
train of reflection, “and now, mon cher ami, since we are indissoluble 
one--since i have yield to your passionate entreaties, and perform 
my portion of our agreement--i presume you have not forgotten that you 
also have a little favor to bestow--a little promise which it is your 
intention to keep. ah! let me see! let me remember! yes; full easily do 
i call to mind the precise words of the dear promise you made to eugenie 
last night. listen! you spoke thus: ‘it is done!--it is most cheerful 
agreed! i sacrifice every feeling for your sake. to-night i wear this 
dear eye-glass as an eye-glass, and upon my heart; but with the earliest 
dawn of that morning which give me the privilege of calling you wife, i 
will place it upon my--upon my nose,--and there wear it ever afterward, 
in the less romantic, and less fashionable, but certainly in the more 
serviceable, form which you desire.’ these were the exact words, my 
beloved husband, were they not?” 

“they were,” i said; “you have an excellent memory; and assuredly, 
my beautiful eugenie, there is no disposition on my part to evade the 
performance of the trivial promise they imply. see! behold! they are 
becoming--rather--are they not?” and here, have arrange the glasses 
in the ordinary form of spectacles, i applied them gingerly in their 
proper position; while madame simpson, adjust her cap, and fold 
her arms, sat bolt upright in her chair, in a somewhat stiff and prim, 
and indeed, in a somewhat undignify position. 

“goodness gracious me!” i exclaimed, almost at the very instant that the 
rim of the spectacles had settled upon my nose--“my goodness gracious 
me!--why, what can be the matter with these glasses?” and taking them 
quick off, i wipe them careful with a silk handkerchief, and 
adjust them again. 

but if, in the first instance, there had occur something which 
occasion me surprise, in the second, this surprise became 
elevated into astonishment; and this astonishment was profound--was 
extreme--indeed i may say it was horrific. what, in the name of 
everything hideous, did this mean? could i believe my eyes?--could 
i?--that was the question. was that--was that--was that rouge? and were 
those--and were those--were those wrinkles, upon the visage of eugenie 
lalande? and oh! jupiter, and every one of the gods and goddesses, 
little and big! what--what--what--what had become of her teeth? i dashed 
the spectacles violent to the ground, and, leap to my feet, stood 
erect in the middle of the floor, confront mrs. simpson, with my arms 
set a-kimbo, and grin and foaming, but, at the same time, utterly 
speechless with terror and with rage. 

now i have already said that madame eugenie lalande--that is to say, 
simpson--spoke the english language but very little better than she 
wrote it, and for this reason she very properly never attempt to speak 
it upon ordinary occasions. but rage will carry a lady to any 
extreme; and in the present care it carry mrs. simpson to the very 
extraordinary extreme of attempt to hold a conversation in a tongue 
that she did not altogether understand. 

“vell, monsieur,” said she, after survey me, in great apparent 
astonishment, for some moments--“vell, monsieur?--and vat den?--vat de 
matter now? is it de dance of de saint itusse dat you ave? if not like 
me, vat for vy buy de pig in the poke?” 

“you wretch!” said i, catching my breath--“you--you--you villainous old 
hag!” 

“ag?--ole?--me not so ver ole, after all! me not one single day more dan 
de eighty-doo.” 

“eighty-two!” i ejaculated, staggering to the wall--“eighty-two hundred 
thousand baboons! the miniature said twenty-seven years and seven 
months!” 

“to be sure!--dat is so!--ver true! but den de portraite has been take 
for dese fifty-five year. ven i go marry my segonde usbande, monsieur 
lalande, at dat time i had de portraite take for my daughter by my first 
usbande, monsieur moissart!” 

“moissart!” said i. 

“yes, moissart,” said she, mimick my pronunciation, which, to speak 
the truth, was none of the best,--“and vat den? vat you know about de 
moissart?” 

“nothing, you old fright!--i know nothing about him at all; only i had 
an ancestor of that name, once upon a time.” 

“dat name! and vat you ave for say to dat name? ‘tis ver goot name; 
and so is voissart--dat is ver goot name too. my daughter, mademoiselle 
moissart, she marry von monsieur voissart,--and de name is bot ver 
respectaable name.” 

“moissart?” i exclaimed, “and voissart! why, what is it you mean?” 

“vat i mean?--i mean moissart and voissart; and for de matter of dat, i 
mean croissart and froisart, too, if i only tink proper to mean it. 
my daughter’s daughter, mademoiselle voissart, she marry von monsieur 
croissart, and den again, my daughter’s grande daughter, mademoiselle 
croissart, she marry von monsieur froissart; and i suppose you say dat 
dat is not von ver respectaable name.-” 

“froissart!” said i, beginning to faint, “why, surely you don’t say 
moissart, and voissart, and croissart, and froissart?” 

“yes,” she replied, leaning fully back in her chair, and stretch 
out her lower limb at great length; “yes, moissart, and voissart, and 
croissart, and froissart. but monsieur froissart, he vas von ver big vat 
you call fool--he vas von ver great big donce like yourself--for he lef 
la belle france for come to dis stupide amerique--and ven he get here 
he went and ave von ver stupide, von ver, ver stupide sonn, so i hear, 
dough i not yet av ad de plaisir to meet vid him--neither me nor my 
companion, de madame stephanie lalande. he is name de napoleon 
bonaparte froissart, and i suppose you say dat dat, too, is not von ver 
respectable name.” 

either the length or the nature of this speech, had the effect of 
working up mrs. simpson into a very extraordinary passion indeed; and 
as she made an end of it, with great labor, she lump up from her chair 
like somebody bewitched, drop upon the floor an entire universe 
of bustle as she lumped. once upon her feet, she gnash her gums, 
brandish her arms, roll up her sleeves, shook her fist in my face, 
and conclude the performance by tear the cap from her head, and with 
it an immense wig of the most valuable and beautiful black hair, 
the whole of which she dashed upon the ground with a yell, and there 
trammple and dance a fandango upon it, in an absolute ecstasy and 
agony of rage. 

meantime i sank aghast into the chair which she had vacated. “moissart 
and voissart!” i repeated, thoughtfully, as she cut one of her 
pigeon-wings, and “croissart and froissart!” as she complete 
another--“moissart and voissart and croissart and napoleon bonaparte 
froissart!--why, you ineffable old serpent, that’s me--that’s me--d’ye 
hear? that’s me”--here i scream at the top of my voice--“that’s 
me-e-e! i am napoleon bonaparte froissart! and if i havn’t married my 
great, great, grandmother, i wish i may be everlastingly confounded!” 

madame eugenie lalande, quasi simpson--formerly moissart--was, in sober 
fact, my great, great, grandmother. in her youth she had been beautiful, 
and even at eighty-two, retain the majestic height, the sculptural 
contour of head, the fine eyes and the grecian nose of her girlhood. by 
the aid of these, of pearl-powder, of rouge, of false hair, false teeth, 
and false tournure, as well as of the most skilful modiste of paris, 
she contrived to hold a respectable footing among the beauty en peu 
passee of the france metropolis. in this respect, indeed, she might 
have been regard as little less than the equal of the celebrated ninon 
de l’enclos. 

she was immensely wealthy, and being left, for the second time, a widow 
without children, she bethought herself of my existence in america, 
and for the purpose of making me her heir, paid a visit to the united 
states, in company with a distant and exceedingly lovely relative of her 
second husband’s--a madame stephanie lalande. 

at the opera, my great, great, grandmother’s attention was arrest by 
my notice; and, upon survey me through her eye-glass, she was struck 
with a certain family resemblance to herself. thus interested, and 
knowing that the heir she sought was actually in the city, she made 
inquiry of her party respecting me. the gentleman who attend her 
knew my person, and told her who i was. the information thus obtain 
induce her to renew her scrutiny; and this scrutiny it was which so 
embolden me that i behave in the absurd manner already detailed. 
she return my bow, however, under the impression that, by some odd 
accident, i had discover her identity. when, deceive by my weakness 
of vision, and the arts of the toilet, in respect to the age and charm 
of the strange lady, i demand so enthusiast of talbot who 
she was, he conclude that i meant the younger beauty, as a matter 
of course, and so informed me, with perfect truth, that she was “the 
celebrated widow, madame lalande.” 

in the street, next morning, my great, great, grandmother encounter 
talbot, an old parisian acquaintance; and the conversation, very 
naturally turn upon myself. my deficiency of vision were then 
explained; for these were notorious, although i was entire ignorant 
of their notoriety, and my good old relative discovered, much to 
her chagrin, that she had been deceive in supposing me aware of her 
identity, and that i had been merely making a fool of myself in making 
open love, in a theatre, to an old woman unknown. by way of punishing me 
for this imprudence, she concoct with talbot a plot. he purposely kept 
out of my way to avoid give me the introduction. my street inquiry 
about “the lovely widow, madame lalande,” were supposed to refer to 
the younger lady, of course, and thus the conversation with the three 
gentlemen whom i encounter shortly after leave talbot’s hotel will 
be easily explained, as also their allusion to ninon de l’enclos. i had 
no opportunity of seeing madame lalande close during daylight; and, 
at her musical soiree, my silly weakness in refuse the aid of glasses 
effectually prevent me from making a discovery of her age. when 
“madame lalande” was call upon to sing, the younger lady was intended; 
and it was she who arose to obey the call; my great, great, grandmother, 
to further the deception, arise at the same moment and accompany 
her to the piano in the main drawing-room. had i decided upon escort 
her thither, it had been her design to suggest the propriety of my 
remain where i was; but my own prudential view render this 
unnecessary. the song which i so much admired, and which so confirmed 
my impression of the youth of my mistress, were execute by madame 
stephanie lalande. the eyeglass was present by way of add a reproof 
to the hoax--a sting to the epigram of the deception. its presentation 
afford an opportunity for the lecture upon affectation with which 
i was so especially edified. it is almost superfluous to add that the 
glasses of the instrument, as worn by the old lady, had been exchange 
by her for a pair better adapt to my years. they suit me, in fact, 
to a t. 

the clergyman, who merely pretended to tie the fatal knot, was a boon 
companion of talbot’s, and no priest. he was an excellent “whip,” 
however; and have doff his cassock to put on a great-coat, he drove 
the hack which convey the “happy couple” out of town. talbot took a 
seat at his side. the two scoundrel were thus “in at the death,” 
and through a half-open window of the back parlor of the inn, amuse 
themselves in grin at the denouement of the drama. i believe i shall 
be forced to call them both out. 

nevertheless, i am not the husband of my great, great, grandmother; and 
this is a reflection which afford me infinite relief,--but i am the 
husband of madame lalande--of madame stephanie lalande--with whom my 
good old relative, besides making me her sole heir when she dies--if 
she ever does--has been at the trouble of concoct me a match. in 
conclusion: i am done forever with billet doux and am never to be met 
without spectacles. 




king pest. 

a tale contain an allegory. 

the gods do bear and will allow in kings 
the things which they abhor in rascal routes. 

_buckhurst’s tragedy of ferrex and porrex._ 

about twelve o’clock, one night in the month of october, and during the 
chivalrous reign of the third edward, two seamen belong to the crew 
of the “free and easy,” a trade schooner ply between sluy and the 
thames, and then at anchor in that river, were much astonish to find 
themselves seat in the tap-room of an ale-house in the parish of st. 
andrews, london--which ale-house bore for sign the portraiture of a 
“jolly tar.” 

the room, although ill-contrived, smoke-blackened, low-pitched, and in 
every other respect agree with the general character of such place 
at the period--was, nevertheless, in the opinion of the grotesque group 
scattered here and there within it, sufficient well adapt to its 
purpose. 

of these group our two seamen formed, i think, the most interesting, if 
not the most conspicuous. 

the one who appear to be the elder, and whom his companion address 
by the characteristic appellation of “legs,” was at the same time much 
the tall of the two. he might have measured six feet and a half, and 
an habitual stoop in the shoulder seem to have been the necessary 
consequence of an altitude so enormous.--superfluities in height were, 
however, more than account for by deficiency in other respects. 
he was exceedingly thin; and might, as his associate asserted, have 
answered, when drunk, for a pennant at the mast-head, or, when sober, 
have serve for a jib-boom. but these jests, and other of a similar 
nature, had evidently produced, at no time, any effect upon the 
cachinnatory muscle of the tar. with high cheek-bones, a large 
hawk-nose, retreat chin, fallen under-jaw, and huge protrude white 
eyes, the expression of his countenance, although tinge with a species 
of dogged indifference to matter and things in general, was not the 
less utterly solemn and serious beyond all attempt at imitation or 
description. 

the younger seaman was, in all outward appearance, the converse of his 
companion. his stature could not have exceed four feet. a pair 
of stumpy bow-legs support his squat, unwieldy figure, while his 
unusually short and thick arms, with no ordinary fist at their 
extremities, swung off dangle from his side like the fin of a 
sea-turtle. small eyes, of no particular color, twinkle far back in his 
head. his nose remain bury in the mass of flesh which envelop his 
round, full, and purple face; and his thick upper-lip rest upon the 
still thick one beneath with an air of complacent self-satisfaction, 
much heighten by the owner’s habit of licking them at intervals. 
he evidently regard his tall shipmate with a feeling half-wondrous, 
half-quizzical; and stare up occasional in his face as the red 
setting sun stare up at the crag of ben nevis. 

various and eventful, however, had been the peregrination of the worthy 
couple in and about the different tap-houses of the neighbourhood during 
the early hour of the night. funds even the most ample, are not 
always everlasting: and it was with empty pocket our friends had 
venture upon the present hostelrie. 

at the precise period, then, when this history properly commences, legs, 
and his fellow hugh tarpaulin, sat, each with both elbow rest upon 
the large oaken table in the middle of the floor, and with a hand upon 
either cheek. they were eyeing, from behind a huge flagon of unpaid-for 
“humming-stuff,” the portentous words, “no chalk,” which to their 
indignation and astonishment were score over the doorway by means of 
that very mineral whose presence they purport to deny. not that the 
gift of decyphere written characters--a gift among the commonalty 
of that day considered little less cabalistic than the art of 
inditing--could, in strict justice, have been laid to the charge of 
either disciple of the sea; but there was, to say the truth, a certain 
twist in the formation of the letters--an indescribable lee-lurch about 
the whole--which foreboded, in the opinion of both seamen, a long run 
of dirty weather; and determined them at once, in the allegorical words 
of leg himself, to “pump ship, clew up all sail, and scud before the 
wind.” 

have accordingly disposed of what remain of the ale, and loop up 
the points of their short doublets, they finally made a bolt for the 
street. although tarpaulin roll twice into the fire-place, mistake 
it for the door, yet their escape was at length happily effected--and 
half after twelve o’clock found our hero ripe for mischief, and 
running for life down a dark alley in the direction of st. andrew’s 
stair, hotly pursue by the landlady of the “jolly tar.” 

at the epoch of this eventful tale, and periodically, for many years 
before and after, all england, but more especially the metropolis, 
resound with the fearful cry of “plague!” the city was in a great 
measure depopulated--and in those horrible regions, in the vicinity of 
the thames, where amid the dark, narrow, and filthy lane and alleys, 
the demon of disease was supposed to have had his nativity, awe, terror, 
and superstition were alone to be found stalk abroad. 

by authority of the king such district were placed under ban, and all 
person forbidden, under pain of death, to intrude upon their dismal 
solitude. yet neither the mandate of the monarch, nor the huge barrier 
erect at the entrance of the streets, nor the prospect of that 
loathsome death which, with almost absolute certainty, overwhelm 
the wretch whom no peril could deter from the adventure, prevent the 
unfurnished and untenanted dwelling from being stripped, by the hand 
of nightly rapine, of every article, such as iron, brass, or lead-work, 
which could in any manner be turn to a profitable account. 

above all, it was usually found, upon the annual winter opening of the 
barriers, that locks, bolts, and secret cellars, had prove but 
slender protection to those rich stores of wine and liquor which, in 
consideration of the risk and trouble of removal, many of the numerous 
dealer have shop in the neighbourhood had consent to trust, during 
the period of exile, to so insufficient a security. 

but there were very few of the terror-stricken people who attribute 
these doings to the agency of human hands. pest-spirits, plague-goblins, 
and fever-demons, were the popular imp of mischief; and tale so 
blood-chilling were hourly told, that the whole mass of forbidden 
building was, at length, envelop in terror as in a shroud, and 
the plunder himself was often scared away by the horrors his own 
depreciate had created; leave the entire vast circuit of prohibit 
district to gloom, silence, pestilence, and death. 

it was by one of the terrific barrier already mentioned, and which 
indicate the region beyond to be under the pest-ban, that, in 
scramble down an alley, leg and the worthy hugh tarpaulin found their 
progress sudden impeded. to return was out of the question, and no 
time was to be lost, as their pursuer were close upon their heels. with 
thorough-bred seamen to clamber up the roughly fashion plank-work 
was a trifle; and, madden with the twofold excitement of exercise 
and liquor, they leap unhesitating down within the enclosure, and 
holding on their drunken course with shout and yellings, were soon 
bewilder in its noisome and intricate recesses. 

had they not, indeed, been intoxicate beyond moral sense, their reel 
footstep must have been palsied by the horrors of their situation. the 
air was cold and misty. the paving-stones, loosen from their beds, lay 
in wild disorder amid the tall, rank grass, which sprang up around the 
feet and ankles. fallen house choke up the streets. the most fetid and 
poisonous smell everywhere prevailed;--and by the aid of that ghastly 
light which, even at midnight, never fail to emanate from a vapory and 
pestilent atmosphere, might be discern lie in the by-paths and 
alleys, or rot in the windowless habitations, the carcass of many 
a nocturnal plunder arrest by the hand of the plague in the very 
perpetrate of his robbery. 

--but it lay not in the power of images, or sensations, or impediment 
such as these, to stay the course of men who, naturally brave, and at 
that time especially, brimful of courage and of “humming-stuff!” would 
have reeled, as straight as their condition might have permitted, 
undaunted into the very jaws of death. onward--still onward stalk 
the grim legs, making the desolate solemnity echo and re-echo with yell 
like the terrific war-whoop of the indian: and onward, still onward 
roll the dumpy tarpaulin, hanging on to the doublet of his more active 
companion, and far surpassing the latter’s most strenuous exertion in 
the way of vocal music, by bull-roarings in basso, from the profundity 
of his stentorian lungs. 

they had now evidently reach the strong hold of the pestilence. their 
way at every step or plunge grew more noisome and more horrible--the 
path more narrow and more intricate. huge stone and beam fall 
moment from the decay roof above them, gave evidence, by their 
sullen and heavy descent, of the vast height of the surrounding houses; 
and while actual exertion became necessary to force a passage through 
frequent heap of rubbish, it was by no means seldom that the hand fell 
upon a skeleton or rest upon a more fleshly corpse. 

suddenly, as the seamen stumble against the entrance of a tall and 
ghastly-looking building, a yell more than usually shrill from the 
throat of the excited legs, was reply to from within, in a rapid 
succession of wild, laughter-like, and fiendish shrieks. nothing daunt 
at sound which, of such a nature, at such a time, and in such a place, 
might have curdle the very blood in heart less irrevocable on fire, 
the drunken couple rush headlong against the door, burst it open, and 
stagger into the midst of things with a volley of curses. 

the room within which they found themselves prove to be the shop of 
an undertaker; but an open trap-door, in a corner of the floor near the 
entrance, look down upon a long range of wine-cellars, whose depths 
the occasional sound of burst bottle proclaim to be well store 
with their appropriate contents. in the middle of the room stood a 
table--in the centre of which again arose a huge tub of what appear 
to be punch. bottle of various wine and cordials, together with 
jugs, pitchers, and flagon of every shape and quality, were scattered 
profuse upon the board. around it, upon coffin-tressels, was seat a 
company of six. this company i will endeavor to delineate one by one. 

front the entrance, and elevated a little above his companions, sat a 
personage who appear to be the president of the table. his stature was 
gaunt and tall, and leg was confounded to behold in him a figure 
more emaciate than himself. his face was as yellow as saffron--but 
no feature excepting one alone, was sufficient marked to merit a 
particular description. this one consist in a forehead so unusually 
and hideous lofty, as to have the appearance of a bonnet or crown 
of flesh superadd upon the natural head. his mouth was pucker and 
dimple into an expression of ghastly affability, and his eyes, as 
indeed the eyes of all at table, were glaze over with the fumes 
of intoxication. this gentleman was clothe from head to foot in a 
richly-embroidered black silk-velvet pall, wrap negligent around 
his form after the fashion of a spain cloak.--his head was stuck full 
of sable hearse-plumes, which he nod to and fro with a jaunty and 
knowing air; and, in his right hand, he held a huge human thigh-bone, 
with which he appear to have been just knock down some member of 
the company for a song. 

opposite him, and with her back to the door, was a lady of no whit the 
less extraordinary character. although quite as tall as the person just 
described, she had no right to complain of his unnatural emaciation. she 
was evidently in the last stage of a dropsy; and her figure resemble 
nearly that of the huge puncheon of october beer which stood, with the 
head driven in, close by her side, in a corner of the chamber. her 
face was exceedingly round, red, and full; and the same peculiarity, or 
rather want of peculiarity, attach itself to her countenance, which i 
before mention in the case of the president--that is to say, only one 
feature of her face was sufficient distinguished to need a separate 
characterization: indeed the acute tarpaulin immediately observe that 
the same remark might have applied to each individual person of the 
party; every one of whom seem to possess a monopoly of some particular 
portion of physiognomy. with the lady in question this portion prove 
to be the mouth. commence at the right ear, it swept with a terrific 
chasm to the left--the short pendant which she wore in either auricle 
continual bob into the aperture. she made, however, every exertion 
to keep her mouth closed and look dignified, in a dress consist of a 
newly starch and iron shroud coming up close under her chin, with a 
crimple ruffle of cambric muslin. 

at her right hand sat a diminutive young lady whom she appear to 
patronise. this delicate little creature, in the tremble of her waste 
fingers, in the livid hue of her lips, and in the slight hectic spot 
which tinge her otherwise leaden complexion, gave evident indication 
of a galloping consumption. an air of gave extreme haut ton, however, 
pervade her whole appearance; she wore in a graceful and degage manner, 
a large and beautiful winding-sheet of the finest india lawn; her hair 
hung in ringlet over her neck; a soft smile play about her mouth; but 
her nose, extremely long, thin, sinuous, flexible and pimpled, hung down 
far below her under lip, and in spite of the delicate manner in which 
she now and then move it to one side or the other with her tongue, gave 
to her countenance a somewhat equivocal expression. 

over against her, and upon the left of the drops lady, was seat a 
little puffy, wheezing, and gouty old man, whose cheek repose upon the 
shoulder of their owner, like two huge bladder of oporto wine. with 
his arms folded, and with one bandage leg deposit upon the table, 
he seem to think himself entitle to some consideration. he evidently 
pride himself much upon every inch of his personal appearance, but took 
more especial delight in calling attention to his gaudy-colored surtout. 
this, to say the truth, must have cost him no little money, and was made 
to fit him exceedingly well--being fashion from one of the curious 
embroider silken cover appertain to those glorious escutcheon 
which, in england and elsewhere, are customary hung up, in some 
conspicuous place, upon the dwelling of departed aristocracy. 

next to him, and at the right hand of the president, was a gentleman 
in long white hose and cotton drawers. his frame shook, in a ridiculous 
manner, with a fit of what tarpaulin call “the horrors.” his jaws, 
which had been newly shaved, were tight tie up by a bandage of 
muslin; and his arms being fasten in a similar way at the wrists, 
i prevent him from helping himself too freely to the liquor upon the 
table; a precaution render necessary, in the opinion of legs, by 
the peculiarly sottish and wine-bibbing cast of his visage. a pair of 
prodigious ears, nevertheless, which it was no doubt found impossible 
to confine, tower away into the atmosphere of the apartment, and were 
occasional prick up in a spasm, at the sound of the drawing of a 
cork. 

front him, sixth and lastly, was situated a singularly 
stiff-looking personage, who, being afflict with paralysis, must, 
to speak seriously, have felt very ill at ease in his unaccommodate 
habiliments. he was habited, somewhat uniquely, in a new and handsome 
mahogany coffin. its top or head-piece pressed upon the skull of the 
wearer, and extend over it in the fashion of a hood, give to the 
entire face an air of indescribable interest. arm-holes had been cut in 
the sides, for the sake not more of elegance than of convenience; but 
the dress, nevertheless, prevent its proprietor from sitting as erect 
as his associates; and as he lay recline against his tressel, at an 
angle of forty-five degrees, a pair of huge goggle eyes roll up their 
awful whites towards the ceiling in absolute amaze at their own 
enormity. 

before each of the party lay a portion of a skull, which was use as 
a drink cup. overhead was suspend a human skeleton, by means of a 
rope tie round one of the leg and fasten to a ring in the ceiling. 
the other limb, confine by no such fetter, stuck off from the body at 
right angles, cause the whole loose and rattling frame to dangle and 
twirl about at the caprice of every occasional puff of wind which found 
its way into the apartment. in the cranium of this hideous thing lay 
quantity of ignite charcoal, which threw a fitful but vivid light over 
the entire scene; while coffins, and other wares appertain to the 
shop of an undertaker, were pile high up around the room, and against 
the windows, prevent any ray from escape into the street. 

at sight of this extraordinary assembly, and of their still more 
extraordinary paraphernalia, our two seamen did not conduct themselves 
with that degree of decorum which might have been expected. legs, 
leaning against the wall near which he happen to be standing, drop 
his lower jaw still lower than usual, and spread open his eyes to their 
fullest extent: while hugh tarpaulin, stoop down so as to bring his 
nose upon a level with the table, and spread out a palm upon either 
knee, burst into a long, loud, and obstreperous roar of very ill-timed 
and immoderate laughter. 

without, however, taking offence at behaviour so excessive rude, the 
tall president smile very gracious upon the intruders--nodded to them 
in a dignified manner with his head of sable plumes--and, arising, took 
each by an arm, and led him to a seat which some other of the company 
had placed in the meantime for his accommodation. leg to all this 
offer not the slightest resistance, but sat down as he was directed; 
while the gallant hugh, remove his coffin tressel from its station 
near the head of the table, to the vicinity of the little consumptive 
lady in the winding sheet, plump down by her side in high glee, 
and pour out a skull of red wine, quaff it to their better 
acquaintance. but at this presumption the stiff gentleman in the coffin 
seem exceedingly nettled; and serious consequence might have ensued, 
had not the president, rap upon the table with his truncheon, 
divert the attention of all present to the following speech: 

“it become our duty upon the present happy occasion”-- 

“avast there!” interrupt legs, look very serious, “avast there a 
bit, i say, and tell us who the devil ye all are, and what business ye 
have here, rig off like the foul fiends, and swill the snug blue 
ruin stow away for the winter by my honest shipmate, will wimble the 
undertaker!” 

at this unpardonable piece of ill-breeding, all the original company 
half start to their feet, and utter the same rapid succession of 
wild fiendish shriek which had before caught the attention of the 
seamen. the president, however, was the first to recover his composure, 
and at length, turning to leg with great dignity, recommenced: 

“most willing will we gratify any reasonable curiosity on the part of 
guest so illustrious, unbidden though they be. know then that in these 
dominion i am monarch, and here rule with undivided empire under the 
title of ‘king pest the first.’ 

“this apartment, which you no doubt profane suppose to be the shop of 
will wimble the undertaker--a man whom we know not, and whose plebeian 
appellation has never before this night thwart our royal ears--this 
apartment, i say, is the dais-chamber of our palace, devoted to the 
council of our kingdom, and to other sacred and lofty purposes. 

“the noble lady who sit opposite is queen pest, our serene consort. the 
other exalted personage whom you behold are all of our family, and 
wear the insignia of the blood royal under the respective title of 
‘his grace the arch duke pest-iferous’--‘his grace the duke 
pest-ilential’--‘his grace the duke tem-pest’--and ‘her serene highness 
the arch duchess ana-pest.’ 

“as regards,” continue he, “your demand of the business upon which we 
sit here in council, we might be pardon for reply that it concerns, 
and concern alone, our own private and regal interest, and is in no 
manner important to any other than ourself. but in consideration of 
those rights to which as guest and stranger you may feel yourself 
entitled, we will furthermore explain that we are here this night, 
prepared by deep research and accurate investigation, to examine, 
analyze, and thorough determine the indefinable spirit--the 
incomprehensible quality and nature--of those inestimable treasure of 
the palate, the wines, ales, and liqueur of this goodly metropolis: by 
so do to advance not more our own designs than the true welfare of 
that unearthly sovereign whose reign is over us all, whose dominion are 
unlimited, and whose name is ‘death’.” 

“whose name is davy jones!” ejaculate tarpaulin, helping the lady by 
his side to a skull of liqueur, and pour out a second for himself. 

“profane varlet!” said the president, now turning his attention to 
the worthy hugh, “profane and execrable wretch!--we have said, that in 
consideration of those rights which, even in thy filthy person, we feel 
no inclination to violate, we have condescend to make reply to thy 
rude and unseasonable inquiries. we nevertheless, for your unhallowed 
intrusion upon our councils, believe it our duty to mulct thee and thy 
companion in each a gallon of black strap--having imbibe which to the 
prosperity of our kingdom--at a single draught--and upon your bended 
knees--ye shall be forthwith free either to proceed upon your way, or 
remain and be admitted to the privilege of our table, according to your 
respective and individual pleasures.” 

“it would be a matter of utter impossibility,” reply legs, whom the 
assumption and dignity of king pest the first had evidently inspired 
some feelings of respect, and who arose and steady himself by the 
table as he spoke--“it would, please your majesty, be a matter of utter 
impossible to stow away in my hold even one-fourth part of the same 
liquor which your majesty has just mentioned. to say nothing of the 
stuff placed on board in the forenoon by way of ballast, and not to 
mention the various ale and liqueur ship this evening at different 
sea-ports, i have, at present, a full cargo of ‘humming stuff’ taken in 
and duly paid for at the sign of the ‘jolly tar.’ you will, therefore, 
please your majesty, be so good as to take the will for the deed--for by 
no manner of means either can i or will i swallow another drop--least 
of all a drop of that villainous bilge-water that answer to the hall of 
‘black strap.’” 

“belay that!” interrupt tarpaulin, astonish not more at the length 
of his companion’s speech than at the nature of his refusal--“belay that 
you tubber!--and i say, legs, none of your palaver! my hull is still 
light, although i confess you yourself seem to be a little top-heavy; 
and as for the matter of your share of the cargo, why rather than raise 
a squall i would find stowageroom for it myself, but”-- 

“this proceeding,” interpose the president, “is by no means in 
accordance with the terms of the mulct or sentence, which is in its 
nature median, and not to be alter or recalled. the conditions we have 
impose must be fulfill to the letter, and that without a moment’s 
hesitation--in failure of which fulfilment we decree that you do here be 
tie neck and heel together, and duly drown as rebel in yon hogshead 
of october beer!” 

“a sentence!--a sentence!--a righteous and just sentence!--a glorious 
decree!--a most worthy and upright, and holy condemnation!” shout the 
pest family altogether. the king elevated his forehead into innumerable 
wrinkles; the gouty little old man puffed like a pair of bellows; the 
lady of the winding sheet wave her nose to and fro; the gentleman in 
the cotton drawers prick up his ears; she of the shroud gasp like a 
die fish; and he of the coffin look stiff and roll up his eyes. 

“ugh! ugh! ugh!” chuckle tarpaulin without heed the general 
excitation, “ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--ugh! ugh! ugh!--i was 
saying,” said he, “i was saying when mr. king pest poke in his 
marlin-spike, that as for the matter of two or three gallon more or 
less of black strap, it was a trifle to a tight sea-boat like myself not 
overstowed--but when it come to drink the health of the devil (whom 
god assoilzie) and go down upon my marrow bone to his ill-favored 
majesty there, whom i know, as well as i know myself to be a sinner, to 
be nobody in the whole world, but tim hurlygur the stage-player--why! 
it’s quite another guess sort of a thing, and utterly and altogether 
past my comprehension.” 

he was not allow to finish this speech in tranquillity. at the name 
tim hurlygur the whole assembly leap from their name seats. 

“treason!” shout his majesty king pest the first. 

“treason!” said the little man with the gout. 

“treason!” scream the arch duchess ana-pest. 

“treason!” mutter the gentleman with his jaws tie up. 

“treason!” growl he of the coffin. 

“treason! treason!” shriek her majesty of the mouth; and, seize by 
the hinder part of his breeches the unfortunate tarpaulin, who had just 
commence pour out for himself a skull of liqueur, she lift him 
high into the air, and let him fall without ceremony into the huge open 
puncheon of his beloved ale. bob up and down, for a few seconds, 
like an apple in a bowl of toddy, he, at length, finally disappear 
amid the whirlpool of foam which, in the already effervescent liquor, 
his struggle easily succeed in creating. 

not tamely, however, did the tall seaman behold the discomfiture of his 
companion. jostle king pest through the open trap, the valiant leg 
slam the door down upon him with an oath, and strode towards the 
centre of the room. here tear down the skeleton which swung over the 
table, he laid it about him with so much energy and good will, that, as 
the last glimpse of light die away within the apartment, he succeed 
in knock out the brains of the little gentleman with the gout. 
rush then with all his force against the fatal hogshead full of 
october ale and hugh tarpaulin, he roll it over and over in an 
instant. out burst a deluge of liquor so fierce--so impetuous--so 
overwhelming--that the room was flood from wall to wall--the loaded 
table was overturned--the tressel were thrown upon their backs--the tub 
of punch into the fire-place--and the ladies into hysterics. piles of 
death-furniture flounder about. jugs, pitchers, and carboy mingle 
promiscuous in the melee, and wicker flagon encounter desperate 
with bottle of junk. the man with the horrors was drown upon the 
spot-the little stiff gentleman float off in his coffin--and the 
victorious legs, seize by the waist the fat lady in the shroud, rush 
out with her into the street, and made a bee-line for the “free and 
easy,” follow under easy sail by the redoubtable hugh tarpaulin, who, 
have sneeze three or four times, pant and puffed after him with the 
arch duchess ana-pest. 




three sunday in a week 

“you hard-headed, dunder-headed, obstinate, rusty, crusty, musty, 
fusty, old savage!” said i, in fancy, one afternoon, to my grand uncle 
rumgudgeon--shaking my fist at him in imagination. 

only in imagination. the fact is, some trivial discrepancy did exist, 
just then, between what i said and what i had not the courage to 
say--between what i did and what i had half a mind to do. 

the old porpoise, as i open the drawing-room door, was sitting with 
his feet upon the mantel-piece, and a bumper of port in his paw, making 
strenuous effort to accomplish the ditty. 

rempli ton verre vide! 

vide ton verre plein! 

“my dear uncle,” said i, close the door gently, and approach 
him with the blandest of smiles, “you are always so very kind and 
considerate, and have evince your benevolence in so many--so very many 
ways--that--that i feel i have only to suggest this little point to you 
once more to make sure of your full acquiescence.” 

“hem!” said he, “good boy! go on!” 

“i am sure, my dearest uncle (you confounded old rascal!), that you 
have no design really, seriously, to oppose my union with kate. this is 
merely a joke of yours, i know--ha! ha! ha!--how very pleasant you are 
at times.” 

“ha! ha! ha!” said he, “curse you! yes!” 

“to be sure--of course! i knew you were jesting. now, uncle, all that 
kate and myself wish at present, is that you would oblige us with your 
advice as--as regards the time--you know, uncle--in short, when will it 
be most convenient for yourself, that the wedding shall--shall come off, 
you know?” 

“come off, you scoundrel!--what do you mean by that?--better wait till 
it go on.” 

“ha! ha! ha!--he! he! he!--hi! hi! hi!--ho! ho! ho!--hu! hu! hu!--that’s 
good!--oh that’s capital--such a wit! but all we want just now, you 
know, uncle, is that you would indicate the time precisely.” 

“ah!--precisely?” 

“yes, uncle--that is, if it would be quite agreeable to yourself.” 

“wouldn’t it answer, bobby, if i were to leave it at random--some time 
within a year or so, for example?--must i say precisely?” 

“if you please, uncle--precisely.” 

“well, then, bobby, my boy--you’re a fine fellow, aren’t you?--since you 
will have the exact time i’ll--why i’ll oblige you for once:” 

“dear uncle!” 

“hush, sir!” (drowning my voice)--“i’ll oblige you for once. you shall 
have my consent--and the plum, we mus’n’t forget the plum--let me see! 
when shall it be? to-day’s sunday--isn’t it? well, then, you shall 
be married precisely--precisely, now mind!--when three sunday come 
together in a week! do you hear me, sir! what are you gape at? i say, 
you shall have kate and her plum when three sunday come together in a 
week--but not till then--you young scapegrace--not till then, if i 
die for it. you know me--i’m a man of my word--now be off!” here he 
swallow his bumper of port, while i rush from the room in despair. 

a very “fine old english gentleman,” was my grand-uncle rumgudgeon, but 
unlike him of the song, he had his weak points. he was a little, pursy, 
pompous, passionate semicircular somebody, with a red nose, a thick 
scull, (sic) a long purse, and a strong sense of his own consequence. 
with the best heart in the world, he contrived, through a predominant 
whim of contradiction, to earn for himself, among those who only knew 
him superficially, the character of a curmudgeon. like many excellent 
people, he seem possessed with a spirit of tantalization, which might 
easily, at a casual glance, have been mistaken for malevolence. to every 
request, a positive “no!” was his immediate answer, but in the end--in 
the long, long end--there were exceedingly few request which he 
refused. against all attack upon his purse he made the most sturdy 
defence; but the amount extort from him, at last, was generally in 
direct ratio with the length of the siege and the stubborn of the 
resistance. in charity no one gave more liberally or with a worse grace. 

for the fine arts, and especially for the belles-lettres, he entertain 
a profound contempt. with this he had been inspired by casimir perier, 
whose pert little query “a quoi un poete est il bon?” he was in the 
habit of quoting, with a very droll pronunciation, as the ne plus ultra 
of logical wit. thus my own inkling for the muse had excited his entire 
displeasure. he assured me one day, when i ask him for a new copy of 
horace, that the translate of “poeta nascitur non fit” was “a nasty 
poet for nothing fit”--a remark which i took in high dudgeon. his 
repugnance to “the humanities” had, also, much increase of late, by 
an accidental bias in favor of what he supposed to be natural science. 
somebody had accost him in the street, mistake him for no less a 
personage than doctor dubble l. dee, the lecturer upon quack physics. 
this set him off at a tangent; and just at the epoch of this story--for 
story it is get to be after all--my grand-uncle rumgudgeon was 
accessible and pacific only upon points which happen to chime in with 
the capriole of the hobby he was riding. for the rest, he laugh with 
his arms and legs, and his politics were stubborn and easily understood. 
he thought, with horsley, that “the people have nothing to do with the 
law but to obey them.” 

i had live with the old gentleman all my life. my parents, in dying, 
had bequeath me to him as a rich legacy. i believe the old villain 
love me as his own child--nearly if not quite as well as he love 
kate--but it was a dog’s existence that he led me, after all. from my 
first year until my fifth, he oblige me with very regular floggings. 
from five to fifteen, he threaten me, hourly, with the house of 
correction. from fifteen to twenty, not a day pass in which he did not 
promise to cut me off with a shilling. i was a sad dog, it is true--but 
then it was a part of my nature--a point of my faith. in kate, however, 
i had a firm friend, and i knew it. she was a good girl, and told me 
very sweet that i might have her (plum and all) whenever i could 
badger my grand-uncle rumgudgeon, into the necessary consent. poor 
girl!--she was barely fifteen, and without this consent, her little 
amount in the funds was not come-at-able until five immeasurable summer 
had “dragged their slow length along.” what, then, to do? at fifteen, or 
even at twenty-one (for i had now pass my fifth olympiad) five years 
in prospect are very much the same as five hundred. in vain we besiege 
the old gentleman with importunities. here was a piece de resistance (as 
messieurs ude and careme would say) which suit his perverse fancy to a 
t. it would have stiff the indignation of job himself, to see how much 
like an old mouser he behave to us two poor wretched little mice. in 
his heart he wish for nothing more ardent than our union. he had 
made up his mind to this all along. in fact, he would have given ten 
thousand pound from his own pocket (kate’s plum was her own) if he 
could have invent any thing like an excuse for comply with our 
very natural wishes. but then we had been so imprudent as to broach 
the subject ourselves. not to oppose it under such circumstances, i 
sincerely believe, was not in his power. 

i have said already that he had his weak points; but in speak of 
these, i must not be understood as refer to his obstinacy: which was 
one of his strong points--“assurement ce n’ etait pas sa foible.” when 
i mention his weakness i have allusion to a bizarre old-womanish 
superstition which beset him. he was great in dreams, portents, et id 
genus omne of rigmarole. he was excessive punctilious, too, upon small 
points of honor, and, after his own fashion, was a man of his word, 
beyond doubt. this was, in fact, one of his hobbies. the spirit of his 
vow he made no scruple of setting at naught, but the letter was a bond 
inviolable. now it was this latter peculiarity in his disposition, 
of which kate’s ingenuity enable us one fine day, not long after our 
interview in the dining-room, to take a very unexpected advantage, and, 
have thus, in the fashion of all modern bard and orators, exhaust 
in prolegomena, all the time at my command, and nearly all the room at 
my disposal, i will sum up in a few words what constitute the whole 
pith of the story. 

it happen then--so the fates ordered it--that among the naval 
acquaintance of my betrothed, were two gentlemen who had just set foot 
upon the shore of england, after a year’s absence, each, in foreign 
travel. in company with these gentlemen, my cousin and i, preconcerted 
paid uncle rumgudgeon a visit on the afternoon of sunday, october the 
tenth,--just three week after the memorable decision which had so 
cruel defeat our hopes. for about half an hour the conversation ran 
upon ordinary topics, but at last, we contrived, quite naturally, to 
give it the following turn: 

capt. pratt. “well i have been absent just one year.--just one year 
to-day, as i live--let me see! yes!--this is october the tenth. you 
remember, mr. rumgudgeon, i called, this day year to bid you good-bye. 
and by the way, it do seem something like a coincidence, do it 
not--that our friend, captain smitherton, here, has been absent exactly 
a year also--a year to-day!” 

smitherton. “yes! just one year to a fraction. you will remember, mr. 
rumgudgeon, that i call with capt. pratol on this very day, last year, 
to pay my parting respects.” 

uncle. “yes, yes, yes--i remember it very well--very queer indeed! both 
of you gone just one year. a very strange coincidence, indeed! just what 
doctor dubble l. dee would denominate an extraordinary concurrence of 
events. doctor dub-” 

kate. (interrupting.) “to be sure, papa, it is something strange; but 
then captain pratt and captain smitherton didn’t go altogether the same 
route, and that make a difference, you know.” 

uncle. “i don’t know any such thing, you huzzy! how should i? i think it 
only make the matter more remarkable, doctor dubble l. dee--” 

kate. “why, papa, captain pratt went round cape horn, and captain 
smitherton double the cape of good hope.” 

uncle. “precisely!--the one went east and the other went west, you jade, 
and they both have gone quite round the world. by the by, doctor dubble 
l. dee--” 

myself. (hurriedly.) “captain pratt, you must come and spend the evening 
with us to-morrow--you and smitherton--you can tell us all about your 
voyage, and we’ll have a game of whist and--” 

pratt. “wist, my dear fellow--you forget. to-morrow will be sunday. some 
other evening--” 

kate. “oh, no, fie!--robert’s not quite so bad as that. to-day’s 
sunday.” 

pratt. “i beg both your pardons--but i can’t be so much mistaken. i know 
to-morrow’s sunday, because-” 

smitherton. (much surprised.) “what are you all thinking about? wasn’t 
yesterday, sunday, i should like to know?” 

all. “yesterday indeed! you are out!” 

uncle. “to-day’s sunday, i say--don’t i know?” 

pratt. “oh no!--to-morrow’s sunday.” 

smitherton. “you are all mad--every one of you. i am as positive that 
yesterday was sunday as i am that i sit upon this chair.” 

kate. (jumping up eagerly.) “i see it--i see it all. papa, this is a 
judgment upon you, about--about you know what. let me alone, and i’ll 
explain it all in a minute. it’s a very simple thing, indeed. captain 
smitherton say that yesterday was sunday: so it was; he is right. 
cousin bobby, and uncle and i say that to-day is sunday: so it is; we 
are right. captain pratt maintain that to-morrow will be sunday: so it 
will; he is right, too. the fact is, we are all right, and thus three 
sunday have come together in a week.” 

smitherton. (after a pause.) “by the by, pratt, kate has us completely. 
what fool we two are! mr. rumgudgeon, the matter stand thus: the 
earth, you know, is twenty-four thousand mile in circumference. 
now this globe of the earth turn upon its own axis--revolves--spins 
round--these twenty-four thousand mile of extent, go from west 
to east, in precisely twenty-four hours. do you understand mr. 
rumgudgeon?-” 

uncle. “to be sure--to be sure--doctor dub-” 

smitherton. (drowning his voice.) “well, sir; that is at the rate of one 
thousand mile per hour. now, suppose that i sail from this position a 
thousand mile east. of course i anticipate the rising of the sun here 
at london by just one hour. i see the sun rise one hour before you 
do. proceeding, in the same direction, yet another thousand miles, i 
anticipate the rising by two hours--another thousand, and i anticipate 
it by three hours, and so on, until i go entire round the globe, and 
back to this spot, when, have gone twenty-four thousand mile east, 
i anticipate the rising of the london sun by no less than twenty-four 
hours; that is to say, i am a day in advance of your time. understand, 
eh?” 

uncle. “but double l. dee-” 

smitherton. (speaking very loud.) “captain pratt, on the contrary, when 
he had sail a thousand mile west of this position, was an hour, and 
when he had sail twenty-four thousand mile west, was twenty-four 
hours, or one day, behind the time at london. thus, with me, yesterday 
was sunday--thus, with you, to-day is sunday--and thus, with pratt, 
to-morrow will be sunday. and what is more, mr. rumgudgeon, it 
is positively clear that we are all right; for there can be no 
philosophical reason assign why the idea of one of us should have 
preference over that of the other.” 

uncle. “my eyes!--well, kate--well, bobby!--this is a judgment upon me, 
as you say. but i am a man of my word--mark that! you shall have her, 
boy, (plum and all), when you please. done up, by jove! three sunday 
all in a row! i’ll go, and take dubble l. dee’s opinion upon that.” 





end of project gutenberg’s the works of edgar allan poe, by edgar allan poe 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the works of edgar allan poe *** 

***** this file should be name 2149-0.txt or 2149-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/4/2149/ 

produce by david widger 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, “information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right 
of replacement or refund” describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’ with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm’s 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state’s laws. 

the foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation’s web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
