the project gutenberg ebook of ten days in a mad-house;, by nellie b 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms 
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll 
have to check the law of the country where you are located before use 
this ebook. 



title: ten days in a mad-house; 
or, nellie bly's experience on blackwell's island. feign 
insanity in order to reveal asylum horrors. the try 
ordeal of the new york world's girl correspondent. 

author: nellie b 

release date: july 10, 2019 [ebook #59899] 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook ten days in a mad-house; *** 




produce by richard tonsing, tim lindell, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive) 









ten days in a mad-house; 

or, 

nellie bly’s experience on blackwell’s island. 


feign insanity in order to reveal asylum horrors. 


_the try ordeal of the new york world’s girl correspondent._ 


_entered according to act of congress, in the year 1887, by norman l. 
munro, in the office of the librarian of congress, at washington, d. c._ 

[illustration] 

new york: 
norman l. munro, publisher, 
24 and 26 vandewater st. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




why are 

the madame mora’s corset 


[illustration] 

=a marvel of comfort and elegances= 

=try them, and you will find= 

=why= they =need no break in=, but feel easy at once. 

=why= they are like by ladies of =full figure=. 

=why= they do =not break down over the hips=, and 

=why= the celebrated =french curve band= prevent any wrinkle or 
stretch at the sides. 

=why= dressmaker delight in fitting dress over them. 

=why= merchant say they give better satisfaction than any others. 

=why= they take pains to recommend them. 

their popularity has induce many imitations, which are frauds, high 
at any price. buy only the genuine, stamp =madame mora’s=. sold by 
all leading dealer with this 

guarantee: 
that if not perfectly satisfactory upon trial the money will be 
refunded. 

l. krau & co., manufacturers, birmingham, conn. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




introduction. 


since my experience in blackwell’s island insane asylum were publish 
in the _world_ i have received hundred of letters in regard to it. the 
edition contain my story long since ran out, and i have been 
prevail upon to allow it to be publish in book-form, to satisfy the 
hundred who are yet ask for copies. 

i am happy to be able to state as a result of my visit to the asylum and 
the exposure consequent thereon, that the city of new york has 
appropriate $1,000,000 more per annum than ever before for the care of 
the insane. so i have at least the satisfaction of knowing that the poor 
unfortunate will be the better care for because of my work. 

[illustration: nellie bly] 




ten days in a mad-house. 




chapter i. 
a delicate mission. 


preface 
on the 22d of september i was ask by the _world_ if i could have 
myself committed to one of the asylum for the insane in new york, with 
a view to writing a plain and unvarnished narrative of the treatment of 
the patient therein and the method of management, etc. did i think i 
had the courage to go through such an ordeal as the mission would 
demand? could i assume the characteristic of insanity to such a degree 
that i could pass the doctors, live for a week among the insane without 
the authority there finding out that i was only a “chiel amang ’em 
takin’ notes?” i said i believe i could. i had some faith in my own 
ability as an actress and thought i could assume insanity long enough to 
accomplish any mission intrust to me. could i pass a week in the 
insane ward at blackwell’s island? i said i could and i would. and i 
did. 

my instruction were simply to go on with my work as soon as i felt that 
i was ready. i was to chronicle faithfully the experience i underwent, 
and when once within the wall of the asylum to find out and describe 
its inside workings, which are always so effectually hidden by 
white-capped nurses, as well as by bolt and bars, from the knowledge of 
the public. “we do not ask you to go there for the purpose of making 
sensational revelations. write up things as you find them, good or bad; 
give praise or blame as you think best, and the truth all the time. but 
i am afraid of that chronic smile of yours,” said the editor. “i will 
smile no more,” i said, and i went away to execute my delicate and, as i 
found out, difficult mission. 

if i did get into the asylum, which i hardly hope to do, i had no idea 
that my experience would contain aught else than a simple tale of life 
in an asylum. that such an institution could be mismanaged, and that 
cruelty could exist ’neath its roof, i did not deem possible. i always 
had a desire to know asylum life more thoroughly—a desire to be 
convinced that the most helpless of god’s creatures, the insane, were 
care for kindly and properly. the many story i had read of abuse in 
such institution i had regard as wildly exaggerate or else romances, 
yet there was a latent desire to know positively. 

i shudder to think how completely the insane were in the power of 
their keepers, and how one could weep and plead for release, and all of 
no avail, if the keeper were so minded. eager i accept the mission 
to learn the inside workings of the blackwell island insane asylum. 

“how will you get me out,” i ask my editor, “after i once get in?” 

“i do not know,” he replied, “but we will get you out if we have to tell 
who you are, and for what purpose you feign insanity—only get in.” 

i had little belief in my ability to deceive the insanity experts, and i 
think my editor had less. 

all the preliminary preparation for my ordeal were left to be plan 
by myself. only one thing was decided upon, namely, that i should pass 
under the pseudonym of nellie brown, the initial of which would agree 
with my own name and my linen, so that there would be no difficulty in 
keeping track of my movements and assist me out of any difficulty 
or danger i might get into. there were ways of get into the insane 
ward, but i did not know them. i might adopt one of two courses. either 
i could feign insanity at the house of friends, and get myself committed 
on the decision of two competent physicians, or i could go to my goal by 
way of the police courts. 

[illustration: nellie practice insanity at home.] 

on reflection i thought it wise not to inflict myself upon my friends 
or to get any good-natured doctor to assist me in my purpose. besides, 
to get to blackwell’s island my friends would have had to feign poverty, 
and, unfortunately for the end i had in view, my acquaintance with the 
struggle poor, except my own self, was only very superficial. so i 
determined upon the plan which led me to the successful accomplishment 
of my mission. i succeed in get committed to the insane ward at 
blackwell’s island, where i spent ten days and nights and had an 
experience which i shall never forget. i took upon myself to enact the 
part of a poor, unfortunate crazy girl, and felt it my duty not to shirk 
any of the disagreeable result that should follow. i became one of the 
city’s insane ward for that length of time, experienced much, and saw 
and heard more of the treatment accord to this helpless class of our 
population, and when i had seen and heard enough, my release was 
prompt secured. i left the insane ward with pleasure and 
regret—pleasure that i was once more able to enjoy the free breath of 
heaven; regret that i could not have brought with me some of the 
unfortunate women who live and suffer with me, and who, i am 
convinced, are just as sane as i was and am now myself. 

but here let me say one thing: from the moment i enter the insane ward 
on the island, i made no attempt to keep up the assume _role_ of 
insanity. i talk and act just as i do in ordinary life. yet strange 
to say, the more sane i talk and act the crazy i was thought to 
be by all except one physician, whose kindness and gentle ways i shall 
not soon forget. 




chapter ii. 
prepare for the ordeal. 


but to return to my work and my mission. after receiving my instruction 
i return to my boarding-house, and when evening came i began to 
practice the _role_ in which i was to make my _debut_ on the morrow. 
what a difficult task, i thought, to appear before a crowd of people and 
convince them that i was insane. i had never been near insane person 
before in my life, and had not the faintest idea of what their action 
were like. and then to be examine by a number of learned physician who 
make insanity a specialty, and who daily come in contact with insane 
people! how could i hope to pass these doctor and convince them that i 
was crazy? i fear that they could not be deceived. i began to think my 
task a hopeless one; but it had to be done. so i flew to the mirror and 
examine my face. i remember all i had read of the doings of crazy 
people, how first of all they must have staring eyes, and so i open 
mine as wide as possible and stare unblinking at my own reflection. i 
assure you the sight was not reassuring, even to myself, especially in 
the dead of night. i try to turn the gas up higher in hope that it 
would raise my courage. i succeed only partially, but i console 
myself with the thought that in a few nights more i would not be there, 
but lock up in a cell with a lot of lunatics. 

the weather was not cold; but, nevertheless, when i thought of what was 
to come, wintery chill ran races up and down my back in very mockery of 
the perspiration which was slow but surely taking the curl out of my 
bangs. between times, practice before the mirror and picture my 
future as a lunatic, i read snatch of improbable and impossible ghost 
stories, so that when the dawn came to chase away the night, i felt that 
i was in a fit mood for my mission, yet hungry enough to feel keen 
that i want my breakfast. slow and sadly i took my morning bath and 
quiet bade farewell to a few of the most precious articles known to 
modern civilization. tender i put my tooth-brush aside, and, when 
taking a final rub of the soap, i murmured, “it may be for days, and it 
may be—for longer.” then i don the old clothing i had select for 
the occasion. i was in the mood to look at everything through very 
serious glasses. it’s just as well to take a last “fond look,” i mused, 
for who could tell but that the strain of play crazy, and being shut 
up with a crowd of mad people, might turn my own brain, and i would 
never get back. but not once did i think of shirk my mission. calmly, 
outwardly at least, i went out to my crazy business. 

i first thought it best to go to a boarding-house, and, after secure 
lodging, confidential tell the landlady, or lord, whichever it might 
chance to be, that i was seek work, and, in a few days after, 
apparently go insane. when i reconsider the idea, i fear it would 
take too long to mature. sudden i thought how much easy it would be 
to go to a boarding-home for working women. i knew, if once i made a 
houseful of women believe me crazy, that they would never rest until i 
was out of their reach and in secure quarters. 

from a directory i select the temporary home for females, no. 84 
second avenue. as i walk down the avenue, i determined that, once 
inside the home, i should do the best i could to get start on my 
journey to blackwell’s island and the insane asylum. 




chapter iii. 
in the temporary home. 


i was left to begin my career as nellie brown, the insane girl. as i 
walk down the avenue i try to assume the look which maiden wear in 
pictures entitle “dreaming.” “far-away” expression have a crazy air. i 
pass through the little paved yard to the entrance of the home. i 
pull the bell, which sound loud enough for a church chime, and 
nervous await the opening of the door to the home, which i intended 
should ere long cast me forth and out upon the charity of the police. 
the door was thrown back with a vengeance, and a short, yellow-haired 
girl of some thirteen summer stood before me. 

“is the matron in?” i asked, faintly. 

“yes, she’s in; she’s busy. go to the back parlor,” answer the girl, 
in a loud voice, without one change in her peculiarly mature face. 

[illustration: at the temporary home for women.] 

i follow these not overkind or polite instruction and found myself in 
a dark, uncomfortable back-parlor. there i await the arrival of my 
hostess. i had been seat some twenty minutes at the least, when a 
slender woman, clad in a plain, dark dress enter and, stopping before 
me, ejaculate inquiringly, “well?” 

“are you the matron?” i asked. 

“no,” she replied, “the matron is sick; i am her assistant. what do you 
want?” 

“i want to stay here for a few days, if you can accommodate me.” 

“well, i have no single rooms, we are so crowded; but if you will occupy 
a room with another girl, i shall do that much for you.” 

“i shall be glad of that,” i answered. “how much do you charge?” i had 
brought only about seventy cent along with me, knowing full well that 
the soon my funds were exhaust the soon i should be put out, and 
to be put out was what i was working for. 

“we charge thirty cent a night,” was her reply to my question, and with 
that i paid her for one night’s lodging, and she left me on the plea of 
have something else to look after. left to amuse myself as best i 
could, i took a survey of my surroundings. 

they were not cheerful, to say the least. a wardrobe, desk, book-case, 
organ, and several chair complete the furnish of the room, into 
which the daylight barely came. 

by the time i had become familiar with my quarters a bell, which rival 
the door-bell in its loudness, began clang in the basement, and 
simultaneous women went troop down-stairs from all parts of the 
house. i imagined, from the obvious signs, that dinner was served, but 
as no one had said anything to me i made no effort to follow in the 
hungry train. yet i did wish that some one would invite me down. it 
always produce such a lonely, homesick feeling to know other are 
eating, and we haven’t a chance, even if we are not hungry. i was glad 
when the assistant matron came up and ask me if i did not want 
something to eat. i reply that i did, and then i ask her what her 
name was. mrs. stanard, she said, and i immediately wrote it down in a 
notebook i had taken with me for the purpose of making memoranda, and in 
which i had written several page of utter nonsense for inquisitive 
scientists. 

thus equip i await developments. but my dinner—well, i follow 
mrs. stanard down the uncarpeted stairs into the basement, where a large 
number of women were eating. she found room for me at a table with three 
other women. the short-haired slavey who had open the door now put in 
an appearance as waiter. place her arms akimbo and staring me out of 
countenance, she said: 

“boiled mutton, boil beef, beans, potatoes, coffee or tea?” 

“beef, potatoes, coffee and bread,” i responded. 

“bread go in,” she explained, as she made her way to the kitchen, 
which was in the rear. it was not very long before she return with 
what i had ordered on a large, badly batter tray, which she bang 
down before me. i began my simple meal. it was not very enticing, so 
while making a feint of eat i watch the others. 

i have often moralize on the repulsive form charity always assumes! 
here was a home for deserving women and yet what a mockery the name was. 
the floor was bare, and the little wooden table were sublime ignorant 
of such modern beautify as varnish, polish and table-covers. it is 
useless to talk about the cheap of linen and its effect on 
civilization. yet these honest workers, the most deserving of women, are 
ask to call this spot of bareness—home. 

when the meal was finished each woman went to the desk in the corner, 
where mrs. stanard sat, and paid her bill. i was given a much-used, and 
abused, red check, by the original piece of humanity in shape of my 
waitress. my bill was about thirty cents. 

after dinner i went up-stairs and resume my former place in the back 
parlor. i was quite cold and uncomfortable, and had fully made up my 
mind that i could not endure that sort of business long, so the soon i 
assume my insane points the soon i would be release from enforce 
idleness. ah! that was indeed the longest day i had ever lived. i 
listless watch the women in the front parlor, where all sat except 
myself. 

one did nothing but read and scratch her head and occasional call out 
mildly, “georgie,” without lift her eyes from her book. “georgie” was 
her over-frisky boy, who had more noise in him than any child i ever saw 
before. he did everything that was rude and unmannerly, i thought, and 
the mother never said a word unless she heard some one else yell at him. 
another woman always kept go to sleep and waking herself up with her 
own snoring. i really felt wicked thankful it was only herself she 
awakened. the majority of the women sat there do nothing, but there 
were a few who made lace and knit unceasingly. the enormous door-bell 
seem to be go all the time, and so did the short-haired girl. the 
latter was, besides, one of those girl who sing all the time snatch 
of all the song and hymn that have been compose for the last fifty 
years. there is such a thing as martyrdom in these days. the ring of 
the bell brought more people who want shelter for the night. excepting 
one woman, who was from the country on a day’s shop expedition, they 
were working women, some of them with children. 

as it drew toward evening mrs. stanard came to me and said: 

“what is wrong with you? have you some sorrow or trouble?” 

“no,” i said, almost stun at the suggestion. “why?” 

“oh, because,” she said, womanlike, “i can see it in your face. it tell 
the story of a great trouble.” 

“yes, everything is so sad,” i said, in a haphazard way, which i had 
intended to reflect my craziness. 

“but you must not allow that to worry you. we all have our troubles, but 
we get over them in good time. what kind of work are you try to get?” 

“i do not know; it’s all so sad,” i replied. 

“would you like to be a nurse for children and wear a nice white cap and 
apron?” she asked. 

i put my handkerchief up to my face to hide a smile, and replied, in a 
muffle tone, “i never worked; i don’t know how.” 

“but you must learn,” she urged; “all these women here work.” 

“do they?” i said, in a low, thrill whisper. “why, they look horrible 
to me; just like crazy women. i am so afraid of them.” 

“they don’t look very nice,” she answered, assentingly, “but they are 
good, honest working women. we do not keep crazy people here.” 

i again use my handkerchief to hide a smile, as i thought that before 
morning she would at least think she had one crazy person among her 
flock. 

“they all look crazy,” i assert again, “and i am afraid of them. there 
are so many crazy people about, and one can never tell what they will 
do. then there are so many murder committed, and the police never catch 
the murderers,” and i finished with a sob that would have broken up an 
audience of _blase_ critics. she gave a sudden and convulsive start, and 
i knew my first stroke had gone home. it was amuse to see what a 
remarkably short time it took her to get up from her chair and to 
whisper hurriedly: “i’ll come back to talk with you after awhile.” i 
knew she would not come back and she did not. 

when the supper-bell rang i went along with the other to the basement 
and partook of the evening meal, which was similar to dinner, except 
that there was a small bill of fare and more people, the women who are 
employ outside during the day have returned. after the evening meal 
we all adjourn to the parlors, where all sat, or stood, as there were 
not chair enough to go round. 

it was a wretched lonely evening, and the light which fell from the 
solitary gas jet in the parlor, and oil-lamp in the hall, help to 
envelop us in a dusky hue and dye our spirits a navy blue, i felt it 
would not require many inundation of this atmosphere to make me a fit 
subject for the place i was strive to reach. 

[illustration: nellie’s first meal at the home.] 

i watch two women, who seem of all the crowd to be the most 
sociable, and i select them as the one to work out my salvation, or, 
more properly speaking, my condemnation and conviction. excuse myself 
and saying that i felt lonely, i ask if i might join their company. 
they gracious consented, so with my hat and glove on, which no one 
had ask me to lay aside, i sat down and listen to the rather 
wearisome conversation, in which i took no part, merely keeping up my 
sad look, saying “yes,” or “no,” or “i can’t say,” to their 
observations. several times i told them i thought everybody in the house 
look crazy, but they were slow to catch on to my very original remark. 
one said her name was mrs. king and that she was a southern woman. then 
she said that i had a southern accent. she ask me bluntly if i did not 
really come from the south. i said “yes.” the other woman got to talk 
about the boston boat and ask me if i knew at what time they left. 

for a moment i forgot my _role_ of assume insanity, and told her the 
correct hour of departure. she then ask me what work i was go to 
do, or if i had ever done any. i reply that i thought it very sad that 
there were so many working people in the world. she said in reply that 
she had been unfortunate and had come to new york, where she had work 
at correct proof on a medical dictionary for some time, but that her 
health had given way under the task, and that she was now go to 
boston again. when the maid came to tell us to go to bed i remark that 
i was afraid, and again venture the assertion that all the women in the 
house seem to be crazy. the nurse insist on my go to bed. i ask 
if i could not sit on the stairs, but she said, decisively: “no; for 
every one in the house would think you were crazy.” finally i allow 
them to take me to a room. 

here i must introduce a new personage by name into my narrative. it is 
the woman who had been a proofreader, and was about to return to boston. 
she was a mrs. caine, who was as courageous as she was good-hearted. she 
came into my room, and sat and talk with me a long time, taking down 
my hair with gentle ways. she try to persuade me to undress and go to 
bed, but i stubborn refuse to do so. during this time a number of the 
inmate of the house had gather around us. they express themselves 
in various ways. “poor loon!” they said. “why, she’s crazy enough!” “i 
am afraid to stay with such a crazy being in the house.” “she will 
murder us all before morning.” one woman was for send for a policeman 
to take me away at once. they were all in a terrible and real state of 
fright. 

no one want to be responsible for me, and the woman who was to occupy 
the room with me declared that she would not stay with that “crazy 
woman” for all the money of the vanderbilts. it was then that mrs. caine 
said she would stay with me. i told her i would like to have her do so. 
so she was left with me. she didn’t undress, but lay down on the bed, 
watchful of my movements. she try to induce me to lie down, but i was 
afraid to do this. i knew that if i once gave way i should fall asleep 
and dream as pleasant and peaceful as a child. i should, to use a 
slang expression, be liable to “give myself dead away.” i had made up my 
mind to stay awake all night. so i insist on sitting on the side of 
the bed and staring blank at vacancy. my poor companion was put into a 
wretched state of unhappiness. every few moments she would rise up to 
look at me. she told me that my eyes shone terribly bright and then 
began to question me, ask me where i had lived, how long i had been 
in new york, what i had been doing, and many things besides. to all her 
questioning i had but one response—i told her that i had forgotten 
everything, that ever since my headache had come on i could not 
remember. 

poor soul! how cruel i torture her, and what a kind heart she had! 
but how i torture all of them! one of them dream of me—as a 
nightmare. after i had been in the room an hour or so, i was myself 
startle by hearing a woman scream in the next room. i began to 
imagine that i was really in an insane asylum. 

mrs. caine woke up, look around, frightened, and listened. she then 
went out and into the next room, and i heard her ask another woman 
some questions. when she came back she told me that the woman had had a 
hideous nightmare. she had been dream of me. she had seen me, she 
said, rush at her with a knife in my hand, with the intention of 
killing her. in try to escape me she had fortunately been able to 
scream, and so to awaken herself and scare off her nightmare. then mrs. 
caine got into bed again, considerably agitated, but very sleepy. 

i was weary, too, but i had brace myself up to the work, and was 
determined to keep awake all night so as to carry on my work of 
impersonate to a successful end in the morning. i heard midnight. i 
had yet six hour to wait for daylight. the time pass with 
excruciating slowness. minutes appear hours. the noise in the house 
and on the avenue ceased. 

fear that sleep would coax me into its grasp, i commence to review 
my life. how strange it all seems! one incident, if never so trifling, 
is but a link more to chain us to our unchangeable fate. i began at the 
beginning, and live again the story of my life. old friends were 
recall with a pleasurable thrill; old enmities, old heartaches, old 
joy were once again present. the turned-down page of my life were 
turn up, and the past was present. 

when it was completed, i turn my thought brave to the future, 
wondering, first, what the next day would bring forth, then making plan 
for the carry out of my project. i wonder if i should be able to 
pass over the river to the goal of my strange ambition, to become 
eventually an inmate of the hall inhabit by my mental wreck 
sisters. and then, once in, what would be my experience? and after? how 
to get out? bah! i said, they will get me out. 

that was the greatest night of my existence. for a few hour i stood 
face to face with “self!” 

i look out toward the window and hail with joy the slight shimmer of 
dawn. the light grew strong and gray, but the silence was striking 
still. my companion slept. i had still an hour or two to pass over. 
fortunately i found some employment for my mental activity. robert bruce 
in his captivity had won confidence in the future, and pass his time 
as pleasant as possible under the circumstances, by watch the 
celebrated spider building his web. i had less noble vermin to interest 
me. yet i believe i made some valuable discovery in natural history. i 
was about drop off to sleep in spite of myself when i was sudden 
startle to wakefulness. i thought i heard something crawl and fall down 
upon the counterpane with an almost inaudible thud. 

i had the opportunity of study these interesting animal very 
thoroughly. they had evidently come for breakfast, and were not a little 
disappointed to find that their principal _plat_ was not there. they 
scamper up and down the pillow, came together, seem to hold 
interesting converse, and act in every way as if they were puzzle by 
the absence of an appetizing breakfast. after one consultation of some 
length they finally disappeared, seek victim elsewhere, and leave 
me to pass the long minutes by give my attention to cockroaches, whose 
size and agile were something of a surprise to me. 

my room companion had been sound asleep for a long time, but she now 
woke up, and express surprise at seeing me still awake and apparently 
as lively as a cricket. she was as sympathetic as ever. she came to me 
and took my hand and try her best to console me, and ask me if i 
did not want to go home. she kept me up-stairs until nearly everybody 
was out of the house, and then took me down to the basement for coffee 
and a bun. after that, partaken in silence, i went back to my room, 
where i sat down, moping. mrs. caine grew more and more anxious. “what 
is to be done?” she kept exclaiming. “where are your friends?” “no,” i 
answered, “i have no friends, but i have some trunks. where are they? i 
want them.” the good woman try to pacify me, saying that they would be 
found in good time. she believe that i was insane. 

yet i forgive her. it is only after one is in trouble that one realize 
how little sympathy and kindness there is in the world. the women in the 
home who were not afraid of me had want to have some amusement at my 
expense, and so they had bother me with question and remark that had 
i been insane would have been cruel and inhumane. only this one woman 
among the crowd, pretty and delicate mrs. caine, display true womanly 
feeling. she compel the other to cease tease me and took the bed 
of the woman who refuse to sleep near me. she protest against the 
suggestion to leave me alone and to have me lock up for the night so 
that i could harm no one. she insist on remain with me in order to 
administer aid should i need it. she smooth my hair and bath my brow 
and talk as soothing to me as a mother would do to an ail child. 
by every means she try to have me go to bed and rest, and when it drew 
toward morning she got up and wrap a blanket around me for fear i 
might get cold; then she kiss me on the brow and whispered, 
compassionately: 

“poor child, poor child!” 

how much i admire that little woman’s courage and kindness. how i 
long to reassure her and whisper that i was not insane, and how i 
hope that, if any poor girl should ever be so unfortunate as to be what 
i was pretend to be, she might meet with one who possessed the same 
spirit of human kindness possessed by mrs. ruth caine. 




chapter iv. 
judge duffy and the police. 


but to return to my story. i kept up my _role_ until the assistant 
matron, mrs. stanard, came in. she try to persuade me to be calm. i 
began to see clearly that she want to get me out of the house at all 
hazards, quiet if possible. this i did not want. i refuse to move, 
but kept up ever the refrain of my lost trunks. finally some one 
suggest that an officer be sent for. after awhile mrs. stanard put on 
her bonnet and went out. then i knew that i was making an advance toward 
the home of the insane. soon she returned, bring with her two 
policemen—big, strong men—who enter the room rather unceremoniously, 
evidently expect to meet with a person violent crazy. the name of 
one of them was tom bockert. 

when they enter i pretended not to see them. “i want you to take her 
quietly,” said mrs. stanard. “if she don’t come along quietly,” 
respond one of the men, “i will drag her through the streets.” i still 
took no notice of them, but certainly wish to avoid raise a scandal 
outside. fortunately mrs. caine came to my rescue. she told the officer 
about my outcry for my lost trunks, and together they made up a plan 
to get me to go along with them quiet by telling me they would go with 
me to look for my lost effects. they ask me if i would go. i said i 
was afraid to go alone. mrs. stanard then said she would accompany me, 
and she arrange that the two policemen should follow us at a respectful 
distance. she tie on my veil for me, and we left the house by the 
basement and start across town, the two officer following at some 
distance behind. we walk along very quiet and finally came to the 
station-house, which the good woman assured me was the express office, 
and that there we should certainly find my missing effects. i went 
inside with fear and trembling, for good reason. 

a few days previous to this i had met captain mccullagh at a meeting 
held in cooper union. at that time i had ask him for some information 
which he had given me. if he were in, would he not recognize me? and 
then all would be lost so far as get to the island was concerned. i 
pull my sailor hat as low down over my face as i possibly could, and 
prepared for the ordeal. sure enough there was sturdy captain mccullagh 
standing near the desk. 

he watch me close as the officer at the desk converse in a low tone 
with mrs. stanard and the policeman who brought me. 

“are you nellie brown?” ask the officer. i said i supposed i was. 
“where do you come from?” he asked. i told him i did not know, and then 
mrs. stanard gave him a lot of information about me—told him how 
strange i had act at her home; how i had not slept a wink all night, 
and that in her opinion i was a poor unfortunate who had been driven 
crazy by inhuman treatment. there was some discussion between mrs. 
stanard and the two officers, and tom bockert was told to take us down 
to the court in a car. 

[illustration: in the hand of the police.] 

“come along,” bockert said, “i will find your trunk for you.” we all 
went together, mrs. stanard, tom bockert, and myself. i said it was very 
kind of them to go with me, and i should not soon forget them. as we 
walk along i kept up my refrain about my trunks, interject 
occasional some remark about the dirty condition of the street and 
the curious character of the people we met on the way. “i don’t think i 
have ever seen such people before,” i said. “who are they?” i asked, and 
my companion look upon me with expression of pity, evidently 
believe i was a foreigner, an immigrant or something of the sort. they 
told me that the people around me were working people. i remark once 
more that i thought there were too many working people in the world for 
the amount of work to be done, at which remark policeman p. t. bockert 
eye me closely, evidently thinking that my mind was gone for good. we 
pass several other policemen, who generally ask my sturdy guardian 
what was the matter with me. by this time quite a number of ragged 
children were following us too, and they pass remark about me that 
were to me original as well as amusing. 

“what’s she up for?” “say, kop, where did ye get her?” “where did yer 
pull ’er?” “she’s a daisy!” 

poor mrs. stanard was more frightened than i was. the whole situation 
grew interesting, but i still had fear for my fate before the judge. 

at last we came to a low building, and tom bockert kindly volunteer 
the information: “here’s the express office. we shall soon find those 
trunks of yours.” 

the entrance to the building was surround by a curious crowd and i did 
not think my case was bad enough to permit me passing them without some 
remark, so i ask if all those people had lost their trunks. 

“yes,” he said, “nearly all these people are look for trunks.” 

i said, “they all seem to be foreigners, too.” “yes,” said tom, “they 
are all foreigner just landed. they have all lost their trunks, and it 
take most of our time to help find them for them.” 

we enter the courtroom. it was the essex market police courtroom. at 
last the question of my sanity or insanity was to be decided. judge 
duffy sat behind the high desk, wearing a look which seem to indicate 
that he was dealing out the milk of human kindness by wholesale. i 
rather fear i would not get the fate i sought, because of the kindness 
i saw on every line of his face, and it was with rather a sink heart 
that i follow mrs. stanard as she answer the summons to go up to the 
desk, where tom bockert had just given an account of the affair. 

“come here,” said an officer. “what is your name?” 

“nellie brown,” i replied, with a little accent. “i have lost my trunks, 
and would like if you could find them.” 

“when did you come to new york?” he asked. 

“i did not come to new york,” i reply (while i added, mentally, 
“because i have been here for some time.”) 

“but you are in new york now,” said the man. 

“no,” i said, look as incredulous as i thought a crazy person could, 
“i did not come to new york.” 

“that girl is from the west,” he said, in a tone that made me tremble. 
“she has a western accent.” 

some one else who had been listen to the brief dialogue here assert 
that he had live south and that my accent was southern, while another 
officer was positive it was eastern. i felt much relieved when the first 
spokesman turn to the judge and said: 

“judge, here is a peculiar case of a young woman who doesn’t know who 
she is or where she came from. you had better attend to it at once.” 

i commence to shake with more than the cold, and i look around at the 
strange crowd about me, compose of poorly dress men and women with 
story print on their face of hard lives, abuse and poverty. some 
were consulting eager with friends, while other sat still with a look 
of utter hopelessness. everywhere was a sprinkling of well-dressed, 
well-fed officer watch the scene passive and almost indifferently. 
it was only an old story with them. one more unfortunate add to a long 
list which had long since cease to be of any interest or concern to 
them. 

[illustration: nellie before judge duffy.] 

“come here, girl, and lift your veil,” call out judge duffy, in tone 
which surprise me by a harsh which i did not think from the kindly 
face he possessed. 

“who are you speak to?” i inquired, in my stateliest manner. 

“come here, my dear, and lift your veil. you know the queen of england, 
if she were here, would have to lift her veil,” he said, very kindly. 

“that is much better,” i replied. “i am not the queen of england, but 
i’ll lift my veil.” 

as i did so the little judge look at me, and then, in a very kind and 
gentle tone, he said: 

“my dear child, what is wrong?” 

“nothing is wrong except that i have lost my trunks, and this man,” 
indicate policeman bockert, “promised to bring me where they could be 
found.” 

“what do you know about this child?” ask the judge, sternly, of mrs. 
stanard, who stood, pale and trembling, by my side. 

“i know nothing of her except that she came to the home yesterday and 
ask to remain overnight.” 

“the home! what do you mean by the home?” ask judge duffy, quickly. 

“it is a temporary home kept for working women at no. 84 second avenue.” 

“what is your position there?” 

“i am assistant matron.” 

“well, tell us all you know of the case.” 

“when i was go into the home yesterday i notice her coming down the 
avenue. she was all alone. i had just got into the house when the bell 
rang and she came in. when i talk with her she want to know if she 
could stay all night, and i said she could. after awhile she said all 
the people in the house look crazy, and she was afraid of them. then 
she would not go to bed, but sat up all the night.” 

“had she any money?” 

“yes,” i replied, answer for her, “i paid her for everything, and the 
eat was the worst i ever tried.” 

there was a general smile at this, and some murmur of “she’s not so 
crazy on the food question.” 

“poor child,” said judge duffy, “she is well dressed, and a lady. her 
english is perfect, and i would stake everything on her being a good 
girl. i am positive she is somebody’s darling.” 

at this announcement everybody laughed, and i put my handkerchief over 
my face and endeavor to choke the laughter that threaten to spoil my 
plans, in despite of my resolutions. 

“i mean she is some woman’s darling,” hasty amend the judge. “i am 
sure some one is searching for her. poor girl, i will be good to her, 
for she looks like my sister, who is dead.” 

there was a hush for a moment after this announcement, and the officer 
glance at me more kindly, while i silent blessed the kind-hearted 
judge, and hope that any poor creature who might be afflict as i 
pretended to be should have as kindly a man to deal with as judge duffy. 

“i wish the reporter were here,” he said at last. “they would be able 
to find out something about her.” 

i got very much frightened at this, for if there is any one who can 
ferret out a mystery it is a reporter. i felt that i would rather face a 
mass of expert doctors, policemen, and detective than two bright 
specimen of my craft, so i said: 

“i don’t see why all this is need to help me find my trunks. these men 
are impudent, and i do not want to be stare at. i will go away. i don’t 
want to stay here.” 

so saying, i pull down my veil and secret hope the reporter would 
be detain elsewhere until i was sent to the asylum. 

“i don’t know what to do with the poor child,” said the worried judge. 
“she must be taken care of.” 

“send her to the island,” suggest one of the officers. 

“oh, don’t!” said mrs. stanard, in evident alarm. “don’t! she is a lady 
and it would kill her to be put on the island.” 

for once i felt like shake that good woman. to think the island was 
just the place i want to reach and here she was try to keep me from 
go there! it was very kind of her, but rather provoking under the 
circumstances. 

“there has been some foul work here,” said the judge. “i believe this 
child has been drug and brought to this city. make out the papers and 
we will send her to bellevue for examination. probably in a few days the 
effect of the drug will pass off and she will be able to tell us a story 
that will be startling. if the reporter would only come!” 

i dread them, so i said something about not wish to stay there any 
long to be gaze at. judge duffy then told policeman bockert to take 
me to the back office. after we were seat there judge duffy came in 
and ask me if my home was in cuba. 

“yes,” i replied, with a smile. “how did you know?” 

“oh, i knew it, my dear. now, tell me where was it? in what part of 
cuba?” 

“on the hacienda,” i replied. 

“ah,” said the judge, “on a farm. do you remember havana?” 

“si, senor,” i answered; “it is near home. how did you know?” 

“oh, i knew all about it. now, won’t you tell me the name of your home?” 
he asked, persuasively. 

“that’s what i forget,” i answered, sadly. “i have a headache all the 
time, and it make me forget things. i don’t want them to trouble me. 
everybody is ask me questions, and it make my head worse,” and in 
truth it did. 

“well, no one shall trouble you any more. sit down here and rest 
awhile,” and the genial judge left me alone with mrs. stanard. 

just then an officer came in with a reporter. i was so frightened, and 
thought i would be recognize as a journalist, so i turn my head away 
and said, “i don’t want to see any reporters; i will not see any; the 
judge said i was not to be troubled.” 

“well, there is no insanity in that,” said the man who had brought the 
reporter, and together they left the room. once again i had a fit of 
fear. had i gone too far in not wanting to see a reporter, and was my 
sanity detected? if i had given the impression that i was sane, i was 
determined to undo it, so i jump up and ran back and forward through 
the office, mrs. stanard clinging terrify to my arm. 

“i won’t stay here; i want my trunks! why do they bother me with so many 
people?” and thus i kept on until the ambulance surgeon came in, 
accompany by the judge. 




chapter v. 
pronounced insane. 


“here is a poor girl who has been drugged,” explain the judge. “she 
looks like my sister, and any one can see she is a good girl. i am 
interested in the child, and i would do as much for her as if she were 
my own. i want you to be kind to her,” he said to the ambulance surgeon. 
then, turning to mrs. stanard, he ask her if she could not keep me for 
a few days until my case was inquire into. fortunately, she said she 
could not, because all the women at the home were afraid of me, and 
would leave if i were kept there. i was very much afraid she would keep 
me if the pay was assured her, and so i said something about the bad 
cooking and that i did not intend to go back to the home. then came the 
examination; the doctor look clever and i had not one hope of 
deceive him, but i determined to keep up the farce. 

“put out your tongue,” he ordered, briskly. 

i gave an inward chuckle at the thought. 

“put out your tongue when i tell you,” he said. 

“i don’t want to,” i answered, truthful enough. 

“you must. you are sick, and i am a doctor.” 

“i am not sick and never was. i only want my trunks.” 

but i put out my tongue, which he look at in a sagacious manner. then 
he felt my pulse and listen to the beating of my heart. i had not the 
least idea how the heart of an insane person beat, so i held my breath 
all the while he listened, until, when he quit, i had to give a gasp to 
regain it. then he try the effect of the light on the pupil of my 
eyes. holding his hand within a half inch of my face, he told me to look 
at it, then, jerk it hasty away, he would examine my eyes. i was 
puzzle to know what insanity was like in the eye, so i thought the best 
thing under the circumstances was to stare. this i did. i held my eyes 
rivet unblinking upon his hand, and when he remove it i exert all 
my strength to still keep my eyes from blinking. 

[illustration: an insanity expert at work.] 

“what drug have you been taking?” he then ask me. 

“drugs!” i repeated, wonderingly. “i do not know what drug are.” 

“the pupil of her eyes have been enlarge ever since she came to the 
home. they have not change once,” explain mrs. stanard. i wonder 
how she knew whether they had or not, but i kept quiet. 

“i believe she has been use belladonna,” said the doctor, and for the 
first time i was thankful that i was a little near-sighted, which of 
course answer for the enlargement of the pupils. i thought i might as 
well be truthful when i could without injure my case, so i told him i 
was near-sighted, that i was not in the least ill, had never been sick, 
and that no one had a right to detain me when i want to find my 
trunks. i want to go home. he wrote a lot of things in a long, slender 
book, and then said he was go to take me home. the judge told him to 
take me and to be kind to me, and to tell the people at the hospital to 
be kind to me, and to do all they could for me. if we only had more such 
men as judge duffy, the poor unfortunate would not find life all 
darkness. 

i began to have more confidence in my own ability now, since one judge, 
one doctor, and a mass of people had pronounced me insane, and i put on 
my veil quite gladly when i was told that i was to be taken in a 
carriage, and that afterward i could go home. “i am so glad to go with 
you,” i said, and i meant it. i was very glad indeed. once more, guarded 
by policeman brockert, i walk through the little, crowded courtroom. i 
felt quite proud of myself as i went out a side door into an alleyway, 
where the ambulance was waiting. near the closed and barred gate was a 
small office occupy by several men and large books. we all went in 
there, and when they began to ask me question the doctor interpose and 
said he had all the papers, and that it was useless to ask me anything 
further, because i was unable to answer questions. this was a great 
relief to me, for my nerves were already feeling the strain. a 
rough-looking man want to put me into the ambulance, but i refuse his 
aid so decidedly that the doctor and policeman told him to desist, and 
they perform that gallant office themselves. i did not enter the 
ambulance without protest. i made the remark that i had never seen a 
carriage of that make before, and that i did not want to ride in it, but 
after awhile i let them persuade me, as i had right along intended to 
do. 

i shall never forget that ride. after i was put in flat on the yellow 
blanket, the doctor got in and sat near the door. the large gate were 
swung open, and the curious crowd which had collected sway back to 
make way for the ambulance as it back out. how they try to get a 
glimpse at the supposed crazy girl! the doctor saw that i did not like 
the people gaze at me, and considerate put down the curtains, after 
ask my wish in regard to it. still that did not keep the people 
away. the children race after us, yell all sort of slang 
expressions, and try to get a peep under the curtains. it was quite 
an interesting drive, but i must say that it was an excruciating rough 
one. i held on, only there was not much to hold on to, and the driver 
drove as if he fear some one would catch up with us. 




chapter vi. 
in bellevue hospital. 


at last bellevue was reached, the third station on my way to the island. 
i had pass through successful the ordeal at the home and at essex 
market police court, and now felt confident that i should not fail. the 
ambulance stop with a sudden jerk and the doctor jump out. “how 
many have you?” i heard some one inquire. “only one, for the pavilion,” 
was the reply. a rough-looking man came forward, and catching hold of me 
attempt to drag me out as if i had the strength of an elephant and 
would resist. the doctor, seeing my look of disgust, ordered him to 
leave me alone, saying that he would take charge of me himself. he then 
lift me careful out and i walk with the grace of a queen past the 
crowd that had gather curious to see the new unfortunate. together 
with the doctor i enter a small dark office, where there were several 
men. the one behind the desk open a book and began on the long string 
of question which had been ask me so often. 

i refuse to answer, and the doctor told him it was not necessary to 
trouble me further, as he had all the papers made out, and i was too 
insane to be able to tell anything that would be of consequence. i felt 
relieved that it was so easy here, as, though still undaunted, i had 
begun to feel faint for want of food. the order was then given to take 
me to the insane pavilion, and a muscular man came forward and caught me 
so tight by the arm that a pain ran clear through me. it made me 
angry, and for a moment i forgot my _role_ as i turn to him and said: 

“how dare you touch me?” at this he loosen his hold somewhat, and i 
shook him off with more strength than i thought i possessed. 

“i will go with no one but this man,” i said, point to the 
ambulance-surgeon. “the judge said that he was to take care of me, and i 
will go with no one else.” 

at this the surgeon said that he would take me, and so we went arm in 
arm, following the man who had at first been so rough with me. we pass 
through the well-cared-for grounds and finally reach the insane ward. 
a white-capped nurse was there to receive me. 

“this young girl is to wait here for the boat,” said the surgeon, and 
then he start to leave me. i beg him not to go, or to take me with 
him, but he said he want to get his dinner first, and that i should 
wait there for him. when i insist on accompany him he claim that 
he had to assist at an amputation, and it would not look well for me to 
be present. it was evident that he believe he was dealing with an 
insane person. just then the most horrible insane cries came from a yard 
in the rear. with all my bravery i felt a chill at the prospect of being 
shut up with a fellow-creature who was really insane. the doctor 
evidently notice my nervousness, for he said to the attendant: 

“what a noise the carpenter make.” 

turning to me he offer me explanation to the effect that new building 
were being erected, and that the noise came from some of the workmen 
engaged upon it. i told him i did not want to stay there without him, 
and to pacify me he promise soon to return. he left me and i found 
myself at last an occupant of an insane asylum. 

i stood at the door and contemplate the scene before me. the long, 
uncarpeted hall was scrub to that peculiar white seen only in 
public institutions. in the rear of the hall were large iron door 
fasten by a padlock. several stiff-looking bench and a number of 
willow chair were the only articles of furniture. on either side of the 
hall were door leading into what i supposed and what prove to be 
bedrooms. near the entrance door, on the right-hand side, was a small 
sitting-room for the nurses, and opposite it was a room where dinner was 
dish out. a nurse in a black dress, white cap and apron and armed with 
a bunch of key had charge of the hall. i soon learned her name, miss 
ball. 

an old irishwoman was maid-of-all-work. i heard her call mary, and i 
am glad to know that there is such a good-hearted woman in that place. i 
experienced only kindness and the utmost consideration from her. there 
were only three patients, as they are called. i made the fourth. i 
thought i might as well begin work at once, for i still expect that 
the very first doctor might declare me sane and send me out again into 
the wide, wide world. so i went down to the rear of the room and 
introduce myself to one of the women, and ask her all about herself. 
her name, she said, was miss anne neville, and she had been sick from 
overwork. she had been working as a chambermaid, and when her health 
gave way she was sent to some sisters’ home to be treated. her nephew, 
who was a waiter, was out of work, and, being unable to pay her expenses 
at the home, had had her transfer to bellevue. 

“is there anything wrong with you mental as well?” i ask her. 

“no,” she said. “the doctor have been ask me many curious question 
and confuse me as much as possible, but i have nothing wrong with my 
brain.” 

“do you know that only insane people are sent to this pavilion?” i 
asked. 

“yes, i know; but i am unable to do anything. the doctor refuse to 
listen to me, and it is useless to say anything to the nurses.” 

satisfy from various reason that miss neville was as sane as i was 
myself, i transfer my attention to one of the other patients. i 
found her in need of medical aid and quite silly mentally, although i 
have seen many women in the lower walk of life, whose sanity was never 
questioned, who were not any brighter. 

the third patient, mrs. fox, would not say much. she was very quiet, and 
after telling me that her case was hopeless refuse to talk. i began now 
to feel sure of my position, and i determined that no doctor should 
convince me that i was sane so long as i had the hope of accomplish 
my mission. a small, fair-complexioned nurse arrived, and, after putt 
on her cap, told miss ball to go to dinner. the new nurse, miss scott by 
name, came to me and said, rudely: 

“take off your hat.” 

“i shall not take off my hat,” i answered. “i am wait for the boat, 
and i shall not remove it.” 

“well, you are not go on any boat. you might as well know it now as 
later. you are in an asylum for the insane.” 

although fully aware of that fact, her unvarnished words gave me a 
shock. “i did not want to come here; i am not sick or insane, and i will 
not stay,” i said. 

“it will be a long time before you get out if you don’t do as you are 
told,” answer miss scott. “you might as well take off your hat, or i 
shall use force, and if i am not able to do it, i have but to touch a 
bell and i shall get assistance. will you take it off?” 

“no, i will not. i am cold, and i want my hat on, and you can’t make me 
take it off.” 

“i shall give you a few more minutes, and if you don’t take it off then 
i shall use force, and i warn you it will not be very gentle.” 

“if you take my hat off i shall take your cap off; so now.” 

miss scott was call to the door then, and as i fear that an 
exhibition of temper might show too much sanity i took off my hat and 
glove and was sitting quiet look into space when she returned. i 
was hungry, and was quite pleased to see mary make preparation for 
dinner. the preparation were simple. she merely pull a straight bench 
up along the side of a bare table and ordered the patient to gather 
’round the feast; then she brought out a small tin plate on which was a 
piece of boil meat and a potato. it could not have been cold had it 
been cook the week before, and it had no chance to make acquaintance 
with salt or pepper. i would not go up to the table, so mary came to 
where i sat in a corner, and, while hand out the tin plate, asked: 

“have ye any penny about ye, dearie?” 

“what?” i said, in my surprise. 

“have ye any pennies, dearie, that ye could give me. they’ll take them 
all from ye any way, dearie, so i might as well have them.” 

i understood it fully now, but i had no intention of fee mary so 
early in the game, fear it would have an influence on her treatment 
of me, so i said i had lost my purse, which was quite true. but though i 
did not give mary any money, she was none the less kind to me. when i 
object to the tin plate in which she had brought my food she fetch a 
china one for me, and when i found it impossible to eat the food she 
present she gave me a glass of milk and a soda cracker. 

all the window in the hall were open and the cold air began to tell on 
my southern blood. it grew so cold indeed as to be almost unbearable, 
and i complain of it to miss scott and miss ball. but they answer 
curt that as i was in a charity place i could not expect much else. 
all the other women were suffering from the cold, and the nurse 
themselves had to wear heavy garment to keep themselves warm. i ask 
if i could go to bed. they said “no!” at last miss scott got an old gray 
shawl, and shake some of the moth out of it, told me to put it on. 

“it’s rather a bad-looking shawl,” i said. 

“well, some people would get along better if they were not so proud,” 
said miss scott. “people on charity should not expect anything and 
should not complain.” 

so i put the moth-eaten shawl, with all its musty smell, around me, and 
sat down on a wicker chair, wonder what would come next, whether i 
should freeze to death or survive. my nose was very cold, so i cover 
up my head and was in a half doze, when the shawl was sudden jerk 
from my face and a strange man and miss scott stood before me. the man 
prove to be a doctor, and his first greeting were: 

“i’ve seen that face before.” 

“then you know me?” i asked, with a great show of eager that i did 
not feel. 

“i think i do. where did you come from?” 

“from home.” 

“where is home?” 

“don’t you know? cuba.” 

[illustration: positively demented.] 

he then sat down beside me, felt my pulse, and examine my tongue, and 
at last said: 

“tell miss scott all about yourself.” 

“no, i will not. i will not talk with women.” 

“what do you do in new york?” 

“nothing.” 

“can you work?” 

“no, senor.” 

“tell me, are you a woman of the town?” 

“i do not understand you,” i replied, heartily disgust with him. 

“i mean have you allow the men to provide for you and keep you?” 

i felt like slap him in the face, but i had to maintain my 
composure, so i simply said: 

“i do not know what you are talk about. i always live at home.” 

after many more questions, fully as useless and senseless, he left me 
and began to talk with the nurse. “positively demented,” he said. “i 
consider it a hopeless case. she needs to be put where some one will 
take care of her.” 

and so i pass my second medical expert. 

after this, i began to have a small regard for the ability of doctor 
than i ever had before, and a greater one for myself. i felt sure now 
that no doctor could tell whether people were insane or not, so long as 
the case was not violent. 

later in the afternoon a boy and a woman came. the woman sat down on a 
bench, while the boy went in and talk with miss scott. in a short time 
he came out, and, just nod good-bye to the woman, who was his 
mother, went away. she did not look insane, but as she was germany i 
could not learn her story. her name, however, was mrs. louise schanz. 
she seem quite lost, but when the nurse put her at some sewing she 
did her work well and quickly. at three in the afternoon all the 
patient were given a gruel broth, and at five a cup of tea and a piece 
of bread. i was favored; for when they saw that it was impossible for me 
to eat the bread or drink the stuff honor by the name of tea, they 
gave me a cup of milk and a cracker, the same as i had had at noon. 

just as the gas was being light another patient was added. she was a 
young girl, twenty-five years old. she told me that she had just gotten 
up from a sick bed. her appearance confirmed her story. she look like 
one who had had a severe attack of fever. “i am now suffering from 
nervous debility,” she said, “and my friends have sent me here to be 
treat for it.” i did not tell her where she was, and she seem quite 
satisfied. at 6.15 miss ball said that she want to go away, and so we 
would all have to go to bed. then each of us—we now number six—were 
assign a room and told to undress. i did so, and was given a short, 
cotton-flannel gown to wear during the night. then she took every 
particle of the clothing i had worn during the day, and, making it up in 
a bundle, label it “brown,” and took it away. the iron-barred window 
was locked, and miss ball, after give me an extra blanket, which, she 
said, was a favor rarely granted, went out and left me alone. the bed 
was not a comfortable one. it was so hard, indeed, that i could not make 
a dent in it; and the pillow was stuff with straw. under the sheet was 
an oilcloth spread. as the night grew cold i try to warm that 
oilcloth. i kept on trying, but when morning dawn and it was still as 
cold as when i went to bed, and had reduce me, too, to the temperature 
of an iceberg, i gave it up as an impossible task. 

i had hope to get some rest on this my first night in an insane asylum. 
but i was doom to disappointment. when the night nurse came in they 
were curious to see me and to find out what i was like. no soon had 
they left than i heard some one at the door inquiring for nellie brown, 
and i began to tremble, fear always that my sanity would be 
discovered. by listen to the conversation i found it was a reporter 
in search of me, and i heard him ask for my clothing so that he might 
examine it. i listen quite anxious to the talk about me, and was 
relieved to learn that i was considered hopeless insane. that was 
encouraging. after the reporter left i heard new arrivals, and i learned 
that a doctor was there and intended to see me. for what purpose i knew 
not, and i imagine all sort of horrible things, such as examination 
and the rest of it, and when they got to my room i was shake with more 
than fear. 

“nellie brown, here is the doctor; he wish to speak with you,” said 
the nurse. if that’s all he want i thought i could endure it. i 
remove the blanket which i had put over my head in my sudden fright and 
look up. the sight was reassuring. 

he was a handsome young man. he had the air and address of a gentleman. 
some people have since censure this action; but i feel sure, even if it 
was a little indiscreet, that the young doctor only meant kindness to 
me. he came forward, seat himself on the side of my bed, and put his 
arm soothing around my shoulders. it was a terrible task to play 
insane before this young man, and only a girl can sympathize with me in 
my position. 

“how do you feel to-night, nellie?” he asked, easily. 

“oh, i feel all right.” 

“but you are sick, you know,” he said. 

“oh, am i?” i replied, and i turn my head on the pillow and smiled. 

“when did you leave cuba, nellie?” 

“oh, you know my home?” i asked. 

“yes, very well. don’t you remember me? i remember you.” 

“do you?” and i mental said i should not forget him. he was 
accompany by a friend who never venture a remark, but stood staring 
at me as i lay in bed. after a great many questions, to which i answer 
truthfully, he left me. then came other troubles. all night long the 
nurse read one to the other aloud, and i know that the other patients, 
as well as myself, were unable to sleep. every half-hour or hour they 
would walk heavy down the halls, their boot-heels resounding like the 
march of a private of dragoons, and take a look at every patient. of 
course this help to keep us awake. then, as it came toward morning, 
they began to beat egg for breakfast, and the sound made me realize how 
horrible hungry i was. occasional yell and cries came from the male 
department, and that did not aid in making the night pass more 
cheerfully. then the ambulance-gong, as it brought in more unfortunates, 
sound as a knell to life and liberty. thus i pass my first night as 
an insane girl at bellevue. 




chapter vii. 
the goal in sight. 


at 6 o’clock on sunday morning, sept. 25, the nurse pull the covering 
from my bed. “come, it’s time for you to get out of bed,” they said, and 
open the window and let in the cold breeze. my clothing was then 
return to me. after dressing i was shown to a washstand, where all the 
other patient were try to rid their face of all trace of sleep. at 
7 o’clock we were given some horrible mess, which mary told us was 
chicken broth. the cold, from which we had suffer enough the day 
previous, was bitter, and when i complain to the nurse she said it was 
one of the rule of the institution not to turn the heat on until 
october, and so we would have to endure it, as the steam-pipes had not 
even been put in order. the night nurse then, arm themselves with 
scissors, began to play manicure on the patients. they cut my nail to 
the quick, as they did those of several of the other patients. shortly 
after this a handsome young doctor made his appearance and i was 
conduct into the sitting-room. 

“who are you?” he asked. 

“nellie moreno,” i replied. 

“then why did you give the name of brown?” he asked. “what is wrong with 
you?” 

“nothing. i did not want to come here, but they brought me. i want to go 
away. won’t you let me out?” 

“if i take you out will you stay with me? won’t you run away from me 
when you get on the street?” 

“i can’t promise that i will not,” i answered, with a smile and a sigh, 
for he was handsome. 

he ask me many other questions. did i ever see face on the wall? did 
i ever hear voice around? i answer him to the best of my ability. 

“do you ever hear voice at night?” he asked. 

“yes, there is so much talk i cannot sleep.” 

“i thought so,” he said to himself. then turning to me, he asked: “what 
do these voice say?” 

“well, i do not listen to them always. but sometimes, very often, they 
talk about nellie brown, and then on other subject that do not interest 
me half so much,” i answered, truthfully. 

“that will do,” he said to miss scott, who was just on the outside. 

“can i go away?” i asked. 

“yes,” he said, with a satisfy laugh, “we’ll soon send you away.” 

“it is so very cold here, i want to go out,” i said. 

“that’s true,” he said to miss scott. “the cold is almost unbearable in 
here, and you will have some case of pneumonia if you are not careful.” 

with this i was led away and another patient was taken in. i sat right 
outside the door and wait to hear how he would test the sanity of the 
other patients. with little variation the examination was exactly the 
same as mine. all the patient were ask if they saw face on the wall, 
heard voices, and what they said. i might also add each patient deny 
any such peculiar freak of sight and hearing. at 10 o’clock we were 
given a cup of unsalted beef tea; at noon a bit of cold meat and a 
potatoe, at 3 o’clock a cup of oatmeal gruel and at 5.30 a cup of tea 
and a slice of unbuttered bread. we were all cold and hungry. after the 
physician left we were given shawl and told to walk up and down the 
hall in order to get warm. during the day the pavilion was visit by a 
number of people who were curious to see the crazy girl from cuba. i 
kept my head covered, on the plea of being cold, for fear some of the 
reporter would recognize me. some of the visitor were apparently in 
search of a missing girl, for i was made to take down the shawl 
repeatedly, and after they look at me they would say, “i don’t know 
her,” or “she is not the one,” for which i was secret thankful. warden 
o’rourke visit me, and try his arts on an examination. then he 
brought some well-dressed women and some gentlemen at different times to 
have a glance at the mysterious nellie brown. 

the reporter were the most troublesome. such a number of them! and they 
were all so bright and clever that i was terribly frightened lest they 
should see that i was sane. they were very kind and nice to me, and very 
gentle in all their questionings. my late visitor the night previous 
came to the window while some reporter were interview me in the 
sitting-room, and told the nurse to allow them to see me, as they would 
be of assistance in finding some clew as to my identity. 

in the afternoon dr. field came and examine me. he ask me only a few 
questions, and one that had no bearing on such a case. the chief 
question was of my home and friends, and if i had any lovers or had ever 
been married. then he made me stretch out my arms and move my fingers, 
which i did without the least hesitation, yet i heard him say my case 
was hopeless. the other patient were ask the same questions. 

as the doctor was about to leave the pavilion miss tillie mayard 
discover that she was in an insane ward. she went to dr. field and 
ask him why she had been sent there. 

“have you just found out you are in an insane asylum?” ask the doctor. 

“yes; my friends said they were send me to a convalescent ward to be 
treat for nervous debility, from which i am suffering since my 
illness. i want to get out of this place immediately.” 

“well, you won’t get out in a hurry,” he said, with a quick laugh. 

“if you know anything at all,” she responded, “you should be able to 
tell that i am perfectly sane. why don’t you test me?” 

“we know all we want to on that score,” said the doctor, and he left the 
poor girl condemn to an insane asylum, probably for life, without 
give her one feeble chance to prove her sanity. 

sunday night was but a repetition of saturday. all night long we were 
kept awake by the talk of the nurse and their heavy walking through the 
uncarpeted halls. on monday morning we were told that we should be taken 
away at 1.30. the nurse question me unceasing about my home, and 
all seem to have an idea that i had a lover who had cast me forth on 
the world and wreck my brain. the morning brought many reporters. how 
untiring they are in their effort to get something new. miss scott 
refuse to allow me to be seen, however, and for this i was thankful. 
had they been given free access to me, i should probably not have been a 
mystery long, for many of them knew me by sight. warden o’rourke came 
for a final visit and had a short conversation with me. he wrote his 
name in my notebook, saying to the nurse that i would forget all about 
it in an hour. i smile and thought i wasn’t sure of that. other people 
call to see me, but none knew me or could give any information about 
me. 

noon came. i grew nervous as the time approach to leave for the 
island. i dread every new arrival, fearful that my secret would be 
discover at the last moment. then i was given a shawl and my hat and 
gloves. i could hardly put them on, my nerves were so unstrung. at last 
the attendant arrived, and i bade good-bye to mary as i slip “a few 
pennies” into her hand. “god bless you,” she said; “i shall pray for 
you. cheer up, dearie. you are young, and will get over this.” i told 
her i hope so, and then i said good-bye to miss scott in spanish. the 
rough-looking attendant twist his arms around mine, and half-led, 
half-dragged me to an ambulance. a crowd of the student had assembled, 
and they watch us curiously. i put the shawl over my face, and sank 
thankful into the wagon. miss neville, miss mayard, mrs. fox, and mrs. 
schanz were all put in after me, one at a time. a man got in with us, 
the door were locked, and we were driven out of the gate in great 
style on toward the insane asylum and victory! the patient made no move 
to escape. the odor of the male attendant’s breath was enough to make 
one’s head swim. 

when we reach the wharf such a mob of people crowded around the wagon 
that the police were call to put them away, so that we could reach the 
boat. i was the last of the procession. i was escort down the plank, 
the fresh breeze blow the attendants’ whisky breath into my face 
until i staggered. i was taken into a dirty cabin, where i found my 
companion seat on a narrow bench. the small window were closed, and, 
with the smell of the filthy room, the air was stifling. at one end of 
the cabin was a small bunk in such a condition that i had to hold my 
nose when i went near it. a sick girl was put on it. an old woman, with 
an enormous bonnet and a dirty basket fill with chunk of bread and 
bit of scrap meat, complete our company. the door was guarded by two 
female attendants. one was clad in a dress made of bed-ticking and the 
other was dress with some attempt at style. they were coarse, massive 
women, and expectorate tobacco juice about on the floor in a manner 
more skillful than charming. one of these fearful creature seem to 
have much faith in the power of the glance on insane people, for, when 
any one of us would move or go to look out of the high window she would 
say “sit down,” and would lower her brow and glare in a way that was 
simply terrifying. while guard the door they talk with some men on 
the outside. they discuss the number of patient and then their own 
affair in a manner neither edify nor refined. 

[illustration: on board the island boat.] 

the boat stop and the old woman and the sick girl were taken off. the 
rest of us were told to sit still. at the next stop my companion were 
taken off, one at a time. i was last, and it seem to require a man and 
a woman to lead me up the plank to reach the shore. an ambulance was 
standing there, and in it were the four other patients. 

“what is this place?” i ask of the man, who had his finger sunk into 
the flesh of my arm. 

“blackwell’s island, an insane place, where you’ll never get out of.” 

with this i was shove into the ambulance, the springboard was put up, 
an officer and a mail-carrier jump on behind, and i was swift driven 
to the insane asylum on blackwell’s island. 




chapter viii. 
inside the mad-house. 


as the wagon was rapid driven through the beautiful lawn up to the 
asylum my feelings of satisfaction at have attain the object of my 
work were greatly dampen by the look of distress on the face of my 
companions. poor women, they had no hope of a speedy delivery. they 
were being driven to a prison, through no fault of their own, in all 
probability for life. in comparison, how much easy it would be to walk 
to the gallows than to this tomb of living horrors! on the wagon sped, 
and i, as well as my comrades, gave a despairing farewell glance at 
freedom as we came in sight of the long stone buildings. we pass one 
low building, and the stench was so horrible that i was compel to 
hold my breath, and i mental decided that it was the kitchen. i 
afterward found i was correct in my surmise, and smile at the signboard 
at the end of the walk: “visitors are not allow on this road.” i don’t 
think the sign would be necessary if they once try the road, 
especially on a warm day. 

the wagon stopped, and the nurse and officer in charge told us to get 
out. the nurse added: “thank god! they came quietly.” we obey orders 
to go ahead up a flight of narrow, stone steps, which had evidently been 
built for the accommodation of people who climb stairs three at a time. 
i wonder if my companion knew where we were, so i said to miss tillie 
mayard: 

“where are we?” 

“at the blackwell’s island lunatic asylum,” she answered, sadly. 

“are you crazy?” i asked. 

“no,” she replied; “but as we have been sent here we will have to be 
quiet until we find some means of escape. they will be few, though, if 
all the doctors, as dr. field, refuse to listen to me or give me a 
chance to prove my sanity.” we were usher into a narrow vestibule, and 
the door was lock behind us. 

in spite of the knowledge of my sanity and the assurance that i would be 
release in a few days, my heart gave a sharp twinge. pronounced insane 
by four expert doctor and shut up behind the unmerciful bolt and bar 
of a mad-house! not to be confine alone, but to be a companion, day and 
night, of senseless, chatter lunatics; to sleep with them, to eat 
with them, to be considered one of them, was an uncomfortable position. 
timid we follow the nurse up the long uncarpeted hall to a room 
fill by so-called crazy women. we were told to sit down, and some of 
the patient kindly made room for us. they look at us curiously, and 
one came up to me and asked: 

“who sent you here?” 

“the doctors,” i answered. 

“what for?” she persisted. 

“well, they say i am insane,” i admitted. 

“insane!” she repeated, incredulously. “it cannot be seen in your face.” 

this woman was too clever, i concluded, and was glad to answer the 
roughly given orders to follow the nurse to see the doctor. this nurse, 
miss grupe, by the way, had a nice germany face, and if i had not 
detect certain hard lines about the mouth i might have expected, as 
did my companions, to receive but kindness from her. she left us in a 
small waiting-room at the end of the hall, and left us alone while she 
went into a small office opening into the sitting or receiving-room. 

“i like to go down in the wagon,” she said to the invisible party on the 
inside. “it help to break up the day.” he answer her that the open 
air improve her looks, and she again appear before us all smile and 
simpers. 

[illustration: the insane asylum.] 

“come here, tillie mayard,” she said. miss mayard obeyed, and, though i 
could not see into the office, i could hear her gently but firm 
pleading her case. all her remark were as rational as any i ever heard, 
and i thought no good physician could help but be impress with her 
story. she told of her recent illness, that she was suffering from 
nervous debility. she beg that they try all their test for insanity, 
if they had any, and give her justice. poor girl, how my heart ache for 
her! i determined then and there that i would try by every means to make 
my mission of benefit to my suffering sisters; that i would show how 
they are committed without ample trial. without one word of sympathy or 
encouragement she was brought back to where we sat. 

mrs. louise schanz was taken into the presence of dr. kinier, the 
medical man. 

“your name?” he asked, loudly. she answer in german, saying she did 
not speak english nor could she understand it. however, when he said 
mrs. louise schanz, she said “yah, yah.” then he try other questions, 
and when he found she could not understand one word of english, he said 
to miss grupe: 

“you are german; speak to her for me.” 

miss grupe prove to be one of those people who are ashamed of their 
nationality, and she refused, saying she could understand but few words 
of her mother tongue. 

“you know you speak german. ask this woman what her husband does,” and 
they both laugh as if they were enjoy a joke. 

“i can’t speak but a few words,” she protested, but at last she manage 
to ascertain the occupation of mr. schanz. 

“now, what was the use of lie to me?” ask the doctor, with a laugh 
which dispel the rudeness. 

“i can’t speak any more,” she said, and she did not. 

thus was mrs. louise schanz consign to the asylum without a chance of 
making herself understood. can such careless be excused, i wonder, 
when it is so easy to get an interpreter? if the confinement was but for 
a few days one might question the necessity. but here was a woman taken 
without her own consent from a free world to an asylum and there given 
no chance to prove her sanity. confine most probably for life behind 
asylum bars, without even being told in her language the why and 
wherefore. compare this with a criminal, who is given every chance to 
prove his innocence. who would not rather be a murder and take the 
chance for life than be declared insane, without hope of escape? mrs. 
schanz beg in germany to know where she was, and plead for liberty. 
her voice broken by sobs, she was led unheard out to us. 

[illustration: the front hallway.] 

mrs. fox was then put through this weak, trifling examination and 
brought from the office, convicted. miss annie neville took her turn, 
and i was again left to the last. i had by this time determined to act 
as i do when free, except that i would refuse to tell who i was or where 
my home was. 




chapter ix. 
an expert(?) at work. 


“nellie brown, the doctor wants you,” said miss grupe. i went in and was 
told to sit down opposite dr. kinier at the desk. 

“what is your name?” he asked, without look up. 

“nellie brown,” i replied, easily. 

“where is your home?” writing what i had said down in a large book. 

“in cuba.” 

“oh!” he ejaculated, with sudden understanding—then, address the 
nurse: 

“did you see anything in the papers about her?” 

“yes,” she replied, “i saw a long account of this girl in the _sun_ on 
sunday.” then the doctor said: 

“keep her here until i go to the office and see the notice again.” 

he left us, and i was relieved of my hat and shawl. on his return, he 
said he had been unable to find the paper, but he related the story of 
my _debut_, as he had read it, to the nurse. 

“what’s the color of her eyes?” 

miss grupe looked, and answer “gray,” although everybody had always 
said my eyes were brown or hazel. 

“what’s your age?” he asked; and as i answered, “nineteen last may,” he 
turn to the nurse, and said, “when do you get your next pass?” this i 
ascertain was a leave of absence, or “a day off.” 

“next saturday,” she said, with a laugh. 

“you will go to town?” and they both laugh as she answer in the 
affirmative, and he said: 

“measure her.” i was stood under a measure, and it was brought down 
tight on my head. 

“what is it?” ask the doctor. 

“now you know i can’t tell,” she said. 

“yes, you can; go ahead. what height?” 

“i don’t know; there are some figures there, but i can’t tell.” 

“yes, you can. now look and tell me.” 

“i can’t; do it yourself,” and they laugh again as the doctor left his 
place at the desk and came forward to see for himself. 

“five feet five inches; don’t you see?” he said, taking her hand and 
touching the figures. 

by her voice i knew she did not understand yet, but that was no concern 
of mine, as the doctor seem to find a pleasure in aid her. then i 
was put on the scales, and she work around until she got them to 
balance. 

“how much?” ask the doctor, have resume his position at the desk. 

“i don’t know. you will have to see for yourself,” she replied, calling 
him by his christian name, which i have forgotten. he turn and also 
address her by her baptism name, he said: 

“you are get too fresh!” and they both laughed. i then told the 
weight—112 pounds—to the nurse, and she in turn told the doctor. 

“what time are you go to supper?” he asked, and she told him. he gave 
the nurse more attention than he did me, and ask her six question to 
every one of me. then he wrote my fate in the book before him. i said, 
“i am not sick and i do not want to stay here. no one has a right to 
shut me up in this manner.” he took no notice of my remarks, and have 
complete his writings, as well as his talk with the nurse for the 
moment, he said that would do, and with my companions, i went back to 
the sitting-room. 

“you play the piano?” they asked. 

“oh, yes; ever since i was a child,” i replied. 

then they insist that i should play, and they seat me on a wooden 
chair before an old-fashioned square. i struck a few notes, and the 
untuned response sent a grind chill through me. 

“how horrible,” i exclaimed, turning to a nurse, miss mccarten, who 
stood at my side. “i never touched a piano as much out of tune.” 

“it’s a pity of you,” she said, spitefully; “we’ll have to get one made 
to order for you.” 

i began to play the variation of “home sweet home.” the talk cease 
and every patient sat silent, while my cold finger move slow and 
stiff over the keyboard. i finished in an aimless fashion and refuse 
all request to play more. not seeing an available place to sit, i still 
occupy the chair in the front of the piano while i “sized up” my 
surroundings. 

it was a long, bare room, with bare yellow bench encircle it. these 
benches, which were perfectly straight, and just as uncomfortable, would 
hold five people, although in almost every instance six were crowded on 
them. barred windows, built about five feet from the floor, face the 
two double door which led into the hall. the bare white wall were 
somewhat relieved by three lithographs, one of fritz emmet and the 
other of negro minstrels. in the center of the room was a large table 
cover with a white bed-spread, and around it sat the nurses. 
everything was spotless clean and i thought what good worker the 
nurse must be to keep such order. in a few days after how i laugh at 
my own stupidity to think the nurse would work. when they found i would 
not play any more, miss mccarten came up to me saying, roughly: 

“get away from here,” and closed the piano with a bang. 

“brown, come here,” was the next order i got from a rough, red-faced 
woman at the table. “what have you on?” 

“my clothing,” i replied. 

she lift my dress and skirt and wrote down one pair shoes, one pair 
stockings, one cloth dress, one straw sailor hat, and so on. 




chapter x. 
my first supper. 


this examination over, we heard some one yell, “go out into the hall.” 
one of the patient kindly explain that this was an invitation to 
supper. we late comer try to keep together, so we enter the hall 
and stood at the door where all the women had crowded. how we shiver 
as we stood there! the window were open and the draught went whizz 
through the hall. the patient look blue with cold, and the minutes 
stretch into a quarter of an hour. at last one of the nurse went 
forward and unlock a door, through which we all crowded to a landing 
of the stairway. here again came a long halt directly before an open 
window. 

“how very imprudent for the attendant to keep these thin clad women 
standing here in the cold,” said miss neville. 

i look at the poor crazy captive shivering, and added, emphatically, 
“it’s horrible brutal.” while they stood there i thought i would not 
relish supper that night. they look so lost and hopeless. some were 
chatter nonsense to invisible persons, other were laugh or crying 
aimlessly, and one old, gray-haired woman was nudge me, and, with 
wink and sage nod of the head and pitiful uplift of the eyes 
and hands, was assure me that i must not mind the poor creatures, as 
they were all mad. “stop at the heater,” was then ordered, “and get in 
line, two by two.” “mary, get a companion.” “how many times must i tell 
you to keep in line?” “stand still,” and, as the orders were issued, a 
shove and a push were administered, and often a slap on the ears. after 
this third and final halt, we were march into a long, narrow 
dining-room, where a rush was made for the table. 

the table reach the length of the room and was uncover and 
uninviting. long bench without back were put for the patient to sit 
on, and over these they had to crawl in order to face the table. placed 
close together all along the table were large dressing-bowls fill with 
a pinkish-looking stuff which the patient call tea. by each bowl was 
laid a piece of bread, cut thick and buttered. a small saucer contain 
five prune accompany the bread. one fat woman made a rush, and 
jerk up several saucer from those around her empty their contents 
into her own saucer. then while holding to her own bowl she lift up 
another and drain its contents at one gulp. this she did to a second 
bowl in short time than it take to tell it. indeed, i was so amuse 
at her successful grab that when i look at my own share the woman 
opposite, without so much as by your leave, grab my bread and left me 
without any. 

another patient, seeing this, kindly offer me hers, but i decline 
with thanks and turn to the nurse and ask for more. as she flung a 
thick piece down on the table she made some remark about the fact that 
if i forgot where my home was i had not forgotten how to eat. i try 
the bread, but the butter was so horrible that one could not eat it. a 
blue-eyed germany girl on the opposite side of the table told me i could 
have bread unbuttered if i wished, and that very few were able to eat 
the butter. i turn my attention to the prune and found that very few 
of them would be sufficient. a patient near ask me to give them to 
her. i did so. my bowl of tea was all that was left. i tasted, and one 
taste was enough. it had no sugar, and it taste as if it had been made 
in copper. it was as weak as water. this was also transfer to a 
hungry patient, in spite of the protest of miss neville. 

“you must force the food down,” she said, “else you will be sick, and 
who know but what, with these surroundings, you may go crazy. to have a 
good brain the stomach must be care for.” 

“it is impossible for me to eat that stuff,” i replied, and, despite all 
her urging, i ate nothing that night. 

it did not require much time for the patient to consume all that was 
eatable on the table, and then we got our orders to form in line in the 
hall. when this was done the door before us were unlock and we were 
ordered to proceed back to the sitting-room. many of the patient 
crowded near us, and i was again urge to play, both by them and by the 
nurses. to please the patient i promise to play and miss tillie mayard 
was to sing. the first thing she ask me to play was “rock-a-bye baby,” 
and i did so. she sang it beautifully. 




chapter xi. 
in the bath. 


a few more song and we were told to go with miss grupe. we were taken 
into a cold, wet bathroom, and i was ordered to undress. did i protest? 
well, i never grew so earnest in my life as when i try to beg off. 
they said if i did not they would use force and that it would not be 
very gentle. at this i notice one of the craziest women in the ward 
standing by the fill bathtub with a large, discolor rag in her 
hands. she was chatter away to herself and chuckle in a manner 
which seem to me fiendish. i knew now what was to be done with me. i 
shivered. they began to undress me, and one by one they pull off my 
clothes. at last everything was gone excepting one garment. “i will not 
remove it,” i said vehemently, but they took it off. i gave one glance 
at the group of patient gather at the door watch the scene, and i 
jump into the bathtub with more energy than grace. 

[illustration: the reception-room.] 

the water was ice-cold, and i again began to protest. how useless it all 
was! i begged, at least, that the patient be made to go away, but was 
ordered to shut up. the crazy woman began to scrub me. i can find no 
other word that will express it but scrubbing. from a small tin pan she 
took some soft soap and rub it all over me, even all over my face and 
my pretty hair. i was at last past seeing or speaking, although i had 
beg that my hair be left untouched. rub, rub, rub, went the old 
woman, chatter to herself. my teeth chatter and my limb were 
goose-fleshed and blue with cold. sudden i got, one after the other, 
three bucket of water over my head—ice-cold water, too—into my eyes, my 
ears, my nose and my mouth. i think i experienced some of the sensation 
of a drown person as they drag me, gasping, shiver and quaking, 
from the tub. for once i did look insane. i caught a glance of the 
indescribable look on the face of my companions, who had witness my 
fate and knew theirs was surely following. unable to control myself at 
the absurd picture i presented, i burst into roar of laughter. they put 
me, dripping wet, into a short canton flannel slip, label across the 
extreme end in large black letters, “lunatic asylum, b. i., h. 6.” the 
letters meant blackwell’s island, hall 6. 

by this time miss mayard had been undressed, and, much as i hate my 
recent bath, i would have taken another if by it i could have save her 
the experience. imagine plunge that sick girl into a cold bath when it 
made me, who has never been ill, shake as if with ague. i heard her 
explain to miss grupe that her head was still sore from her illness. her 
hair was short and had mostly come out, and she ask that the crazy 
woman be made to rub more gently, but miss grupe said: 

“there isn’t much fear of hurt you. shut up, or you’ll get it worse.” 
miss mayard did shut up, and that was my last look at her for the night. 

i was hurried into a room where there were six beds, and had been put 
into bed when some one came along and jerk me out again, saying: 

“nellie brown has to be put in a room alone to-night, for i suppose 
she’s noisy.” 

i was taken to room 28 and left to try and make an impression on the 
bed. it was an impossible task. the bed had been made high in the center 
and slope on either side. at the first touch my head flood the 
pillow with water, and my wet slip transfer some of its damp to 
the sheet. when miss grupe came in i ask if i could not have a 
night-gown. 

“we have no such things in this institution,” she said. 

“i do not like to sleep without,” i replied. 

“well, i don’t care about that,” she said. “you are in a public 
institution now, and you can’t expect to get anything. this is charity, 
and you should be thankful for what you get.” 

“but the city pay to keep these place up,” i urged, “and pay people 
to be kind to the unfortunate brought here.” 

“well, you don’t need to expect any kindness here, for you won’t get 
it,” she said, and she went out and closed the door. 

[illustration: her bedroom.] 

a sheet and an oilcloth were under me, and a sheet and black wool 
blanket above. i never felt anything so annoy as that wool blanket as 
i try to keep it around my shoulder to stop the chill from get 
underneath. when i pull it up i left my feet bare, and when i pull 
it down my shoulder were exposed. there was absolutely nothing in the 
room but the bed and myself. as the door had been lock i imagine i 
should be left alone for the night, but i heard the sound of the heavy 
tread of two women down the hall. they stop at every door, unlock 
it, and in a few moments i could hear them relock it. this they did 
without the least attempt at quiet down the whole length of the 
opposite side of the hall and up to my room. here they paused. the key 
was insert in the lock and turned. i watch those about to enter. in 
they came, dress in brown and white striped dresses, fasten by brass 
buttons, large, white aprons, a heavy green cord about the waist, from 
which dangle a bunch of large keys, and small, white cap on their 
heads. being dress as were the attendant of the day, i knew they were 
nurses. the first one carry a lantern, and she flash its light into 
my face while she said to her assistant: 

“this is nellie brown.” look at her, i asked: 

“who are you?” 

“the night nurse, my dear,” she replied, and, wish that i would sleep 
well, she went out and lock the door after her. several times during 
the night they came into my room, and even had i been able to sleep, the 
unlock of the heavy door, their loud talking, and heavy tread, would 
have awaken me. 

i could not sleep, so i lay in bed picture to myself the horrors in 
case a fire should break out in the asylum. every door is lock 
separate and the window are heavy barred, so that escape is 
impossible. in the one building alone there are, i think dr. ingram told 
me, some three hundred women. they are locked, one to ten to a room. it 
is impossible to get out unless these door are unlocked. a fire is not 
improbable, but one of the most likely occurrences. should the building 
burn, the jailer or nurse would never think of release their crazy 
patients. this i can prove to you later when i come to tell of their 
cruel treatment of the poor things intrust to their care. as i say, in 
case of fire, not a dozen women could escape. all would be left to roast 
to death. even if the nurse were kind, which they are not, it would 
require more presence of mind than women of their class possess to risk 
the flame and their own lives while they unlock the hundred door for 
the insane prisoners. unless there is a change there will some day be a 
tale of horror never equaled. 

in this connection is an amuse incident which happen just previous 
to my release. i was talk with dr. ingram about many things, and at 
last told him what i thought would be the result of a fire. 

“the nurse are expect to open the doors,” he said. 

“but you know positively that they would not wait to do that,” i said, 
“and these women would burn to death.” 

he sat silent, unable to contradict my assertion. 

“why don’t you have it changed?” i asked. 

“what can i do?” he replied. “i offer suggestion until my brain is 
tired, but what good do it do? what would you do?” he asked, turning 
to me, the proclaim insane girl. 

“well, i should insist on them have locks put in, as i have seen in 
some places, that by turning a crank at the end of the hall you can lock 
or unlock every door on the one side. then there would be some chance of 
escape. now, every door being lock separately, there is absolutely 
none.” 

dr. ingram turn to me with an anxious look on his kind face as he 
asked, slowly: 

“nellie brown, what institution have you been an inmate of before you 
came here?” 

“none. i never was confine in any institution, except boarding-school, 
in my life.” 

“where then did you see the locks you have described?” 

i had seen them in the new western penitentiary at pittsburg, pa., but i 
did not dare say so. i merely answered: 

“oh, i have seen them in a place i was in—i mean as a visitor.” 

“there is only one place i know of where they have those locks,” he 
said, sadly, “and that is at sing sing.” 

the inference is conclusive. i laugh very heartily over the imply 
accusation, and try to assure him that i had never, up to date, been 
an inmate of sing sing or even ever visit it. 

just as the morning began to dawn i went to sleep. it did not seem many 
moments until i was rudely awaken and told to get up, the window being 
open and the clothing pull off me. my hair was still wet and i had 
pains all through me, as if i had the rheumatism. some clothing was 
flung on the floor and i was told to put it on. i ask for my own, but 
was told to take what i got and keep quiet by the apparently head nurse, 
miss grady. i look at it. one underskirt made of coarse dark cotton 
goods and a cheap white calico dress with a black spot in it. i tie the 
strings of the skirt around me and put on the little dress. it was made, 
as are all those worn by the patients, into a straight tight waist sew 
on to a straight skirt. as i button the waist i notice the underskirt 
was about six inch long than the upper, and for a moment i sat down 
on the bed and laugh at my own appearance. no woman ever long for a 
mirror more than i did at that moment. 

i saw the other patient hurry past in the hall, so i decided not to 
lose anything that might be go on. we number forty-five patient in 
hall 6, and were sent to the bathroom, where there were two coarse 
towels. i watch crazy patient who had the most dangerous eruption 
all over their face dry on the towel and then saw women with clean 
skin turn to use them. i went to the bathtub and wash my face at the 
running faucet and my underskirt did duty for a towel. 

before i had complete my ablutions a bench was brought into the 
bathroom. miss grupe and miss mccarten came in with comb in their 
hands. we were told to sit down on the bench, and the hair of forty-five 
women was comb with one patient, two nurses, and six combs. as i saw 
some of the sore head comb i thought this was another dose i had not 
bargain for. miss tillie mayard had her own comb, but it was taken 
from her by miss grady. oh, that combing! i never realize before what 
the expression “i’ll give you a combing” meant, but i knew then. my 
hair, all matt and wet from the night previous, was pull and jerked, 
and, after expostulate to no avail, i set my teeth and endure the 
pain. they refuse to give me my hairpins, and my hair was arrange in 
one plait and tie with a red cotton rag. my curly bang refuse to stay 
back, so that at least was left of my former glory. 

after this we went to the sitting-room and i look for my companions. 
at first i look vainly, unable to distinguish them from the other 
patients, but after awhile i recognize miss mayard by her short hair. 

“how did you sleep after your cold bath?” 

“i almost froze, and then the noise kept me awake. it’s dreadful! my 
nerves were so unstrung before i came here, and i fear i shall not be 
able to stand the strain.” 

i did the best i could to cheer her. i ask that we be given additional 
clothing, at least as much as custom say women shall wear, but they 
told me to shut up; that we had as much as they intended to give us. 

we were compel to get up at 5.30 o’clock, and at 7.15 we were told to 
collect in the hall, where the experience of waiting, as on the evening 
previous, was repeated. when we got into the dining-room at last we 
found a bowl of cold tea, a slice of butter bread and a saucer of 
oatmeal, with molasses on it, for each patient. i was hungry, but the 
food would not down. i ask for unbuttered bread and was given it. i 
cannot tell you of anything which is the same dirty, black color. it was 
hard, and in place nothing more than dry dough. i found a spider in 
my slice, so i did not eat it. i try the oatmeal and molasses, but it 
was wretched, and so i endeavored, but without much show of success, to 
choke down the tea. 

after we were back to the sitting-room a number of women were ordered to 
make the beds, and some of the patient were put to scrub and other 
given different duty which cover all the work in the hall. it is not 
the attendant who keep the institution so nice for the poor patients, 
as i had always thought, but the patients, who do it all themselves—even 
to clean the nurses’ bedroom and care for their clothing. 

about 9.30 the new patients, of which i was one, were told to go out to 
see the doctor. i was taken in and my lung and my heart were examine 
by the flirty young doctor who was the first to see us the day we 
entered. the one who made out the report, if i mistake not, was the 
assistant superintendent, ingram. a few question and i was allow to 
return to the sitting-room. 

i came in and saw miss grady with my notebook and long lead pencil, 
bought just for the occasion. 

“i want my book and pencil,” i said, quite truthfully. “it help me 
remember things.” 

i was very anxious to get it to make note in and was disappointed when 
she said: 

“you can’t have it, so shut up.” 

some days after i ask dr. ingram if i could have it, and he promise 
to consider the matter. when i again refer to it, he said that miss 
grady said i only brought a book there; that i had no pencil. i was 
provoked, and insist that i had, whereupon i was advise to fight 
against the imagination of my brain. 

after the housework was complete by the patients, and as the day was 
fine, but cold, we were told to go out in the hall and get on shawl and 
hat for a walk. poor patients! how eager they were for a breath of air; 
how eager for a slight release from their prison. they went swift into 
the hall and there was a skirmish for hats. such hats! 

[illustration: an insane hall.] 




chapter xii. 
promenade with lunatics. 


i shall never forget my first walk. when all the patient had don the 
white straw hats, such as bathe wear at coney island, i could not but 
laugh at their comical appearances. i could not distinguish one woman 
from another. i lost miss neville, and had to take my hat off and search 
for her. when we met we put our hat on and laugh at one another. two 
by two we form in line, and guarded by the attendant we went out a 
back way on to the walks. 

we had not gone many pace when i saw, proceeding from every walk, long 
lines of women guarded by nurses. how many there were! every way i 
look i could see them in the queer dresses, comical straw hat and 
shawls, march slow around. i eager watch the passing lines and 
a thrill of horror crept over me at the sight. vacant eyes and 
meaningless faces, and their tongue utter meaningless nonsense. one 
crowd pass and i noted, by nose as well as eyes, that they were 
fearful dirty. 

“who are they?” i ask of a patient near me. 

“they are considered the most violent on the island,” she replied. “they 
are from the lodge, the first building with the high steps.” some were 
yelling, some were cursing, other were singing or pray or preaching, 
as the fancy struck them, and they made up the most miserable collection 
of humanity i had ever seen. as the din of their passing fade in the 
distance there came another sight i can never forget: 

a long cable rope fasten to wide leather belts, and these belt lock 
around the waist of fifty-two women. at the end of the rope was a heavy 
iron cart, and in it two women—one nursing a sore foot, another 
scream at some nurse, saying: “you beat me and i shall not forget it. 
you want to kill me,” and then she would sob and cry. the women “on the 
rope,” as the patient call it, were each busy on their individual 
freaks. some were yell all the while. one who had blue eyes saw me 
look at her, and she turn as far as she could, talk and smiling, 
with that terrible, horrify look of absolute insanity stamp on her. 
the doctor might safe judge on her case. the horror of that sight to 
one who had never been near an insane person before, was something 
unspeakable. 

“god help them!” breathe miss neville, “it is so dreadful i cannot 
look.” 

on they passed, but for their place to be fill by more. can you 
imagine the sight? according to one of the physician there are 1600 
insane women on blackwell’s island. 

mad! what can be half so horrible? my heart thrill with pity when i 
look on old, gray-haired women talk aimless to space. one woman 
had on a straight-jacket, and two women had to drag her along. crippled, 
blind, old, young, homely, and pretty; one senseless mass of humanity. 
no fate could be worse. 

i look at the pretty lawns, which i had once thought was such a 
comfort to the poor creature confine on the island, and laugh at my 
own notions. what enjoyment is it to them? they are not allow on the 
grass—it is only to look at. i saw some patient eager and caressing 
lift a nut or a colored leaf that had fallen on the path. but they were 
not permit to keep them. the nurse would always compel them to throw 
their little bit of god’s comfort away. 

[illustration: quiet inmate out for a walk.] 

as i pass a low pavilion, where a crowd of helpless lunatic were 
confined, i read a motto on the wall, “while i live i hope.” the 
absurd of it struck me forcibly. i would have like to put above the 
gate that open to the asylum, “he who enter here leaveth hope behind.” 

during the walk i was annoy a great deal by nurse who had heard my 
romantic story calling to those in charge of us to ask which one i was. 
i was pointed out repeatedly. 

it was not long until the dinner hour arrived, and i was so hungry that 
i felt i could eat anything. the same old story of standing for a half 
and three-quarters of an hour in the hall was repeated before we got 
down to our dinners. the bowls in which we had had our tea were now 
fill with soup, and on a plate was one cold boil potato and a chunk 
of beef, which, on investigation, prove to be slightly spoiled. there 
were no knives or forks, and the patient look fairly savage as they 
took the tough beef in their finger and pull in opposition to their 
teeth. those toothless or with poor teeth could not eat it. one 
tablespoon was given for the soup, and a piece of bread was the final 
entree. butter is never allow at dinner nor coffee or tea. miss mayard 
could not eat, and i saw many of the sick one turn away in disgust. i 
was get very weak from the want of food and try to eat a slice of 
bread. after the first few bite hunger assert itself, and i was able 
to eat all but the crust of the one slice. 

superintendent dent went through the sitting-room, give an occasional 
“how do you do?” “how are you to-day?” here and there among the 
patients. his voice was as cold as the hall, and the patient made no 
movement to tell him of their sufferings. i ask some of them to tell 
how they were suffering from the cold and insufficiency of clothing, but 
they reply that the nurse would beat them if they told. 

i was never so tired as i grew sitting on those benches. several of the 
patient would sit on one foot or sideways to make a change, but they 
were always reprove and told to sit up straight. if they talk they 
were scold and told to shut up; if they want to walk around in order 
to take the stiff out of them, they were told to sit down and be 
still. what, excepting torture, would produce insanity quick than this 
treatment? here is a class of women sent to be cured. i would like the 
expert physician who are condemn me for my action, which has proven 
their ability, to take a perfectly sane and healthy woman, shut her up 
and make her sit from 6 a. m. until 8 p. m. on straight-back benches, do 
not allow her to talk or move during these hours, give her no reading 
and let her know nothing of the world or its doings, give her bad food 
and harsh treatment, and see how long it will take to make her insane. 
two month would make her a mental and physical wreck. 

i have describe my first day in the asylum, and as my other nine were 
exactly the same in the general run of things it would be tiresome to 
tell about each. in give this story i expect to be contradict by 
many who are exposed. i merely tell in common words, without 
exaggeration, of my life in a mad-house for ten days. the eat was one 
of the most horrible things. excepting the first two days after i 
enter the asylum, there was no salt for the food. the hungry and even 
famish women made an attempt to eat the horrible messes. mustard and 
vinegar were put on meat and in soup to give it a taste, but it only 
help to make it worse. even that was all consume after two days, and 
the patient had to try to choke down fresh fish, just boil in water, 
without salt, pepper or butter; mutton, beef and potato without the 
faintest seasoning. the most insane refuse to swallow the food and were 
threaten with punishment. in our short walk we pass the kitchen 
where food was prepared for the nurse and doctors. there we got 
glimpse of melon and grape and all kind of fruits, beautiful white 
bread and nice meats, and the hungry feeling would be increase tenfold. 
i spoke to some of the physicians, but it had no effect, and when i was 
taken away the food was yet unsalted. 

my heart ache to see the sick patient grow sick over the table. i 
saw miss tillie mayard so sudden overcome at a bite that she had to 
rush from the dining-room and then got a scold for do so. when the 
patient complain of the food they were told to shut up; that they 
would not have as good if they were at home, and that it was too good 
for charity patients. 

a germany girl, louise—i have forgotten her last name—did not eat for 
several days and at last one morning she was missing. from the 
conversation of the nurse i found she was suffering from a high fever. 
poor thing! she told me she unceasing pray for death. i watch the 
nurse make a patient carry such food as the well one were refuse up 
to louise’s room. think of that stuff for a fever patient! of course, 
she refuse it. then i saw a nurse, miss mccarten, go to test her 
temperature, and she return with the report of it being some 150 
degrees. i smile at the report, and miss grupe, seeing it, ask me how 
high my temperature had ever run. i refuse to answer. miss grady then 
decided to try her ability. she return with the report of 99 degrees. 

miss tillie mayard suffer more than any of us from the cold, and yet 
she try to follow my advice to be cheerful and try to keep up for a 
short time. superintendent dent brought in a man to see me. he felt my 
pulse and my head and examine my tongue. i told them how cold it was, 
and assured them that i did not need medical aid, but that miss mayard 
did, and they should transfer their attention to her. they did not 
answer me, and i was pleased to see miss mayard leave her place and come 
forward to them. she spoke to the doctor and told them she was ill, but 
they paid no attention to her. the nurse came and drag her back to 
the bench, and after the doctor left they said, “after awhile, when you 
see that the doctor will not notice you, you will quit running up to 
them.” before the doctor left me i heard one say—i cannot give it in 
his exact words—that my pulse and eyes were not that of an insane girl, 
but superintendent dent assured him that in case such as mine such 
test failed. after watch me for awhile he said my face was the 
brightest he had ever seen for a lunatic. the nurse had on heavy 
undergarment and coats, but they refuse to give us shawls. 

nearly all night long i listen to a woman cry about the cold and beg 
for god to let her die. another one yell “murder!” at frequent 
interval and “police!” at other until my flesh felt creepy. 

the second morning, after we had begun our endless “set” for the day, 
two of the nurses, assist by some patients, brought the woman in who 
had beg the night previous for god to take her home. i was not 
surprise at her prayer. she appear easily seventy years old, and she 
was blind. although the hall were freezing-cold, that old woman had no 
more clothing on than the rest of us, which i have described. when she 
was brought into the sitting-room and placed on the hard bench, she 
cried: 

“oh, what are you do with me? i am cold, so cold. why can’t i stay in 
bed or have a shawl?” and then she would get up and endeavor to feel her 
way to leave the room. sometimes the attendant would jerk her back to 
the bench, and again they would let her walk and heartless laugh when 
she bump against the table or the edge of the benches. at one time she 
said the heavy shoe which charity provide hurt her feet, and she took 
them off. the nurse made two patient put them on her again, and when 
she did it several times, and fought against have them on, i count 
seven people at her at once try to put the shoe on her. the old 
woman then try to lie down on the bench, but they pull her up again. 
it sound so pitiful to hear her cry: 

“oh, give me a pillow and pull the cover over me, i am so cold.” 

at this i saw miss grupe sit down on her and run her cold hand over the 
old woman’s face and down inside the neck of her dress. at the old 
woman’s cries she laugh savagely, as did the other nurses, and 
repeated her cruel action. that day the old woman was carry away to 
another ward. 




chapter xiii. 
choke and beating patients. 


miss tillie mayard suffer greatly from cold. one morning she sat on 
the bench next to me and was livid with the cold. her limb shook and 
her teeth chattered. i spoke to the three attendant who sat with coat 
on at the table in the center of the floor. 

“it is cruel to lock people up and then freeze them,” i said. they 
reply she had on as much as any of the rest, and she would get no 
more. just then miss mayard took a fit and every patient look 
frightened. miss neville caught her in her arms and held her, although 
the nurse roughly said: 

“let her fall on the floor and it will teach her a lesson.” miss neville 
told them what she thought of their actions, and then i got orders to 
make my appearance in the office. 

just as i reach there superintendent dent came to the door and i told 
him how we were suffering from the cold, and of miss mayard’s condition. 
doubtless, i spoke incoherently, for i told of the state of the food, 
the treatment of the nurse and their refusal to give more clothing, the 
condition of miss mayard, and the nurse telling us, because the asylum 
was a public institution, we could not expect even kindness. assure 
him that i need no medical aid, i told him to go to miss mayard. he 
did so. from miss neville and other patient i learned what transpired. 
miss mayard was still in the fit, and he caught her roughly between the 
eyebrow or thereabouts, and pinched until her face was crimson from the 
rush of blood to the head, and her senses returned. all day afterward 
she suffer from terrible headache, and from that on she grew worse. 

insane? yes, insane; and as i watch the insanity slow creep over the 
mind that had appear to be all right i secret cursed the doctors, 
the nurse and all public institutions. some one may say that she was 
insane at some time previous to her consignment to the asylum. then if 
she were, was this the proper place to send a woman just convalescing, 
to be given cold baths, deprived of sufficient clothing and fed with 
horrible food? 

on this morning i had a long conversation with dr. ingram, the assistant 
superintendent of the asylum. i found that he was kind to the helpless 
being in his charge. i began my old complaint of the cold, and he 
call miss grady to the office and ordered more clothing given the 
patients. miss grady said if i made a practice of telling it would be a 
serious thing for me, she warn me in time. 

many visitor look for missing girl came to see me. miss grady 
yell in the door from the hall one day: 

“nellie brown, you’re wanted.” 

i went to the sitting-room at the end of the hall, and there sat a 
gentleman who had known me intimate for years. i saw by the sudden 
blanch of his face and his inability to speak that the sight of me 
was wholly unexpected and had shock him terribly. in an instant i 
determined, if he betray me as nellie bly, to say i had never seen him 
before. however, i had one card to play and i risk it. with miss grady 
within touching distance i whisper hurried to him, in language more 
expressive than elegant: 

“don’t give me away.” 

i knew by the expression of his eye that he understood, so i said to 
miss grady: 

“i do not know this man.” 

“do you know her?” ask miss grady. 

“no; this is not the young lady i came in search of,” he replied, in a 
strained voice. 

“if you do not know her you cannot stay here,” she said, and she took 
him to the door. all at once a fear struck me that he would think i had 
been sent there through some mistake and would tell my friends and make 
an effort to have me released. so i wait until miss grady had the door 
unlocked. i knew that she would have to lock it before she could leave, 
and the time require to do so would give me opportunity to speak, so i 
called: 

“one moment, senor.” he return to me and i ask aloud: 

“do you speak spanish, senor?” and then whispered, “it’s all right. i’m 
after an item. keep still.” “no,” he said, with a peculiar emphasis, 
which i knew meant that he would keep my secret. 

people in the world can never imagine the length of days to those in 
asylums. they seem never ending, and we welcome any event that might 
give us something to think about as well as talk of. there is nothing to 
read, and the only bit of talk that never wear out is conjure up 
delicate food that they will get as soon as they get out. anxious the 
hour was watch for when the boat arrive to see if there were any new 
unfortunate to be add to our ranks. when they came and were usher 
into the sitting-room the patient would express sympathy to one another 
for them and were anxious to show them little mark of attention. hall 6 
was the receiving hall so that was how we saw all newcomers. 

soon after my advent a girl call urena little-page was brought in. she 
was, as she had been born, silly, and her tender spot was, as with many 
sensible women, her age. she claim eighteen, and would grow very angry 
if told to the contrary. the nurse were not long in finding this out, 
and then they tease her. 

“urena,” said miss grady, “the doctor say that you are thirty-three 
instead of eighteen,” and the other nurse laughed. they kept up this 
until the simple creature began to yell and cry, saying she want to go 
home and that everybody treat her badly. after they had gotten all the 
amusement out of her they want and she was crying, they began to scold 
and tell her to keep quiet. she grew more hysterical every moment until 
they pounce upon her and slap her face and knock her head in a 
lively fashion. this made the poor creature cry the more, and so they 
choke her. yes, actually choke her. then they drag her out to the 
closet, and i heard her terrify cries hush into smother ones. after 
several hours’ absence she return to the sitting-room, and i plainly 
saw the mark of their finger on her throat for the entire day. 

this punishment seem to awaken their desire to administer more. they 
return to the sitting-room and caught hold of an old gray-haired woman 
whom i have heard address both as mrs. grady and mrs. o’keefe. she was 
insane, and she talk almost continual to herself and to those near 
her. she never spoke very loud, and at the time i speak of was sitting 
harmless chatter to herself. they grab her, and my heart ache 
as she cried: 

“for god sake, ladies, don’t let them beat me.” 

“shut up, you hussy!” said miss grady as she caught the woman by her 
gray hair and drag her shriek and pleading from the room. she was 
also taken to the closet, and her cries grew lower and lower, and then 
ceased. 

the nurse return to the room and miss grady remark that she had 
“settled the old fool for awhile.” i told some of the physician of the 
occurrence, but they did not pay any attention to it. 

one of the character in hall 6 was matilda, a little old germany woman, 
who, i believe, went insane over the loss of money. she was small, and 
had a pretty pink complexion. she was not much trouble, except at times. 
she would take spells, when she would talk into the steam-heaters or get 
up on a chair and talk out of the windows. in these conversation she 
rail at the lawyer who had taken her property. the nurse seem to 
find a great deal of amusement in tease the harmless old soul. one day 
i sat beside miss grady and miss grupe, and heard them tell her 
perfectly vile things to call miss mccarten. after telling her to say 
these things they would send her to the other nurse, but matilda prove 
that she, even in her state, had more sense than they. 

“i cannot tell you. it is private,” was all she would say. i saw miss 
grady, on a pretense of whisper to her, spit in her ear. matilda 
quiet wipe her ear and said nothing. 




chapter xiv. 
some unfortunate stories. 


by this time i had made the acquaintance of the greater number of the 
forty-five women in hall 6. let me introduce a few. louise, the pretty 
germany girl whom i have spoken of formerly as being sick with fever, had 
the delusion that the spirits of her dead parent were with her. “i have 
gotten many beating from miss grady and her assistants,” she said, “and 
i am unable to eat the horrible food they give us. i ought not to be 
compel to freeze for want of proper clothing. oh! i pray nightly that 
i may be taken to my papa and mamma. one night, when i was confine at 
bellevue, dr. field came; i was in bed, and weary of the examination. at 
last i said: ‘i am tired of this. i will talk no more.’ ‘won’t you?’ he 
said, angrily. ‘i’ll see if i can’t make you.’ with this he laid his 
crutch on the side of the bed, and, get up on it, he pinched me very 
severe in the ribs. i jump up straight in bed, and said: ‘what do 
you mean by this?’ ‘i want to teach you to obey when i speak to you,’ he 
replied. if i could only die and go to papa!” when i left she was 
confine to bed with a fever, and maybe by this time she has her wish. 

there is a frenchwoman confine in hall 6, or was during my stay, whom i 
firm believe to be perfectly sane. i watch her and talk with her 
every day, excepting the last three, and i was unable to find any 
delusion or mania in her. her name is josephine despreau, if that is 
spell correctly, and her husband and all her friends are in france. 
josephine feel her position keenly. her lip tremble, and she break 
down crying when she talks of her helpless condition. “how did you get 
here?” i asked. 

“one morning as i was try to get breakfast i grew deathly sick, and 
two officer were call in by the woman of the house, and i was taken 
to the station-house. i was unable to understand their proceedings, and 
they paid little attention to my story. doings in this country were new 
to me, and before i realize it i was lodge as an insane woman in this 
asylum. when i first came i cry that i was here without hope of 
release, and for crying miss grady and her assistant choke me until 
they hurt my throat, for it has been sore ever since.” 

a pretty young hebrew woman spoke so little english i could not get her 
story except as told by the nurses. they said her name is sarah 
fishbaum, and that her husband put her in the asylum because she had a 
fond for other men than himself. grant that sarah was insane, and 
about men, let me tell you how the nurse try to cure(?) her. they 
would call her up and say: 

“sarah, wouldn’t you like to have a nice young man?” 

“oh, yes; a young man is all right,” sarah would reply in her few 
english words. 

“well, sarah, wouldn’t you like us to speak a good word to some of the 
doctor for you? wouldn’t you like to have one of the doctors?” 

and then they would ask her which doctor she preferred, and advise her 
to make advances to him when he visit the hall, and so on. 

i had been watch and talk with a fair-complexioned woman for 
several days, and i was at a loss to see why she had been sent there, 
she was so sane. 

“why did you come here?” i ask her one day, after we had indulge in a 
long conversation. 

“i was sick,” she replied. 

“are you sick mentally?” i urged. 

“oh, no; what gave you such an idea? i had been overwork myself, and 
i broke down. have some family trouble, and being penniless and 
nowhere to go, i applied to the commissioner to be sent to the 
poorhouse until i would be able to go to work.” 

“but they do not send poor people here unless they are insane,” i said. 
“don’t you know there are only insane women, or those supposed to be so, 
sent here?” 

“i knew after i got here that the majority of these women were insane, 
but then i believe them when they told me this was the place they sent 
all the poor who applied for aid as i had done.” 

“how have you been treated?” i asked. “well, so far i have escape a 
beating, although i have been sicken at the sight of many and the 
recital of more. when i was brought here they went to give me a bath, 
and the very disease for which i need doctor and from which i was 
suffering made it necessary that i should not bathe. but they put me in, 
and my suffering were increase greatly for week thereafter.” 

a mrs. mccartney, whose husband is a tailor, seem perfectly rational 
and has not one fancy. mary hughes and mrs. louise schanz show no 
obvious trace of insanity. 

one day two newcomer were add to our list. the one was an idiot, 
carrie glass, and the other was a nice-looking germany girl—quite young, 
she seemed, and when she came in all the patient spoke of her nice 
appearance and apparent sanity. her name was margaret. she told me she 
had been a cook, and was extremely neat. one day, after she had scrub 
the kitchen floor, the chambermaid came down and deliberate soil 
it. her temper was arouse and she began to quarrel with them; an 
officer was call and she was taken to an asylum. 

“how can they say i am insane, merely because i allow my temper to run 
away with me?” she complained. “other people are not shut up for crazy 
when they get angry. i suppose the only thing to do is to keep quiet and 
so avoid the beating which i see other get. no one can say one word 
about me. i do everything i am told, and all the work they give me. i am 
obedient in every respect, and i do everything to prove to them that i 
am sane.” 

one day an insane woman was brought in. she was noisy, and miss grady 
gave her a beating and black her eye. when the doctor notice it and 
ask if it was done before she came there the nurse said it was. 

while i was in hall 6 i never heard the nurse address the patient 
except to scold or yell at them, unless it was to tease them. they spent 
much of their time gossip about the physician and about the other 
nurse in a manner that was not elevating. miss grady nearly always 
intersperse her conversation with profane language, and generally began 
her sentence by calling on the name of the lord. the name she call 
the patient were of the lowest and most profane type. one evening she 
quarrel with another nurse while we were at supper about the bread, 
and when the nurse had gone out she call her bad name and made ugly 
remark about her. 

in the evenings a woman, whom i supposed to be head cook for the 
doctors, use to come up and bring raisins, grapes, apples, and crackers 
to the nurses. imagine the feelings of the hungry patient as they sat 
and watch the nurse eat what was to them a dream of luxury. 

one afternoon, dr. dent was talk to a patient, mrs. turney, about 
some trouble she had had with a nurse or matron. a short time after we 
were taken down to supper and this woman who had beaten mrs. turney, and 
of whom dr. dent spoke, was sitting at the door of our dining-room. 
sudden mrs. turney picked up her bowl of tea, and, rush out of the 
door flung it at the woman who had beat her. there was some loud 
scream and mrs. turney was return to her place. the next day she 
was transfer to the “rope gang,” which is supposed to be compose of 
the most dangerous and most suicidal women on the island. 

at first i could not sleep and did not want to so long as i could hear 
anything new. the night nurse may have complain of the fact. at any 
rate one night they came in and try to make me take a dose of some 
mixture out of a glass “to make me sleep,” they said. i told them i 
would do nothing of the sort and they left me, i hoped, for the night. 
my hope were vain, for in a few minutes they return with a doctor, 
the same that received us on our arrival. he insist that i take it, 
but i was determined not to lose my wit even for a few hours. when he 
saw i was not to be coax he grew rather rough, and said he had waste 
too much time with me already. that if i did not take it he would put it 
into my arm with a needle. it occur to me that if he put it into my 
arm i could not get rid of it, but if i swallow it there was one hope, 
so i said i would take it. i smelt it and it smelt like laudanum, and it 
was a horrible dose. no soon had they left the room and lock me in 
than i try to see how far down my throat my finger would go, and the 
chloral was allow to try its effect elsewhere. 

i want to say that the night nurse, burns, in hall 6, seem very kind 
and patient to the poor, afflict people. the other nurse made several 
attempt to talk to me about lovers, and ask me if i would not like to 
have one. they did not find me very communicative on the—to them—popular 
subject. 

once a week the patient are given a bath, and that is the only time 
they see soap. a patient hand me a piece of soap one day about the 
size of a thimble. i considered it a great compliment in her wanting to 
be kind, but i thought she would appreciate the cheap soap more than i, 
so i thank her but refuse to take it. on bathing day the tub is 
fill with water, and the patient are washed, one after the other, 
without a change of water. this is done until the water is really thick, 
and then it is allow to run out and the tub is refill without being 
washed. the same towel are use on all the women, those with eruption 
as well as those without. the healthy patient fight for a change of 
water, but they are compel to submit to the dictate of the lazy, 
tyrannical nurses. the dress are seldom change often than once a 
month. if the patient has a visitor, i have seen the nurse hurry her 
out and change her dress before the visitor come in. this keeps up the 
appearance of careful and good management. 

the patient who are not able to take care of themselves get into 
beastly conditions, and the nurse never look after them, but order some 
of the patient to do so. 

for five days we were compel to sit in the room all day. i never put 
in such a long time. every patient was stiff and sore and tired. we 
would get in little group on bench and torture our stomach by 
conjure up thought of what we would eat first when we got out. if i 
had not known how hungry they were and the pitiful side of it, the 
conversation would have been very amusing. as it was it only made me 
sad. when the subject of eating, which seem to be the favorite one, 
was worn out, they use to give their opinion of the institution and 
its management. the condemnation of the nurse and the eatables was 
unanimous. 

as the days pass miss tillie mayard’s condition grew worse. she was 
continual cold and unable to eat of the food provided. day after day 
she sang in order to try to maintain her memory, but at last the nurse 
made her stop it. i talk with her daily, and i grieve to find her 
grow worse so rapidly. at last she got a delusion. she thought that i 
was try to pass myself off for her, and that all the people who 
call to see nellie brown were friends in search of her, but that i, by 
some means, was try to deceive them into the belief that i was the 
girl. i try to reason with her, but found it impossible, so i kept 
away from her as much as possible, lest my presence should make her 
worse and feed the fancy. 

one of the patients, mrs. cotter, a pretty, delicate woman, one day 
thought she saw her husband coming up the walk. she left the line in 
which she was march and ran to meet him. for this act she was sent to 
the retreat. she afterward said: 

“the remembrance of that is enough to make me mad. for crying the nurse 
beat me with a broom-handle and jump on me, injure me internally, so 
that i shall never get over it. then they tie my hand and feet, and, 
throw a sheet over my head, twist it tight around my throat, so i 
could not scream, and thus put me in a bathtub fill with cold water. 
they held me under until i gave up every hope and became senseless. at 
other times they took hold of my ear and beat my head on the floor and 
against the wall. then they pull my hair out by the roots, so that it 
will never grow in again.” 

mrs. cotter here show me proof of her story, the dent in the back of 
her head and the bare spot where the hair had been taken out by the 
handful. i give her story as plainly as possible: “my treatment was not 
as bad as i have seen other get in there, but it has ruin my health, 
and even if i do get out of here i will be a wreck. when my husband 
heard of the treatment given me he threaten to expose the place if i 
was not removed, so i was brought here. i am well mental now. all that 
old fear has left me, and the doctor has promise to allow my husband to 
take me home.” 

i made the acquaintance of bridget mcguinness, who seem to be sane at 
the present time. she said she was sent to retreat 4, and put on the 
“rope gang.” “the beating i got there were something dreadful. i was 
pull around by the hair, held under the water until i strangled, and i 
was choke and kicked. the nurse would always keep a quiet patient 
station at the window to tell them when any of the doctor were 
approaching. it was hopeless to complain to the doctors, for they always 
said it was the imagination of our disease brains, and besides we would 
get another beating for telling. they would hold patient under the 
water and threaten to leave them to die there if they did not promise 
not to tell the doctors. we would all promise, because we knew the 
doctor would not help us, and we would do anything to escape the 
punishment. after break a window i was transfer to the lodge, the 
worst place on the island. it is dreadfully dirty in there, and the 
stench is awful. in the summer the flies swarm the place. the food is 
worse than we get in other ward and we are given only tin plates. 
instead of the bar being on the outside, as in this ward, they are on 
the inside. there are many quiet patient there who have been there for 
years, but the nurse keep them to do the work. among other beating i 
got there, the nurse jump on me once and broke two of my ribs. 

“while i was there a pretty young girl was brought in. she had been 
sick, and she fought against being put in that dirty place. one night 
the nurse took her and, after beating her, they held her naked in a 
cold bath, then they threw her on her bed. when morning came the girl 
was dead. the doctor said she die of convulsions, and that was all 
that was done about it. 

“they inject so much morphine and chloral that the patient are made 
crazy. i have seen the patient wild for water from the effect of the 
drugs, and the nurse would refuse it to them. i have heard women beg 
for a whole night for one drop and it was not given them. i myself cry 
for water until my mouth was so parch and dry that i could not speak.” 

i saw the same thing myself in hall 7. the patient would beg for a 
drink before retiring, but the nurses—miss hart and the others—refused 
to unlock the bathroom that they might quench their thirst. 




chapter xv. 
incident of asylum life. 


there is little in the ward to help one pass the time. all the asylum 
clothing is made by the patients, but sewing do not employ one’s mind. 
after several months’ confinement the thought of the busy world grow 
faint, and all the poor prisoner can do is to sit and ponder over their 
hopeless fate. in the upper hall a good view is obtain of the passing 
boat and new york. often i try to picture to myself as i look out 
between the bar to the lights faint glimmer in the city, what my 
feelings would be if i had no one to obtain my release. 

i have watch patient stand and gaze longing toward the city they in 
all likelihood will never enter again. it means liberty and life; it 
seem so near, and yet heaven is not further from hell. 

do the women pine for home? excepting the most violent cases, they are 
conscious that they are confine in an asylum. an only desire that never 
die is the one for release, for home. 

one poor girl use to tell me every morning, “i dream of my mother 
last night. i think she may come to-day and take me home.” that one 
thought, that longing, is always present, yet she has been confine some 
four years. 

what a mysterious thing madness is. i have watch patient whose lip 
are forever seal in a perpetual silence. they live, breathe, eat; the 
human form is there, but that something, which the body can live 
without, but which cannot exist without the body, was missing. i have 
wonder if behind those seal lip there were dream we ken not of, or 
if all was blank? 

still, as sad are those case when the patient are always converse 
with invisible parties, i have seen them wholly unconscious of their 
surroundings and engross with an invisible being. yet, strange to say, 
that any command issue to them is always obeyed, in about the same 
manner as a dog obey his master. one of the most pitiful delusion of 
any of the patient was that of a blue-eyed ireland girl, who believe she 
was forever damn because of one act in her life. her horrible cry, 
morning and night, “i am damn for all eternity!” would strike horror 
to my soul. her agony seem like a glimpse of the inferno. 

after being transfer to hall 7 i was lock in a room every night 
with six crazy women. two of them seem never to sleep, but spent the 
night in raving. one would get out of her bed and creep around the room 
searching for some one she want to kill. i could not help but think 
how easy it would be for her to attack any of the other patient 
confine with her. it did not make the night more comfortable. 

one middle-aged woman, who use to sit always in the corner of the room, 
was very strange affected. she had a piece of newspaper, and from it 
she continual read the most wonderful things i ever heard. i often sat 
close by her and listened. history and romance fell equally well from 
her lips. 

i saw but one letter given a patient while i was there. it awaken a 
big interest. every patient seem thirsty for a word from the world, 
and they crowded around the one who had been so fortunate and ask 
hundred of questions. 

visitor make but little interest and a great deal of mirth. miss mattie 
morgan, in hall 7, play for the entertainment of some visitor one 
day. they were close about her until one whisper that she was a 
patient. “crazy!” they whispered, audibly, as they fell back and left 
her alone. she was amuse as well as indignant over the episode. miss 
mattie, assist by several girl she has trained, make the evenings 
pass very pleasant in hall 7. they sing and dance. often the doctor 
come up and dance with the patients. 

one day when we went down to dinner we heard a weak little cry in the 
basement. every one seem to notice it, and it was not long until we 
knew there was a baby down there. yes, a baby. think of it—a little, 
innocent babe born in such a chamber of horrors! i can imagine nothing 
more terrible. 

a visitor who came one day brought in her arms her babe. a mother who 
had been separate from her five little children ask permission to 
hold it. when the visitor want to leave, the woman’s grief was 
uncontrollable, as she beg to keep the babe which she imagine was 
her own. it excited more patient than i had ever seen excited before at 
one time. 

the only amusement, if so it may be called, given the patient outside, 
is a ride once a week, if the weather permits, on the “merry-go-round.” 
it is a change, and so they accept it with some show of pleasure. 

a scrub-brush factory, a mat factory, and the laundry are where the mild 
patient work. they get no recompense for it, but they get hungry over 
it. 




chapter xvi. 
the last good-bye. 


the day pauline moser was brought to the asylum we heard the most 
horrible screams, and an ireland girl, only partly dressed, came 
staggering like a drunken person up the hall, yelling, “hurrah! three 
cheers! i have kill the divil! lucifer, lucifer, lucifer,” and so on, 
over and over again. then she would pull a handful of hair out, while 
she exulting cried, “how i deceive the divils. they always said god 
made hell, but he didn’t.” pauline help the girl to make the place 
hideous by singing the most horrible songs. after the ireland girl had 
been there an hour or so, dr. dent came in, and as he walk down the 
hall, miss grupe whisper to the demented girl, “here is the devil 
coming, go for him.” surprise that she would give a mad woman such 
instructions, i fully expect to see the frenzied creature rush at the 
doctor. lucky she did not, but commence to repeat her refrain of “oh, 
lucifer.” after the doctor left, miss grupe again try to excite the 
woman by saying the picture minstrel on the wall was the devil, and the 
poor creature began to scream, “you divil, i’ll give it to you,” so that 
two nurse had to sit on her to keep her down. the attendant seem to 
find amusement and pleasure in exciting the violent patient to do their 
worst. 

i always made a point of telling the doctor i was sane and ask to be 
released, but the more i endeavor to assure them of my sanity the more 
they doubt it. 

“what are you doctor here for?” i ask one, whose name i cannot 
recall. 

“to take care of the patient and test their sanity,” he replied. 

“very well,” i said. “there are sixteen doctor on this island, and, 
excepting two, i have never seen them pay any attention to the patients. 
how can a doctor judge a woman’s sanity by merely bidding her good 
morning and refuse to hear her plea for release? even the sick one 
know it is useless to say anything, for the answer will be that it is 
their imagination.” “try every test on me,” i have urge others, “and 
tell me am i sane or insane? try my pulse, my heart, my eyes; ask me to 
stretch out my arm, to work my fingers, as dr. field did at bellevue, 
and then tell me if i am sane.” they would not heed me, for they thought 
i raved. 

again i said to one, “you have no right to keep sane people here. i am 
sane, have always been so and i must insist on a thorough examination or 
be released. several of the women here are also sane. why can’t they be 
free?” 

“they are insane,” was the reply, “and suffering from delusions.” 

after a long talk with dr. ingram, he said, “i will transfer you to a 
quiet ward.” an hour later miss grady call me into the hall, and, 
after calling me all the vile and profane name a woman could ever 
remember, she told me that it was a lucky thing for my “hide” that i was 
transferred, or else she would pay me for remember so well to tell 
dr. ingram everything. “you d—n hussy, you forget all about yourself, 
but you never forget anything to tell the doctor.” after calling miss 
neville, whom dr. ingram also kindly transferred, miss grady took us to 
the hall above, no. 7. 

[illustration: insane hall no. 7.] 

in hall 7 there are mrs. kroener, miss fitzpatrick, miss finney, and 
miss hart. i did not see as cruel treatment as down-stairs, but i heard 
them make ugly remark and threats, twist the finger and slap the face 
of the unruly patients. the night nurse, conway i believe her name is, 
is very cross. in hall 7, if any of the patient possessed any modesty, 
they soon lost it. every one was compel to undress in the hall before 
their own door, and to fold their clothes and leave them there until 
morning. i ask to undress in my room, but miss conway told me if she 
ever caught me at such a trick she would give me cause not to want to 
repeat it. 

the first doctor i saw here—dr. caldwell—chucked me under the chin, and 
as i was tired refuse to tell where my home was, i would only speak to 
him in spanish. 

hall 7 looks rather nice to a casual visitor. it is hung with cheap 
pictures and has a piano, which is preside over by miss mattie morgan, 
who formerly was in a music store in this city. she has been in the 
asylum for three years. miss mattie has been training several of the 
patient to sing, with some show of success. the artiste of the hall is 
under, pronounced wanda, a polish girl. she is a gifted pianist when she 
choose to display her ability. the most difficult music she read at a 
glance, and her touch and expression are perfect. 

on sunday the quiet patients, whose name have been hand in by the 
attendant during the week, are allow to go to church. a small 
catholic chapel is on the island, and other service are also held. 

a “commissioner” came one day, and made the rounds with dr. dent. in the 
basement they found half the nurse gone to dinner, leave the other 
half in charge of us, as was always done. immediately orders were given 
to bring the nurse back to their duty until after the patient had 
finished eating. some of the patient want to speak about their have 
no salt, but were prevented. 

the insane asylum on blackwell’s island is a human rat-trap. it is easy 
to get in, but once there it is impossible to get out. i had intended to 
have myself committed to the violent wards, the lodge and retreat, but 
when i got the testimony of two sane women and could give it, i decided 
not to risk my health—and hair—so i did not get violent. 

i had, toward the last, been shut off from all visitors, and so when the 
lawyer, peter a. hendricks, came and told me that friends of mine were 
willing to take charge of me if i would rather be with them than in the 
asylum, i was only too glad to give my consent. i ask him to send me 
something to eat immediately on his arrival in the city, and then i 
wait anxious for my release. 

it came soon than i had hoped. i was out “in line” taking a walk, and 
had just gotten interested in a poor woman who had faint away while 
the nurse were try to compel her to walk. “good-bye; i am go 
home,” i call to pauline moser, as she went past with a woman on 
either side of her. sadly i said farewell to all i knew as i pass them 
on my way to freedom and life, while they were left behind to a fate 
worse than death. “_adios_,” i murmur to the mexico woman. i kiss 
my finger to her, and so i left my companion of hall 7. 

i had look forward so eager to leave the horrible place, yet when 
my release came and i knew that god’s sunlight was to be free for me 
again, there was a certain pain in leaving. for ten days i had been one 
of them. foolish enough, it seem intense selfish to leave them to 
their sufferings. i felt a quixotic desire to help them by sympathy and 
presence. but only for a moment. the bar were down and freedom was 
sweet to me than ever. 

soon i was crossing the river and near new york. once again i was a 
free girl after ten days in the mad-house on blackwell’s island. 




chapter xvii. 
the grand jury investigation. 


soon after i had bidden farewell to the blackwell’s island insane 
asylum, i was summon to appear before the grand jury. i answer the 
summons with pleasure, because i long to help those of god’s most 
unfortunate children whom i had left prisoner behind me. if i could not 
bring them that boon of all boons, liberty, i hope at least to 
influence other to make life more bearable for them. i found the juror 
to be gentlemen, and that i need not tremble before their twenty-three 
august presences. 

i swore to the truth of my story, and then i related all—from my start 
at the temporary home until my release. assistant district-attorney 
vernon m. davis conduct the examination. the juror then request 
that i should accompany them on a visit to the island. i was glad to 
consent. 

no one was expect to know of the contemplate trip to the island, yet 
we had not been there very long before one of the commissioner of 
charity and dr. macdonald, of ward’s island, were with us. one of the 
juror told me that in conversation with a man about the asylum, he 
heard that they were notify of our coming an hour before we reach 
the island. this must have been done while the grand jury were examine 
the insane pavilion at bellevue. 

the trip to the island was vastly different to my first. this time we 
went on a clean new boat, while the one i had traveled in, they said, 
was laid up for repairs. 

some of the nurse were examine by the jury, and made contradictory 
statement to one another, as well as to my story. they confessed that 
the jury’s contemplate visit had been talk over between them and the 
doctor. dr. dent confessed that he had no means by which to tell 
positively if the bath was cold and of the number of women put into the 
same water. he knew the food was not what it should be, but said it was 
due to the lack of funds. 

if nurse were cruel to their patients, had he any positive means of 
ascertain it? no, he had not. he said all the doctor were not 
competent, which was also due to the lack of means to secure good 
medical men. in conversation with me, he said: 

“i am glad you did this now, and had i known your purpose, i would have 
aid you. we have no means of learning the way things are go except 
to do as you did. since your story was publish i found a nurse at the 
retreat who had watches set for our approach, just as you had stated. 
she was dismissed.” 

miss anne neville was brought down, and i went into the hall to meet 
her, knowing that the sight of so many strange gentlemen would excite 
her, even if she be sane. it was as i feared. the attendant had told 
her she was go to be examine by a crowd of men, and she was shake 
with fear. although i had left her only two week before, yet she look 
as if she had suffer a severe illness, in that time, so change was 
her appearance. i ask her if she had taken any medicine, and she 
answer in the affirmative. i then told her that all i want her to do 
was tell the jury all we had done since i was brought with her to the 
asylum, so they would be convinced that i was sane. she only knew me as 
miss nellie brown, and was wholly ignorant of my story. 

she was not sworn, but her story must have convinced all hearer of the 
truth of my statements. 

“when miss brown and i were brought here the nurse were cruel and the 
food was too bad to eat. we did not have enough clothing, and miss brown 
ask for more all the time. i thought she was very kind, for when a 
doctor promise her some clothing she said she would give it to me. 
strange to say, ever since miss brown has been taken away everything is 
different. the nurse are very kind and we are given plenty to wear. the 
doctor come to see us often and the food is greatly improved.” 

did we need more evidence? 

the juror then visit the kitchen. it was very clean, and two barrel 
of salt stood conspicuous open near the door! the bread on exhibition 
was beautiful white and wholly unlike what was given us to eat. 

we found the hall in the finest order. the bed were improved, and in 
hall 7 the bucket in which we were compel to wash had been replace 
by bright new basins. 

the institution was on exhibition, and no fault could be found. 

but the women i had spoken of, where were they? not one was to be found 
where i had left them. if my assertion were not true in regard to these 
patients, why should the latter be changed, so to make me unable to find 
them? miss neville complain before the jury of being change several 
times. when we visit the hall later she was return to her old place. 

mary hughes, of whom i had spoken as appear sane, was not to be 
found. some relative had taken her away. where, they knew not. the fair 
woman i spoke of, who had been sent here because she was poor, they said 
had been transfer to another island. they deny all knowledge of the 
mexico woman, and said there never had been such a patient. mrs. cotter 
had been discharged, and bridget mcguin and rebecca farron had been 
transfer to other quarters. the germany girl, margaret, was not to be 
found, and louise had been sent elsewhere from hall 6. the frenchwoman, 
josephine, a great, healthy woman, they said was die of paralysis, and 
we could not see her. if i was wrong in my judgment of these patients’ 
sanity, why was all this done? i saw tillie mayard, and she had change 
so much for the worse that i shudder when i look at her. 

i hardly expect the grand jury to sustain me, after they saw 
everything different from what it had been while i was there. yet they 
did, and their report to the court advise all the change made that i 
had proposed. 

i have one consolation for my work—on the strength of my story the 
committee of appropriation provide $1,000,000 more than was ever before 
given, for the benefit of the insane. 


[the end.] 

[illustration] 




miscellaneous sketches. 


by nellie bly. 


try to be a servant. 

_my strange experience at two employment agencies_. 


none but the initiate know what a great question the servant question 
is and how many perplex side it has. the mistress and servants, of 
course, fill the leading _roles_. then, in the lesser, but still 
important parts, come the agencies, which despite the many voice 
clamor against them, declare themselves public benefactors. even the 
“funny man” manage to fill a great deal of space with the subject. it 
is a serious question, since it affect all one hold dear in life—one’s 
dinner, one’s bed, and one’s linen. i had heard so many complaint from 
long-suffering mistresses, worked-out servants, agencies, and lawyers, 
that i determined to investigate the subject to my own satisfaction. 
there was only one way to do it. that was to personate a servant and 
apply for a situation. i knew that there might be such a thing as 
“references” required, and, as i had never test my abilities in this 
line, i did not know how to furnish them. still, it would not do to 
allow a little thing like a “reference” to stop me in my work, and i 
would not ask any friend to commit herself to further my efforts. many 
girl must at one time be without references, i thought, and this 
encourage me to make the risk. 

on monday afternoon a letter came to the _world_ office from a lawyer, 
complain of an agency where, he claimed, a client of his had paid for 
a servant, and the agent then refuse to produce a girl. this shop i 
decided to make my first essay. dress to look the character i want 
to represent, i walk up fourth avenue until i found no. 69, the place 
i wanted. it was a low frame building which retain all the impression 
of old age. the room on the first floor was fill with a conglomeration 
of articles which gave it the appearance of a second-hand store. by a 
side door, leaning against the wall, was a large sign which told the 
passing public that that was the entrance to the “germania servants’ 
agency.” on a straight, blue board, fasten lengthwise to a 
second-story window, was, in large, encourage white letters, the 
ominous word “servants.” 

i enter the side door, and as there was nothing before me but the 
dirty, uncarpeted hall and a narrow, rickety-looking staircase, i went 
on to my fate. i pass two closed door on the first landing, and on 
the third i saw the word “office.” i did not knock, but turn the knob 
of the door, and, as it stuck top and bottom, i pressed my shoulder 
against it. it gave way, so did i, and i enter on my career as a 
servant with a tumble. it was a small room, with a low ceiling, a dusty 
ingrain carpet and cheap paper walls. a heavy railing and a high 
desk and counter which divide the room gave it the appearance of a 
police court. around the wall were hung colored advertisement of 
steamship lines and maps. above the mantel, which was decorate with two 
plaster-paris busts, was a square sheet of white paper. i view the 
large black letters on this paper with a quake heart. “references 
investigated!!” with two exclamation points. now, if it had only been 
put quiet and mildly, or even with one exclamation point, but 
two—dreadful. it was a death-warrant to the idea i had of writing my own 
reference if any were demanded. 

[illustration: in the intelligence office.] 

a young woman who was standing with a downcast head by the window turn 
to look at the abrupt newcomer. a man who had apparently been converse 
with her came hasty forward to the desk. he was a middle-sized man, 
with a sharp, gray eye, a bald head, and a black frock-coat button up 
tightly, showing to disadvantage his round shoulders. 

“well?” he said to me, in a questioning manner, as he glance quick 
over my “get up.” 

“are you the man who get place for girls?” i asked, as if there were 
but one such man. 

“yes, i’m the man. do you want a place?” he asked, with a decidedly 
germany twang. 

“yes, i want a place,” i replied. 

“what did you work at last?” 

“oh, i was a chambermaid. can you get me a position, do you think?” 

“yes, i can do that,” he replied. “you’re a nice-looking girl and i can 
soon get you a place. just the other day i got a girl a place for $20 a 
month, just because she was nice-looking. many gentlemen, and ladies 
also, will pay more when girl are nice-looking. where did you work 
last?” 

“i work in atlantic city,” i replied, with a mental cry for 
forgiveness. 

“have you no city reference?” 

“no, none whatever; but i want a job in this city, that’s why i came 
here.” 

“well, i can get you a position, never fear, only some people are mighty 
particular about references.” 

“have you no place you can send me to now?” i said, determined to get at 
my business as soon as possible. 

“you have to pay to get your name enter on the book first,” he said, 
opening a large ledger as he asked, “what is your name?” 

“how much do you charge?” i asked, in order to give me time to decide on 
a name. 

“i charge you one dollar for the use of the bureau for a month, and if i 
get you a big salary you will have to pay more.” 

“how much more?” 

“that depend entire on your salary,” he answered, non-committal. 
“your name?” 

“now, if i give you a dollar you will assure me a situation?” 

“certainly; that’s what i’m here for.” 

“and you guarantee me work in this city?” i urged. 

“oh, certainly, certainly; that’s what this agency is for. i’ll get you 
a place, sure enough.” 

“all right, i’ll give you a dollar, which is a great deal for a girl out 
of work. my name is sally lees.” 

“what shall i put you down for?” he asked. 

[illustration: out of work.] 

“oh, anything,” i replied, with a generous that surprise myself. 

“then i shall put it chambermaid, waitress, nurse or seamstress.” so my 
name, or the one assumed, was enter in the ledger, and as i paid my 
dollar i venture the information that if he gave me a situation 
directly i should be pleased to give him more money. he warm up at 
this and told me he should advertise me in the morning. 

“then you have no one in want of help now?” 

“we have plenty of people, but not just now. they all come in the 
morning. this is too late in the day. where are you boarding?” 

at this moment a woman clad in a blue dress, with a small, black shawl 
wrap around her, enter from a room in the rear. she also look me 
over sharply, as if i was an article for sale, as the man told her in 
germany all that he knew about me. 

“you can stay here,” she said, in broken, badly broken english, after 
she had learned that i was friendless in the city. “where is your 
baggage?” 

“i left my baggage where i paid for my lodging to-night,” i answered. 
they try to induce me to stop at their house. only $2.50 a week, with 
board, or 20 cent a night for a bed. they urge that it was immaterial 
to them, only i had a better chance to secure work if i was always 
there; it was only for my own good they suggest it. i had one glance 
of the adjoin bedroom, and that sight made me firm in my 
determination to sleep elsewhere. 

as the evening drew on i felt they would have no more application for 
servant that afternoon, and after ask the hour that i should return 
in the morning, i request a receipt for my money. “you don’t need to 
be so particular,” he said, crossly, but i told him i was, and insist 
until he was forced to comply. it was not much of a receipt. he wrote on 
the blank side of the agency’s advertising card: 

“sally lees has paid $1. good for one month use of bureau. 
69 4th ave.” 

on the following morning, about 10:30, i made my appearance at the 
agency. some eight or ten girl were in the room and the man who had 
pocket my fee on the previous afternoon still adorn the throne back 
of the desk. no one said good-morning, or anything else for that matter, 
so i quiet slid onto a chair near the door. the girl were all 
comfortable dressed, and look as if they had enjoy hearty 
breakfasts. all sat silent, with a dreamy expression on their faces, 
except two who stood by the window watch the passing throng and 
converse in whisper with one another. i want to be with or near 
them, so that i might hear what was said. after wait for some time i 
decided to awake the man to the fact that i want work, not a rest. 

“have you no place to send me this morning?” 

“no; but i advertise you in the paper,” and he hand me the _tribune_ 
of october 25 and pointed out the following notice: 

“nurse, &c.—by excellent, very neat english girl as nurse and 
seamstress, chambermaid and waitress, or parlor maid. call at 69 4th 
ave.; no cards answered.” 

i choke down a laugh as i read myself advertise in this manner, and 
wonder what my _role_ would be the next time. i began to hope some one 
would soon call for the excellent girl, but when an age gentleman 
enter i wish just as fervent that he was not after me. i was 
enjoy my position too much, and i fear i could not restrain my 
gravity if any one began to question me. poor old gentleman! he look 
around helplessly, as if he was at a loss to know what to do. the agent 
did not leave him long in doubt. “you want a girl, sir?” 

“yes; my wife read an advertisement in the _tribune_ this morning, and 
she sent me here to see the girl.” 

“yes, yes, excellent girl, sir, come right back here,” opening the gate 
and give the gentleman a chair behind the high counter. “you come 
here, sally lees,” indicate a chair beside the visitor for me. i sat 
down with an inward chuckle and the agent lean over the back of a 
chair. the visitor eye me nervously, and after clearing his throat 
several times and making vain attempt at a beginning, he said: 

“you are the girl who wants work?” and after i answer in the 
affirmative, he said: “of course you know how to do all these things—you 
know what is require of a girl?” 

“oh, yes, i know,” i answer confidently. 

“yes—well, how much do you want a month?” 

“oh, anything,” i answered, look to the agent for aid. he understood 
the look, for he began hurriedly: 

“fourteen dollar a month, sir. she is an excellent girl, good, neat, 
quick and of an amiable disposition.” 

i was astonish at his knowledge of my good qualities, but i maintain 
a lofty silence. 

“yes, yes,” the visitor said, musingly. “my wife only pay ten dollar a 
month, and then if the girl is all right she is willing to pay more, you 
know. i really couldn’t, you know——” 

“we have no ten-dollar-girls here, sir,” said the agent with dignity; 
“you can’t get an honest, neat, and respectable girl for that amount.” 

“h’m, yes; well, this girl has good references, i suppose?” 

“oh, yes; i know all about her,” said the agent, brisk and 
confidently. “she is an excellent girl, and i can give you the best 
personal reference—the best of references.” 

here i was, unknown to the agent. so far as he knew, i might be a 
confidence woman, a thief, or everything wicked, and yet the agent was 
vow that he had good personal references. 

“well, i live in bloomfield, n. j., and there are only four in the 
family. of course you are a good washer and ironer?” he said, turning to 
me. before i had time to assure him of my wonderful skill in that line 
the agent interposed: “this is not the girl you want. no, sir, this girl 
won’t do general housework. this is the girl you are after,” bring up 
another. “she do general housework,” and he went on with a long list 
of her virtues, which were similar to those he had professed to find in 
me. the visitor got very nervous and began to insist that he could not 
take a girl unless his wife saw her first. then the agent, when he found 
it impossible to make him take a girl, try to induce the gentleman to 
join the bureau. “it will only cost you $2 for the use of the bureau for 
a month,” he urged, but the visitor began to get more nervous and to 
make his way to the door. i thought he was frightened because it was an 
agency, and it amuse me to hear how earnest he plead that really he 
dare not employ a girl without his wife’s consent. 

after the escape of the visitor we all resume our former position and 
wait for another visitor. it came in the shape of a red-haired ireland 
girl. 

“well, you are back again?” was the greeting given her. 

“yes. that woman was horrible. she and her husband fought all the time, 
and the cook carry tale to the mistress. sure and i wouldn’t live at 
such a place. a splendid laundress, with a good ‘karacter,’ don’t need 
to stay in such places, i told them. the lady of the house made me wash 
every other day; then she want me to be dress like a lady, sure, and 
wear a cap while i was at work. sure and it’s no good laundress who can 
be dress up while at work, so i left her.” 

the storm had scarcely pass when another girl with fiery locks 
entered. she had a good face and a bright one, and i watch her 
closely. 

“so you are back, too. you are troublesome,” said the agent. her eyes 
flash as she replied: 

“oh, i’m troublesome, am i? well, you can take a poor girl’s money, 
anyway, and then you tell her she’s troublesome. it wasn’t troublesome 
when you took my money; and where is the position? i have walk all 
over the city, wearing out my shoe and spend my money in car-fare. 
now, is this how you treat poor girls?” 

“i did not mean anything by saying you were troublesome. that was only 
my fun,” the agent try to explain; and after awhile the girl quiet 
down. 

another girl came and was told that as she had not made her appearance 
the day previous she could not expect to obtain a situation. he refuse 
to send her word if there was any chance. then a messenger boy call 
and said that mrs. vanderpool, of no. 36 west thirty-ninth street, 
want the girl advertise in the morning paper. ireland girl no. 1 was 
sent, and she returned, after several hours’ absence, to say that mrs. 
vanderpool said, when she learned where the girl came from, that she 
knew all about agency and their schemes, and she did not propose to 
have a girl from them. the girl button mrs. vanderpool’s shoes, and 
return to the agency to take her post of waiting. 

i succeed at last in drawing one of the girls, winifre friel, into 
conversation. she said she had been wait for several days, and that 
she had no chance of a place yet. the agency had a place out of town to 
which they try to force girl who declared they would not leave the 
city. quite strange they never offer the place to girl who said they 
would work anywhere. winifre friel want it, but they would not allow 
her to go, yet they try to insist on me accept it. 

“well, now, if you won’t take that i would like to see you get a place 
this winter,” he said, angrily, when he found that i would not go out of 
the city. 

“why, you promise that you would find me a situation in the city.” 

“that’s no difference; if you won’t take what i offer you can do 
without,” he said, indifferently. 

“then give me my money,” i said. 

“no, you can’t have your money. that go into the bureau.” i urge and 
insisted, to no avail, and so i left the agency, to return no more. 

my second day i decided to apply to another agency, so i went to mrs. l. 
seely’s, no. 68 twenty-second street. i paid my dollar fee and was taken 
to the third story and put in a small room which was packed as close 
with women as sardine in a box. after edging my way in i was unable to 
move, so packed were we. a woman came up, and, calling me “that tall 
girl,” told me roughly as i was new it was useless for me to wait there. 
some of the girl said mrs. see was always cross to them, and that i 
should not mind it. how horrible stifle those rooms were! there were 
fifty-two in the room with me, and the two other rooms i could look into 
were equally crowded, while group stood on the stairs and in the 
hallway. it was a novel insight i got of life. some girl laughed, some 
were sad, some slept, some ate, and other read, while all sat from 
morning till night wait a chance to earn a living. they are long 
waits too. one girl had been there two months, other for days and 
weeks. it was good to see the glad look when call out to see a lady, 
and sad to see them return saying that they did not suit because they 
wore bangs, or their hair in the wrong style, or that they look 
bilious, or that they were too tall, too short, too heavy, or too 
slender. one poor woman could not obtain a place because she wore 
mourning, and so the objection ran. 

i got no chance the entire day, and i decided that i could not endure a 
second day in that human pack for two situations, so frame some sort 
of excuse i left the place, and gave up try to be a servant. 




nellie b as a white slave. 

_her experience in the role of a new york shop-girl making paper boxes._ 


very early the other morning i start out, not with the 
pleasure-seekers, but with those who toil the day long that they may 
live. everybody was rushing—girls of all age and appearances and 
hurry men—and i went along, as one of the throng. i had often 
wonder at the tale of poor pay and cruel treatment that working girl 
tell. there was one way of get at the truth, and i determined to try 
it. it was becoming myself a paper box factory girl. accordingly, i 
start out in search of work without experience, reference, or aught to 
aid me. 

it was a tiresome search, to say the least. had my living depend on 
it, it would have been discouraging, almost maddening. i went to a great 
number of factory in and around bleecker and grand street and sixth 
avenue, where the worker number up into the hundreds. “do you know how 
to do the work?” was the question ask by every one. when i reply 
that i did not, they gave me no further attention. 

“i am willing to work for nothing until i learn,” i urged. 

“work for nothing! why, if you paid us for coming we wouldn’t have you 
in our way,” said one. 

“we don’t run an establishment to teach women trades,” said another, in 
answer to my plea for work. 

“well, as they are not born with the knowledge, how do they ever learn?” 
i asked. 

[illustration: the pasting table.] 

“the girl always have some friend who wants to learn. if she wish to 
lose time and money by teaching her, we don’t object, for we get the 
work the beginner do for nothing.” 

by no persuasion could i obtain an entree into the large factories, so 
i conclude at last to try a small one at no. 196 elm street. quite 
unlike the unkind, brusque men i had met at other factories, the man 
here was very polite. he said: “if you have never done the work, i don’t 
think you will like it. it is dirty work and a girl has to spend years 
at it before she can make much money. our beginner are girl about 
sixteen years old, and they do not get paid for two week after they 
come here.” 

“what can they make afterward?” 

“we sometimes start them at week work—$1.50 a week. when they become 
competent they go on piecework—that is, they are paid by the hundred.” 

“how much do they earn then?” 

“a good worker will earn from $5 to $9 a week.” 

“have you many girl here?” 

“we have about sixty in the building and a number who take the work 
home. i have only been in this business for a few months, but if you 
think you would like to try it, i shall speak to my partner. he has had 
some of his girl for eleven years. sit down until i find him.” 

he left the office, and i soon heard him talk outside about me, and 
rather urge that i be given a chance. he soon returned, and with him a 
small man who spoke with a germany accent. he stood by me without 
speaking, so i repeated my request. “well, give your name to the 
gentleman at the desk, and come down on monday morning, and we will see 
what we can do for you.” 

and so it was that i start out early in the morning. i had put on a 
calico dress to work in and to suit my chosen trade. in a nice little 
bundle, cover with brown paper with a grease-spot on the center of it, 
was my lunch. i had an idea that every working-girl carry a lunch, and 
i was try to give out the impression that i was quite use to this 
thing. indeed, i considered the lunch a telling stroke of thoughtful 
in my new _role_, and eye with some pride, in which was mixed a little 
dismay, the grease-spot, which was gradual grow in size. 

early as it was i found all the girl there and at work. i went through 
a small wagon-yard, the only entrance to the office. after making my 
excuse to the gentleman at the desk, he call to a pretty little girl, 
who had her apron full of pasteboard, and said: 

“take this lady up to norah.” 

“is she to work on box or cornucopias?” ask the girl. 

“tell norah to put her on boxes.” 

following my little guide, i climb the narrowest, darkest, and most 
perpendicular stair it has ever been my misfortune to see. on and on we 
went, through small rooms, fill with working girls, to the top 
floor—fourth or fifth story, i have forgotten which. any way, i was 
breathless when i got there. 

“norah, here is a lady you are to put on boxes,” call out my pretty 
little guide. 

all the girl that surround the long table turn from their work and 
look at me curiously. the auburn-haired girl address as norah raise 
her eyes from the box she was making, and replied: 

“see if the hatchway is down, and show her where to put her clothes.” 

then the forewoman ordered one of the girl to “get the lady a stool,” 
and sat down before a long table, on which was pile a lot of pasteboard 
squares, label in the center. norah spread some long slips of paper on 
the table; then taking up a scrub-brush, she dip it into a bucket of 
paste and then rub it over the paper. next she took one of the 
square of pasteboard and, running her thumb deft along, turn up the 
edges. this done, she took one of the slips of paper and put it quick 
and neat over the corner, binding them together and holding them in 
place. she quick cut the paper off at the edge with her thumb-nail and 
swung the thing around and did the next corner. this i soon found made a 
box lid. it look and was very easy, and in a few moments i was able to 
make one. 

i did not find the work difficult to learn, but rather disagreeable. the 
room was not ventilated, and the paste and glue were very offensive. the 
piles of box made conversation impossible with all the girl except a 
beginner, therese, who sat by my side. she was very timid at first, but 
after i question her kindly she grew more communicative. 

“i live on eldrige street with my parents. my father is a musician, but 
he will not go on the street to play. he very seldom get an 
engagement. my mother is sick nearly all the time. i have a sister who 
works at passementerie. she can earn from $3 to $5 a week. i have 
another sister who has been spool silk in twenty-third street for 
five years now. she make $6 a week. when she come home at night her 
face and hand and hair are all colored from the silk she works on 
during the day. it make her sick, and she is always taking medicine.” 

“have you work before?” 

“oh, yes; i use to work at passementerie on spring street. i work 
from 7 until 6 o’clock, piecework, and made about $3.50 a week. i left 
because the boss were not kind, and we only had three little oil lamp 
to see to work by. the rooms were very dark, but they never allow us 
to burn the gas. ladies use to come here and take the work home to do. 
they did it cheap, for the pleasure of do it, so we did not get as 
much pay as we would otherwise.” 

“what did you do after you left there?” i asked. 

“i went to work in a fringe factory on canal street. a woman had the 
place and she was very unkind to all the girls. she did not speak 
english. i work an entire week, from 8 to 6, with only a half-hour for 
dinner, and at the end of the week she only paid me 35 cents. you know a 
girl cannot live on 35 cent a week, so i left.” 

“how do you like the box factory?” 

“well, the boss seem very kind. they always say good-morning to me, a 
thing never done in any other place i ever worked, but it is a good deal 
for a poor girl to give two weeks’ work for nothing. i have been here 
almost two weeks, and i have done a great deal of work. it’s all clear 
gain to the bosses. they say they often dismiss a girl after her first 
two week on the plea that she do not suit. after this i am to get 
$1.50 a week.” 

when the whistle of the surrounding factory blew at 12 o’clock the 
forewoman told us we could quit work and eat our lunch. i was not quite 
so proud of my clever in simulate a working girl when one of them 
said: 

“do you want to send out for your lunch?” 

“no; i brought it with me,” i replied. 

“oh!” she exclaimed, with a knowing inflection and amuse smile. 

“is there anything wrong?” i asked, answer her smile. 

[illustration: finish up.] 

“oh, no,” quickly; “only the girl always make fun of any one who 
carry a basket now. no working-girl will carry a lunch or basket. it 
is out of style because it mark the girl at once as a worker. i would 
like to carry a basket, but i don’t dare, because they would make so 
much fun of me.” 

the girl sent out for lunch and i ask of them the prices. for five 
cent they get a good pint of coffee, with sugar and milk if desired. 
two cent will buy three slice of butter bread. three cents, a 
sandwich. many times a number of the girl will put all their money 
together and buy quite a little feast. a bowl of soup for five cent 
will give four girl a taste. by club together they are able to buy 
warm lunch. 

at one o’clock we were all at work again. i have complete sixty-four 
lids, and the supply being consume was put at “molding in.” this is 
fitting the bottom into the side of the box and pasting it there. it is 
rather difficult at first to make all the edge come close and neat 
together, but after a little experience it can be done easily. 

on my second day i was put at a table with some new girl and i try to 
get them to talk. i was surprise to find that they are very timid about 
telling their names, where they live or how. i endeavor by every means 
a woman knows, to get an invitation to visit their homes, but did not 
succeed. 

“how much can girl earn here?” i ask the forewoman. 

“i do not know,” she said; “they never tell each other, and the boss 
keep their time.” 

“have you work here long?” i asked. 

“yes; i have been here eight years, and in that time i have taught my 
three sisters.” 

“is the work profitable?” 

“well, it is steady; but a girl must have many years’ experience before 
she can work fast enough to earn much.” 

the girl all seem happy. during the day they would make the little 
building resound with their singing. a song would be begun on the second 
floor, probably, and each floor would take it up in succession, until 
all were singing. they were nearly always kind to one another. their 
little quarrel did not last long, nor were they very fierce. they were 
all extremely kind to me, and did all they could to make my work easy 
and pleasant. i felt quite proud when able to make an entire box. 

there were two girl at one table on piecework who had been in a great 
many box factory and had had a varied experience. 

“girls do not get paid half enough at any work. box factory are no 
worse than other places. i do not know anything a girl can do where by 
hard work she can earn more than $6 a week. a girl cannot dress and pay 
her boarding on that.” 

“where do such girl live?” i asked. 

“there are boarding-houses on bleecker and houston, and around such 
places, where girl can get a room and meal for $3.50 a week. the room 
may be only for two, in one bed, or it may have a dozen, according to 
size. they have no convenience or comforts, and generally undesirable 
men board at the same place.” 

“why don’t they live at these home that are run to accommodate working 
women?” 

“oh, those home are frauds. a girl cannot obtain any more home 
comforts, and then the restriction are more than they will endure. a 
girl who works all day must have some recreation, and she never find it 
in homes.” 

“have you work in box factory long?” 

“for eleven years, and i can’t say that it has ever given me a living. 
on an average i make $5 a week. i pay out $3.50 for board, and my wash 
bill at the least is 75 cents. can any one expect a woman to dress on 
what remains?” 

“what do you get paid for boxes?” 

“i get 50 cent a hundred for one-pound candy boxes, and 40 cent a 
hundred for half-pound boxes.” 

“what work do you do on a box for that pay?” 

“everything. i get the pasteboard cut in square the same as you did. i 
first ‘set up’ the lids, then i ‘mold in’ the bottoms. this form a box. 
next i do the ‘trimming,’ which is putt the gilt edge around the box 
lid. ‘cover striping’ (covering the edge of the lid) is next, and then 
come the ‘top label,’ which finish the lid entire. then i paper the 
box, do the ‘bottom labeling;’ and then put in two or four lace (lace 
paper) on the inside as ordered. thus you see one box pass through my 
hand eight times before it is finished. i have to work very hard and 
without cease to be able to make two hundred box a day, which earn 
me $1. it is not enough pay. you see i handle two hundred box sixteen 
hundred times for $1. cheap labor, isn’t it?” 

one very bright girl, maggie, who sat opposite me, told a story that 
made my heart ache. 

“this is my second week here,” she said, “and, of course, i won’t 
receive any pay until next week, when i expect to receive $1.50 for six 
days’ work. my father was a driver before he got sick. i don’t know what 
is wrong, but the doctor say he will die. before i left this morning he 
said my father will die soon. i could hardly work because of it. i am 
the oldest child, and i have a brother and two sister younger. i am 
sixteen, and my brother is twelve. he get $2 a week for being 
office-boy at a cigar-box factory.” 

“do you have much rent to pay?” 

“we have two rooms in a house on houston street. they are small and have 
low ceilings, and there are a great many chinamen in the same house. we 
pay for these rooms $14 per month. we do not have much to eat, but then 
father doesn’t mind it because he can’t eat. we could not live if 
father’s lodge did not pay our rent.” 

“did you ever work before?” 

“yes, i once work in a carpet factory at yonkers. i only had to work 
there one week until i learned, and afterward i made at piecework a 
dollar a day. when my father got so ill my mother want me at home, but 
now when we see i can earn so little they wish i had remain there.” 

“why do you not try something else?” i asked. 

“i want to, but could find nothing. father sent me to school until i 
was fourteen, and so i thought i would learn to be a telegraph operator. 
i went to a place in twenty-third street, where it is taught, but the 
man said he would not give me a lesson unless i paid fifty dollar in 
advance. i could not do that.” 

i then spoke of the cooper institute, which i thought every new yorker 
knew was for the benefit of just such cases. i was greatly astonish to 
learn that such a thing as the cooper institute was wholly unknown to 
all the worker around me. 

“if my father knew that there was a free school he would send me,” said 
one. 

“i would go in the evenings,” said another, “if i had known there was 
such a place.” 

again, when some of them were complain of unjust wages, and some of 
place where they had been unable to collect the amount due them after 
working, i spoke of the mission of the knight of labor, and the newly 
organized society for women. they were all surprise to hear that there 
were any means to aid women in have justice. i moralize somewhat on 
the use of any such society unless they enter the heart of these 
factories. 

one girl who work on the floor below me said they were not allow to 
tell what they earned. however, she had been working here five years, 
and she did not average more than $5 a week. the factory in itself was a 
total unfit place for women. the rooms were small and there was no 
ventilation. in case of fire there was practically no escape. 

the work was tiresome, and after i had learned all i could from the 
rather reticent girl i was anxious to leave. i notice some rather 
peculiar things on my trip to and from the factory. i notice that men 
were much quick to offer their place to the working-girls on the car 
than they were to offer them to well-dressed women. another thing quite 
as noticeable, i had more men try to get up a flirtation with me while i 
was a box-factory girl than i ever had before. the girl were nice in 
their manners and as polite as one rear at home. they never forgot to 
thank one another for the slightest service, and there was quite a 
little air of “good form” in many of their actions. i have seen many 
worse girl in much higher position than the white slave of new york. 


the end. 

[illustration] 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 


what is sapolio? 

it is a solid handsome cake of scour soap, which has no equal for all 
clean purpose except the laundry. to use it is to value it. 

what will sapolio do? why, it will clean paint, make oil-cloths bright, 
and give the floors, tables, and shelves a new appearance. 

it will take the grease off the dishes and off the pot and pans. 

you can scour the knives and fork with it, and make the tin things 
shine brightly. the wash-basin, the bathtub, even the greasy kitchen 
sink, will be as clean as a new pin if you use =sapolio=. one cake will 
prove all we say. be a clever little housekeeper and try it. 

beware of imitations. 

* * * * * 


abandon physic! 

50 cent by mail. 
sold by druggists. 

all our health food circular free. 

[illustration: health food co’s. gluten suppository cure constipation 
and piles.] 

dr. a. w. thompson, northampton, mass., says: “i have test the gluten 
suppositories, and consider them valuable, as indeed i expect from the 
excellence of their theory.” 

dr. wm. todd helmuth declare the gluten suppository to be “the best 
remedy for constipation which i have ever prescribed.” 

as sancho panza said of sleep, so say i of your gluten suppositories: 
“god bless the man who invent them!”—e. l. ripley, burlington, vt. 

“i prescribe the gluten suppository almost daily in my practice, and 
am often astonish at the permanent result obtained.”—j. montfort 
schley, m. d., professor physical diagnosis woman’s medical college, new 
york city. 

health food co., 76 4th avenue, n. y. 

* * * * * 


neuralgine, the great pain cure. 

one application of neuralgine remove in many case the most 
excruciating pain—the worst case rarely need more than two or three. 

=sufferers= should at once send for this invaluable =remedy=. 

price 50 cts. per bottle. 

for sale by all druggists, or will be sent by mail to any address, 
postage paid. 

neuralgine company, 

26 vandewater street, new york. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------ 




transcriber’s note 


1. silent correct typographic error and variation in spelling. 
2. retain anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spelling as 
printed. 
3. enclose italics font in _underscores_. 
4. enclose bold font in =equals=. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of ten days in a mad-house;, by nellie b 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook ten days in a mad-house; *** 

***** this file should be name 59899-0.txt or 59899-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/8/9/59899/ 

produce by richard tonsing, tim lindell, and the online 
distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net (this 
file was produce from image generous made available 
by the internet archive) 


update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition will 
be renamed. 

create the works from print edition not protect by u.s. copyright 
law means that no one own a united states copyright in these works, 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united 
states without permission and without pay copyright 
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part 
of this license, apply to copy and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the project gutenberg-tm 
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a register trademark, 
and may not be use if you charge for the ebooks, unless you receive 
specific permission. if you do not charge anything for copy of this 
ebook, comply with the rule is very easy. you may use this ebook 
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, 
performance and research. they may be modify and print and given 
away--you may do practically anything in the united states with ebook 
not protect by u.s. copyright law. redistribute is subject to the 
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. 

start: full license 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase "project 
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full 
project gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at 
www.gutenberg.org/license. 

section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or 
destroy all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your 
possession. if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a 
project gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound 
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the 
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 
1.e.8. 

1.b. "project gutenberg" is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this 
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the 
foundation" or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection 
of project gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual 
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united 
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the 
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not 
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, 
display or create derivative works base on the work as long as 
all reference to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope 
that you will support the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote 
free access to electronic works by freely share project gutenberg-tm 
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the 
project gutenberg-tm name associate with the work. you can easily 
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the 
same format with its attach full project gutenberg-tm license when 
you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are 
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, 
check the law of your country in addition to the terms of this 
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, 
distribute or create derivative works base on this work or any 
other project gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no 
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any 
country outside the united states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other 
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear 
prominent whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work 
on which the phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the 
phrase "project gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, 
performed, viewed, copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no 
restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it 
under the terms of the project gutenberg license included with this 
ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the 
united states, you'll have to check the law of the country where you 
are located before use this ebook. 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is 
derive from text not protect by u.s. copyright law (does not 
contain a notice indicate that it is post with permission of the 
copyright holder), the work can be copy and distribute to anyone in 
the united states without pay any fee or charges. if you are 
redistribute or providing access to a work with the phrase "project 
gutenberg" associate with or appear on the work, you must comply 
either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or 
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any 
additional terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms 
will be link to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works 
post with the permission of the copyright holder found at the 
beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including 
any word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access 
to or distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format 
other than "plain vanilla ascii" or other format use in the official 
version post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site 
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense 
to the user, provide a copy, a means of export a copy, or a means 
of obtain a copy upon request, of the work in its original "plain 
vanilla ascii" or other form. any alternate format must include the 
full project gutenberg-tm license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
provided that 

* you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owe 
to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has 
agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment must be paid 
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are 
legal require to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty 
payment should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specify in 
section 4, "information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation." 

* you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all 
copy of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue 
all use of and all access to other copy of project gutenberg-tm 
works. 

* you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of 
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days of 
receipt of the work. 

* you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than 
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing 
from both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and the 
project gutenberg trademark llc, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm 
trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
works not protect by u.s. copyright law in create the project 
gutenberg-tm collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may 
contain "defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate 
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other 
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damage disk or 
other medium, a computer virus, or computer code that damage or 
cannot be read by your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right 
of replacement or refund" describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium 
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you 
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in 
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person 
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second 
opportunity to receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if 
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 
without further opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no 
other warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not 
limited to warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of 
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement 
violate the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the 
agreement shall be interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or 
limitation permit by the applicable state law. the invalid or 
unenforceable of any provision of this agreement shall not void the 
remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in 
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the 
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, 
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirect from any of 
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this 
or any project gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or 
addition or deletion to any project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any 
defect you cause. 

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of 
computer including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it 
exist because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation 
from people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need are critical to reach project gutenberg-tm's 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future 
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation and how your effort and donation can help, see 
section 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at 
www.gutenberg.org section 3. information about the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation's ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. contribution to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent permit by 
u.s. federal law and your state's laws. 

the foundation's principal office is in fairbanks, alaska, with the 
mail address: po box 750175, fairbanks, ak 99775, but its 
volunteer and employee are scattered throughout numerous 
locations. its business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt 
lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up to 
date contact information can be found at the foundation's web site and 
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact 

for additional contact information: 

dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 

section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send 
donation or determine the status of compliance for any particular 
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. to 
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate 

section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic works. 

professor michael s. hart was the originate of the project 
gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be 
freely share with anyone. for forty years, he produce and 
distribute project gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of 
volunteer support. 

project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protect by copyright in 
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not 
necessarily keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper 
edition. 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search 
facility: www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 

