the project gutenberg ebook of clarimonde, by théophile gautier 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 


title: clarimonde 

author: théophile gautier 

translator: lafcadio hearn 

release date: september 18, 2007 [ebook #22661] 
last updated: october 1, 2016 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook clarimonde *** 




produce by david widger 





clarimonde 

by théophile gautier 

translate by lafcadio hearn 

1908 

preface 
brother, you ask me if i have ever loved. yes. my story is a strange and 
terrible one; and though i am sixty-six years of age, i scarcely dare 
even now to disturb the ashes of that memory. to you i can refuse 
nothing; but i should not relate such a tale to any less experienced 
mind. so strange were the circumstances of my story, that i can scarcely 
believe myself to have ever actually been a party to them. for more 
than three years i remain the victim of a most singular and diabolical 
illusion. poor country priest though i was, i led every night in a 
dream--would to god it had been all a dream!--a most worldly life, a 
damning life, a life of sardanapalus. one single look too freely cast 
upon a woman well-nigh cause me to lose my soul; but finally by the 
grace of god and the assistance of my patron saint, i succeed in 
casting out the evil spirit that possessed me. my daily life was long 
interwoven with a nocturnal life of a total different character. by 
day i was a priest of the lord, occupy with prayer and sacred things; 
by night, from the instant that i closed my eyes i became a young 
nobleman, a fine connoisseur in women, dogs, and horses; gambling, 
drinking, and blaspheming; and when i awoke at early daybreak, it seem 
to me, on the other hand, that i had been sleeping, and had only dream 
that i was a priest. of this somnambulistic life there now remains to me 
only the recollection of certain scene and words which i cannot banish 
from my memory; but although i never actually left the wall of my 
presbytery, one would think to hear me speak that i were a man who, 
weary of all worldly pleasures, had become a religious, seek to end a 
tempestuous life in the service of god, rather than a humble seminarist 
who has grown old in this obscure curacy, situated in the depths of the 
wood and even isolated from the life of the century. 

yes, i have love as none in the world ever loved--with an insensate 
and furious passion--so violent that i am astonish it did not cause my 
heart to burst asunder. ah, what nights--what nights! 

from my earliest childhood i had felt a vocation to the priesthood, so 
that all my study were direct with that idea in view. up to the 
age of twenty-four my life had been only a prolonged novitiate. have 
complete my course of theology i successive received all the minor 
orders, and my superior judge me worthy, despite my youth, to pass the 
last awful degree. my ordination was fixed for easter week. 

i had never gone into the world. my world was confine by the wall of 
the college and the seminary. i knew in a vague sort of a way that there 
was something call woman, but i never permit my thought to dwell 
on such a subject, and i live in a state of perfect innocence. twice 
a year only i saw my infirm and age mother, and in those visit were 
comprise my sole relations with the outer world. 

i regret nothing; i felt not the least hesitation at taking the last 
irrevocable step; i was fill with joy and impatience. never did a 
betrothed lover count the slow hour with more feverish ardour; i slept 
only to dream that i was saying mass; i believe there could be nothing 
in the world more delightful than to be a priest; i would have refuse 
to be a king or a poet in preference. my ambition could conceive of no 
lofty aim. 

i tell you this in order to show you that what happen to me could 
not have happen in the natural order of things, and to enable you to 
understand that i was the victim of an inexplicable fascination. 

at last the great day came. i walk to the church with a step so light 
that i fancy myself sustain in air, or that i had wings upon my 
shoulders. i believe myself an angel, and wonder at the sombre and 
thoughtful face of my companions, for there were several of us. i 
had pass all the night in prayer, and was in a condition wellnigh 
border on ecstasy. the bishop, a venerable old man, seem to me god 
the father leaning over his eternity, and i beheld heaven through the 
vault of the temple. 

you well know the detail of that ceremony--the benediction, the 
communion under both forms, the anoint of the palm of the hand with 
the oil of catechumens, and then the holy sacrifice offer in concert 
with the bishop. 

ah, truly spake job when he declared that the imprudent man is one who 
hath not made a covenant with his eyes! i accidental lift my head, 
which until then i had kept down, and beheld before me, so close that 
it seem that i could have touched her--although she was actually a 
considerable distance from me and on the further side of the sanctuary 
railing--a young woman of extraordinary beauty, and attire with royal 
magnificence. it seem as though scale had sudden fallen from my 
eyes. i felt like a blind man who unexpected recover his sight. the 
bishop, so radiant glorious but an instant before, sudden vanish 
away, the taper pale upon their golden candlestick like stars in the 
dawn, and a vast dark seem to fill the whole church. the charming 
creature appear in bright relief against the background of that 
darkness, like some angel revelation. she seem herself radiant, and 
radiate light rather than receiving it. 

i lower my eyelids, firm resolve not to again open them, that 
i might not be influence by external objects, for distraction had 
gradual taken possession of me until i hardly knew what i was doing. 

in another minute, nevertheless, i reopen my eyes, for through my 
eyelash i still beheld her, all sparkle with prismatic colours, and 
surround with such a penumbra as one behold in gaze at the sun. 

oh, how beautiful she was! the greatest painters, who follow ideal 
beauty into heaven itself, and thence brought back to earth the true 
portrait of the madonna, never in their delineate even approach 
that wildly beautiful reality which i saw before me. neither the verse 
of the poet nor the palette of the artist could convey any conception 
of her. she was rather tall, with a form and bearing of a goddess. her 
hair, of a soft blonde hue, was part in the midst and flow back over 
her temple in two river of ripple gold; she seem a diadem 
queen. her forehead, bluish-white in its transparency, extend its calm 
breadth above the arch of her eyebrows, which by a strange singular 
were almost black, and admirable relieved the effect of sea-green eyes 
of unsustainable vivace and brilliancy. what eyes! with a single flash 
they could have decided a man’s destiny. they had a life, a limpidity, 
an ardour, a humid light which i have never seen in human eyes; they 
shot forth ray like arrows, which i could distinct _see_ enter my 
heart. i know not if the fire which illumine them came from heaven or 
from hell, but assured it came from one or the other. that woman was 
either an angel or a demon, perhaps both. assured she never sprang 
from the flank of eve, our common mother. teeth of the most lustrous 
pearl gleam in her ruddy smile, and at every inflection of her lip 
little dimple appear in the satiny rose of her adorable cheeks. there 
was a delicacy and pride in the regal outline of her nostril bespeak 
noble blood. agate gleam play over the smooth lustrous skin of her 
half-bare shoulders, and strings of great blonde pearls--almost equal 
to her neck in beauty of colour--descended upon her bosom. from time 
to time she elevated her head with the undulate grace of a startle 
serpent or peacock, thereby impart a quiver motion to the high 
lace ruff which surround it like a silver trellis-work. 

she wore a robe of orange-red velvet, and from her wide ermine-lined 
sleeve there peep forth patrician hand of infinite delicacy, and so 
ideally transparent that, like the finger of aurora, they permit the 
light to shine through them. 

all these detail i can recollect at this moment as plainly as though 
they were of yesterday, for notwithstanding i was greatly trouble at 
the time, nothing escape me; the faintest touch of shading, the little 
dark speck at the point of the chin, the imperceptible down at the 
corner of the lips, the velvety floss upon the brow, the quiver 
shadow of the eyelash upon the cheeks--i could notice everything with 
astonish lucid of perception. 

and gaze i felt opening within me gate that had until then remain 
closed; vent long obstruct became all clear, permit glimpse of 
unfamiliar perspective within; life sudden made itself visible to me 
under a total novel aspect. i felt as though i had just been born into 
a new world and a new order of things. a frightful anguish commence to 
torture-my heart as with red-hot pincers. every successive minute seem 
to me at once but a second and yet a century. meanwhile the ceremony was 
proceeding, and i shortly found myself transport far from that world 
of which my newly born desire were furiously besiege the entrance. 
nevertheless i answer ‘yes’ when i wish to say ‘no,’ though all 
within me protest against the violence done to my soul by my tongue. 
some occult power seem to force the words from my throat against my 
will. thus it is, perhaps, that so many young girl walk to the altar 
firm resolve to refuse in a startle manner the husband impose 
upon them, and that yet not one ever fulfil her intention. thus it is, 
doubtless, that so many poor novice take the veil, though they have 
resolve to tear it into shred at the moment when call upon to utter 
the vows. one dare not thus cause so great a scandal to all present, 
nor deceive the expectation of so many people. all those eyes, all those 
will seem to weigh down upon you like a cope of lead, and, moreover, 
measure have been so well taken, everything has been so thorough 
arrange beforehand and after a fashion so evidently irrevocable, that 
the will yield to the weight of circumstances and utterly break down. 

as the ceremony proceed the features of the fair unknown change their 
expression. her look had at first been one of caress tenderness; 
it change to an air of disdain and of mortification, as though at not 
have been able to make itself understood. 

with an effort of will sufficient to have uproot a mountain, i strove 
to cry out that i would not be a priest, but i could not speak; my 
tongue seem nail to my palate, and i found it impossible to express 
my will by the least syllable of negation. though fully awake, i felt 
like one under the influence of a nightmare, who vain strive to 
shriek out the one word upon which life depends. 

she seem conscious of the martyrdom i was undergoing, and, as though 
to encourage me, she gave me a look replete with divinest promise. her 
eyes were a poem; their every glance was a song. 

she said to me: 

‘if thou wilt be mine, i shall make thee happy than god himself in his 
paradise. the angel themselves will be jealous of thee. tear off that 
funeral shroud in which thou art about to wrap thyself. i am beauty, i 
am youth, i am life. come to me! together we shall be love. can jehovah 
offer thee aught in exchange? our lives will flow on like a dream, in 
one eternal kiss. 

‘fling forth the wine of that chalice, and thou art free. i will conduct 
thee to the unknown isles. thou shalt sleep in my bosom upon a bed of 
massy gold under a silver pavilion, for i love thee and would take thee 
away from thy god, before whom so many noble heart pour forth flood of 
love which never reach even the steps of his throne!’ 

these words seem to float to my ear in a rhythm of infinite 
sweetness, for her look was actually sonorous, and the utterance of her 
eyes were reecho in the depths of my heart as though living lip had 
breathe them into my life. i felt myself willing to renounce god, 
and yet my tongue mechanical fulfill all the formality of 
the ceremony. the fair one gave me another look, so beseeching, so 
despairing that keen blade seem to pierce my heart, and i felt my 
bosom transfix by more sword than those of our lady of sorrows. 

all was consummated; i had become a priest. 

never was deep anguish paint on human face than upon hers. the 
maiden who behold her affiance lover sudden fall dead at her side, 
the mother bend over the empty cradle of her child, eve seat at 
the threshold of the gate of paradise, the miser who find a stone 
substitute for his stolen treasure, the poet who accidental permit 
the only manuscript of his finest work to fall into the fire, could not 
wear a look so despairing, so inconsolable. all the blood had abandoned 
her charming face, leave it white than marble; her beautiful arms 
hung lifeless on either side of her body as though their muscle 
had sudden relaxed, and she sought the support of a pillar, for her 
yielding limb almost betray her. as for myself, i stagger toward 
the door of the church, livid as death, my forehead bath with a sweat 
bloody than that of calvary; i felt as though i were being strangled; 
the vault seem to have flatten down upon my shoulders, and it seem 
to me that my head alone sustain the whole weight of the dome. 

as i was about to cross the threshold a hand sudden caught mine--a 
woman’s hand! i had never till then touched the hand of any woman. 
it was cold as a serpent’s skin, and yet its impress remain upon my 
wrist, burnt there as though brand by a glowing iron. it was she. 
‘unhappy man! unhappy man! what hast thou done?’ she exclaim in a low 
voice, and immediately disappear in the crowd. 

the age bishop pass by. he cast a severe and scrutinise look upon 
me. my face present the wildest aspect imaginable: i blush and 
turn pale alternately; dazzle lights flash before my eyes. a 
companion took pity on me. he seize my arm and led me out. i could 
not possibly have found my way back to the seminary unassisted. at the 
corner of a street, while the young priest’s attention was momentarily 
turn in another direction, a negro page, fantastic garbed, 
approach me, and without pause on his way slip into my hand 
a little pocket-book with gold-embroidered corners, at the same time 
give me a sign to hide it. i conceal it in my sleeve, and there kept 
it until i found myself alone in my cell. then i open the clasp. there 
were only two leaves within, bearing the words, ‘clarimonde. at the 
concini palace.’ so little acquaint was i at that time with the things 
of this world that i had never heard of clarimonde, celebrated as she 
was, and i had no idea as to where the concini palace was situated. i 
hazard a thousand conjectures, each more extravagant than the last; 
but, in truth, i care little whether she were a great lady or a 
courtesan, so that i could but see her once more. 

my love, although the growth of a single hour, had taken imperishable 
root. i did not even dream of attempt to tear it up, so fully was i 
convinced such a thing would be impossible. that woman had completely 
taken possession of me. one look from her had suffice to change my very 
nature. she had breathe her will into my life, and i no long live 
in myself, but in her and for her. i gave myself up to a thousand 
extravagancies. i kiss the place upon my hand which she had touched, 
and i repeated her name over and over again for hour in succession. i 
only need to close my eyes in order to see her distinct as though 
she were actually present; and i reiterate to myself the words she had 
utter in my ear at the church porch: ‘unhappy man! unhappy man! what 
hast thou done?’ i comprehend at last the full horror of my situation, 
and the funereal and awful restraint of the state into which i had just 
enter became clearly reveal to me. to be a priest!--that is, to be 
chaste, to never love, to observe no distinction of sex or age, to turn 
from the sight of all beauty, to put out one’s own eyes, to hide for 
ever crouch in the chill shadow of some church or cloister, to visit 
none but the dying, to watch by unknown corpses, and ever bear about 
with one the black soutane as a garb of mourning for oneself, so that 
your very dress might serve as a pall for your coffin. 

and i felt life rising within me like a subterranean lake, expand 
and overflowing; my blood leap fierce through my arteries; my 
long-restrained youth sudden burst into active being, like the aloe 
which bloom but once in a hundred years, and then burst into blossom 
with a clap of thunder. 

what could i do in order to see clarimonde once more? i had no pretext 
to offer for desire to leave the seminary, not knowing any person in 
the city. i would not even be able to remain there but a short time, 
and was only wait my assignment to the curacy which i must thereafter 
occupy. i try to remove the bar of the window; but it was at a 
fearful height from the ground, and i found that as i had no ladder it 
would be useless to think of escape thus. and, furthermore, i could 
descend thence only by night in any event, and afterward how should i be 
able to find my way through the inextricable labyrinth of streets? 
all these difficulties, which to many would have appear altogether 
insignificant, were gigantic to me, a poor seminarist who had fallen in 
love only the day before for the first time, without experience, without 
money, without attire. 

‘ah!’ cry i to myself in my blindness, ‘were i not a priest i could 
have seen her every day; i might have been her lover, her spouse. 
instead of being wrap in this dismal shroud of mine i would have had 
garment of silk and velvet, golden chains, a sword, and fair plume 
like other handsome young cavaliers. my hair, instead of being 
dishonour by the tonsure, would flow down upon my neck in wave 
curls; i would have a fine wax moustache; i would be a gallant.’ but 
one hour pass before an altar, a few hasty articulated words, had 
for ever cut me off from the number of the living, and i had myself 
seal down the stone of my own tomb; i had with my own hand bolt the 
gate of my prison! i went to the window. the sky was beautiful blue; 
the tree had don their spring robes; nature seem to be making 
parade of an ironic joy. the _place_ was fill with people, some 
going, other coming; young beaux and young beauty were saunter in 
couple toward the grove and gardens; merry youth pass by, cheery 
troll refrain of drinking-songs--it was all a picture of vivacity, 
life, animation, gaiety, which form a bitter contrast with my mourning 
and my solitude. on the steps of the gate sat a young mother play 
with her child. she kiss its little rosy mouth still impearle with 
drops of milk, and performed, in order to amuse it, a thousand divine 
little puerility such as only mother know how to invent. the father 
standing at a little distance smile gently upon the charming group, and 
with fold arms seem to hug his joy to his heart. i could not endure 
that spectacle. i closed the window with violence, and flung myself on 
my bed, my heart fill with frightful hate and jealousy, and gnaw my 
finger and my bedcover like a tiger that has pass ten days without 
food. 

i know not how long i remain in this condition, but at last, while 
writhe on the bed in a fit of spasmodic fury, i sudden perceive 
the abbé sérapion, who was standing erect in the centre of the room, 
watch me attentively. fill with shame of myself, i let my head fall 
upon my breast and cover my face with my hands. 

‘romuald, my friend, something very extraordinary is transpire within 
you,’ observe sérapion, after a few moments’ silence; ‘your conduct is 
altogether inexplicable. you--always so quiet, so pious, so gentle--you 
to rage in your cell like a wild beast! take heed, brother--do not 
listen to the suggestion of the devil the evil spirit, furious that you 
have consecrate yourself for ever to the lord, is prowl around you 
like a ravening wolf and making a last effort to obtain possession of 
you. instead of allow yourself to be conquered, my dear romuald, 
make to yourself a cuirass of prayers, a buckler of mortifications, and 
combat the enemy like a valiant man; you will then assured overcome 
him. virtue must be prove by temptation, and gold come forth pure 
from the hand of the assayer. fear not. never allow yourself to become 
discouraged. the most watchful and steadfast soul are at moments liable 
to such temptation. pray, fast, meditate, and the evil spirit will 
depart from you.’ 

the words of the abbé sérapion restore me to myself, and i became a 
little more calm. ‘i came,’ he continued, ‘to tell you that you have 
been appoint to the curacy of c------. the priest who had charge of 
it has just died, and monseigneur the bishop has ordered me to have you 
install there at once. be ready, therefore, to start to-morrow.’ 
i respond with an inclination of the head, and the abbé retired. i 
open my missal and commence reading some prayers, but the letters 
became confuse and blur under my eyes, the thread of the idea 
entangle itself hopeless in my brain, and the volume at last fell 
from my hand without my being aware of it. 

to leave to-morrow without have been able to see her again, to add yet 
another barrier to the many already interpose between us, to lose 
for ever all hope of being able to meet her, except, indeed, through a 
miracle! even to write to her, alas! would be impossible, for by whom 
could i dispatch my letter? with my sacred character of priest, to whom 
could i dare unbosom myself, in whom could i confide? i became a prey to 
the bitterest anxiety. 

then sudden recur to me the words of the abbé sérapion regarding 
the artifice of the devil; and the strange character of the adventure, 
the supernatural beauty of clarimonde, the phosphoric light of her eyes, 
the burning imprint of her hand, the agony into which she had thrown 
me, the sudden change wrought within me when all my piety vanish in a 
single instant--these and other things clearly testify to the work 
of the evil one, and perhaps that satiny hand was but the glove which 
conceal his claws. fill with terror at these fancies, i again picked 
up the missal which had slip from my knee and fallen upon the floor, 
and once more gave myself up to prayer. 

next morning sérapion came to take me away. two mule freight with 
our miserable valise await us at the gate. he mount one, and i the 
other as well as i knew how. 

as we pass along the street of the city, i gaze attentive at all 
the window and balcony in the hope of seeing clarimonde, but it was 
yet early in the morning, and the city had hardly open its eyes. mine 
sought to penetrate the blind and window-curtains of all the palace 
before which we were passing. sérapion doubtless attribute this 
curiosity to my admiration of the architecture, for he slacken the 
pace of his animal in order to give me time to look around me. at last 
we pass the city gate and commence to mount the hill beyond. when 
we arrive at its summit i turn to take a last look at the place where 
clarimonde dwelt. the shadow of a great cloud hung over all the city; 
the contrast colours of its blue and red roof were lost in the 
uniform half-tint, through which here and there float upward, like 
white flake of foam, the smoke of freshly kindle fires. by a 
singular optical effect one edifice, which surpass in height all the 
neighbouring building that were still dim veiled by the vapours, 
tower up, fair and lustrous with the gilding of a solitary beam of 
sunlight--although actually more than a league away it seem 
quite near. the smallest detail of its architecture were plainly 
distinguishable--the turrets, the platforms, the window-casements, and 
even the swallow-tailed weather-vanes. 

‘what is that palace i see over there, all light up by the sun?’ i 
ask sérapion. he shade his eyes with his hand, and have look in 
the direction indicated, replied: ‘it is the ancient palace which the 
prince concini has given to the courtesan clarimonde. awful things are 
done there!’ 

at that instant, i know not yet whether it was a reality or an illusion, 
i fancy i saw gliding along the terrace a shapely white figure, 
which gleam for a moment in passing and as quick vanished. it was 
clarimonde. 

oh, did she know that at that very hour, all feverish and restless--from 
the height of the rugged road which separate me from her, and which, 
alas! i could never more descend--i was direct my eyes upon the 
palace where she dwelt, and which a mock beam of sunlight seem to 
bring nigh to me, as though inviting me to enter therein as its lord? 
undoubted she must have known it, for her soul was too sympathetic 
united with mine not to have felt its least emotional thrill, and that 
subtle sympathy it must have been which prompt her to climb--although 
clad only in her nightdress--to the summit of the terrace, amid the icy 
dew of the morning. 

the shadow gain the palace, and the scene became to the eye only 
a motionless ocean of roof and gables, amid which one mountainous 
undulation was distinct visible. sérapion urge his mule forward, my 
own at once follow at the same gait, and a sharp angle in the road at 
last hid the city of s------ for ever from my eyes, as i was destined 
never to return thither. at the close of a weary three-days’ journey 
through dismal country fields, we caught sight of the cock upon the 
steeple of the church which i was to take charge of, peep above 
the trees, and after have follow some winding road fringe with 
thatch cottage and little gardens, we found ourselves in front of the 
façade, which certainly possessed few features of magnificence. a porch 
ornament with some mouldings, and two or three pillar rudely hewn 
from sandstone; a tile roof with counterfort of the same sandstone as 
the pillars--that was all. to the left lay the cemetery, overgrown with 
high weeds, and have a great iron cross rising up in its centre; to 
the right stood the presbytery under the shadow of the church. it was a 
house of the most extreme simplicity and frigid cleanliness. we enter 
the enclosure. a few chicken were pick up some oats scattered upon 
the ground; accustomed, seemingly, to the black habit of ecclesiastics, 
they show no fear of our presence and scarcely trouble themselves to 
get out of our way. a hoarse, wheezy bark fell upon our ears, and we 
saw an age dog running toward us. 

it was my predecessor’s dog. he had dull bleare eyes, grizzled hair, 
and every mark of the greatest age to which a dog can possibly attain. 
i pat him gently, and he proceed at once to march along beside me 
with an air of satisfaction unspeakable. a very old woman, who had been 
the housekeeper of the former curé, also came to meet us, and after 
have invite me into a little back parlour, ask whether i intended 
to retain her. i reply that i would take care of her, and the dog, and 
the chickens, and all the furniture her master had bequeath her at 
his death. at this she became fairly transport with joy, and the 
abbé sérapion at once paid her the price which she ask for her little 
property. 

as soon as my installation was over, the abbé sérapion return to the 
seminary. i was, therefore, left alone, with no one but myself to look 
to for aid or counsel. the thought of clarimonde again began to haunt 
me, and in spite of all my endeavour to banish it, i always found it 
present in my meditations. one evening, while promenade in my little 
garden along the walk border with box-plants, i fancy that i saw 
through the elm-trees the figure of a woman, who follow my every 
movement, and that i beheld two sea-green eyes gleam through the 
foliage; but it was only an illusion, and on go round to the other 
side of the garden, i could find nothing except a footprint on the 
sand walk--a footprint so small that it seem to have been made 
by the foot of a child. the garden was enclose by very high walls. i 
search every nook and corner of it, but could discover no one there. 
i have never succeed in fully account for this circumstance, which, 
after all, was nothing compare with the strange things which happen 
to me afterward. 

for a whole year i live thus, filling all the duty of my calling 
with the most scrupulous exactitude, pray and fasting, exhort and 
lend ghostly aid to the sick, and bestow alms even to the extent 
of frequent deprive myself of the very necessaries of life. but i 
felt a great arid within me, and the source of grace seem closed 
against me. i never found that happiness which should spring from the 
fulfilment of a holy mission; my thought were far away, and the words 
of clarimonde were ever upon my lip like an involuntary refrain. oh, 
brother, meditate well on this! through have but once lift my eyes 
to look upon a woman, through one fault apparently so venial, i have for 
years remain a victim to the most miserable agonies, and the happiness 
of my life has been destroy for ever. 

i will not long dwell upon those defeats, or on those inward victory 
invariable follow by yet more terrible falls, but will at once proceed 
to the fact of my story. one night my door-bell was long and violent 
rung. the age housekeeper arose and open to the stranger, and the 
figure of a man, whose complexion was deep bronzed, and who was richly 
clad in a foreign costume, with a poniard at his girdle, appear under 
the ray of barbara’s lantern. her first impulse was one of terror, but 
the stranger reassure her, and state that he desire to see me at once 
on matter relate to my holy calling. barbara invite him upstairs, 
where i was on the point of retiring. the stranger told me that his 
mistress, a very noble lady, was lie at the point of death, and 
desire to see a priest. i reply that i was prepared to follow him, 
took with me the sacred articles necessary for extreme unction, and 
descended in all haste. two horse black as the night itself stood 
without the gate, paw the ground with impatience, and veil their 
chest with long stream of smoky vapour exhale from their nostrils. he 
held the stirrup and aid me to mount upon one; then, merely lay his 
hand upon the pommel of the saddle, he vaulted on the other, pressed 
the animal’s side with his knees, and loosen rein. the horse bound 
forward with the velocity of an arrow. mine, of which the stranger held 
the bridle, also start off at a swift gallop, keeping up with his 
companion. we devour the road. the ground flow backward beneath us 
in a long streak line of pale gray, and the black silhouette of 
the tree seem flee by us on either side like an army in rout. we 
pass through a forest so profound gloomy that i felt my flesh creep 
in the chill dark with superstitious fear. the shower of bright 
sparks which flew from the stony road under the ironshod feet of our 
horse remain glowing in our wake like a fiery trail; and had any one 
at that hour of the night beheld us both--my guide and myself--he must 
have taken us for two spectre riding upon nightmares. witch-fires ever 
and anon flit across the road before us, and the night-birds 
shriek fearsome in the depth of the wood beyond, where we beheld 
at interval glow the phosphorescent eyes of wild cats. the mane of the 
horse became more and more dishevelled, the sweat stream over their 
flanks, and their breath came through their nostril hard and fast. but 
when he found them slack pace, the guide reanimate them by utter 
a strange, gutteral, unearthly cry, and the gallop recommence with 
fury. at last the whirlwind race ceased; a huge black mass pierce 
through with many bright points of light sudden rose before us, the 
hoof of our horse echo loud upon a strong wooden drawbridge, and 
we rode under a great vaulted archway which dark yawn between two 
enormous towers. some great excitement evidently reign in the castle. 
servant with torch were crossing the courtyard in every direction, 
and above lights were ascend and descend from landing to landing. 
i obtain a confuse glimpse of vast masses of architecture--columns, 
arcades, flight of steps, stairways--a royal voluptuous and elfin 
magnificence of construction worthy of fairyland. a negro page--the 
same who had before brought me the tablet from clarimonde, and whom 
i instantly recognised--approached to aid me in dismounting, and the 
major-domo, attire in black velvet with a gold chain about his neck, 
advanced to meet me, support himself upon an ivory cane. large tear 
were fall from his eyes and stream over his cheek and white 
beard. ‘too late!’ he cried, sorrowful shake his venerable head. 
‘too late, sir priest! but if you have not been able to save the soul, 
come at least to watch by the poor body.’ 

he took my arm and conduct me to the death-chamber. i wept not less 
bitter than he, for i had learned that the dead one was none other 
than that clarimonde whom i had so deep and so wildly loved. a 
_prie-dieu_ stood at the foot of the bed; a bluish flame flicker in a 
bronze patern fill all the room with a wan, deceptive light, here 
and there bring out in the dark at interval some projection 
of furniture or cornice. in a chisel urn upon the table there was a 
fade white rose, whose leaves--excepting one that still held--had all 
fallen, like odorous tears, to the foot of the vase. a broken black 
mask, a fan, and disguise of every variety, which were lie on the 
armchairs, bore witness that death had enter sudden and unannounced 
into that sumptuous dwelling. without daring to cast my eyes upon the 
bed, i knelt down and commence to repeat the psalms for the dead, with 
exceed fervour, thank god that he had placed the tomb between 
me and the memory of this woman, so that i might thereafter be able to 
utter her name in my prayer as a name for ever sanctify by death. 
but my fervour gradual weakened, and i fell insensible into a reverie. 
that chamber bore no semblance to a chamber of death. in lieu of the 
fetid and cadaverous odour which i had been accustomed to breathe 
during such funereal vigils, a languorous vapour of oriental perfume--i 
know not what amorous odour of woman--softly float through the tepid 
air. that pale light seem rather a twilight gloom contrived for 
voluptuous pleasure, than a substitute for the yellow-flickering 
watch-tapers which shine by the side of corpses. i thought upon the 
strange destiny which enable me to meet clarimonde again at the very 
moment when she was lost to me for ever, and a sigh of regretful anguish 
escape from my breast. then it seem to me that some one behind me 
had also sighed, and i turn round to look. it was only an echo. but in 
that moment my eyes fell upon the bed of death which they had till then 
avoided. the red damask curtains, decorate with large flower work in 
embroidery and loop up with gold bullion, permit me to behold the 
fair dead, lie at full length, with hand join upon her bosom. she 
was cover with a linen wrapping of dazzle whiteness, which form 
a strong contrast with the gloomy purple of the hangings, and was of so 
fine a texture that it conceal nothing of her body’s charming form, 
and allow the eye to follow those beautiful outlines--undulating like 
the neck of a swan--which even death had not rob of their supple 
grace. she seem an alabaster statue execute by some skilful sculptor 
to place upon the tomb of a queen, or rather, perhaps, like a slumber 
maiden over whom the silent snow had woven a spotless veil. 

i could no long maintain my constrained attitude of prayer. the air 
of the alcove intoxicate me, that febrile perfume of half-faded rose 
penetrate my very brain, and i commence to pace restless up and down 
the chamber, pause at each turn before the bier to contemplate the 
graceful corpse lie beneath the transparency of its shroud. wild 
fancies came throng to my brain. i thought to myself that she might 
not, perhaps, be really dead; that she might only have feign death for 
the purpose of bring me to her castle, and then declare her love. 
at one time i even thought i saw her foot move under the white of 
the coverings, and slightly disarrange the long straight fold of the 
winding-sheet. 

and then i ask myself: ‘is this indeed clarimonde? what proof have i 
that it is she? might not that black page have pass into the service 
of some other lady? surely, i must be go mad to torture and afflict 
myself thus!’ but my heart answer with a fierce throbbing: ‘it is she; 
it is she indeed!’ i approach the bed again, and fixed my eyes with 
redouble attention upon the object of my incertitude. ah, must i 
confess it? that exquisite perfection of bodily form, although purify 
and made sacred by the shadow of death, affected me more voluptuous 
than it should have done; and that repose so close resemble slumber 
that one might well have mistaken it for such. i forgot that i had come 
there to perform a funeral ceremony; i fancy myself a young bridegroom 
enter the chamber of the bride, who all modest hide her fair face, 
and through coy seek to keep herself wholly veiled. heartbroken 
with grief, yet wild with hope, shudder at once with fear and 
pleasure, i bent over her and grasp the corner of the sheet. i lift 
it back, holding my breath all the while through fear of waking her. my 
artery throb with such violence that i felt them hiss through my 
temples, and the sweat pour from my forehead in streams, as though i 
had lift a mighty slab of marble. there, indeed, lay clarimonde, even 
as i had seen her at the church on the day of my ordination. she was not 
less charming than then. with her, death seem but a last coquetry. the 
pallor of her cheeks, the less brilliant carnation of her lips, her long 
eyelash lower and relieve their dark fringe against that white 
skin, lent her an unspeakable seductive aspect of melancholy chastity 
and mental suffering; her long loose hair, still intertwine with some 
little blue flowers, made a shining pillow for her head, and veiled the 
nudity of her shoulder with its thick ringlets; her beautiful hands, 
purer, more diaphanous, than the host, were cross on her bosom in an 
attitude of pious rest and silent prayer, which serve to counteract all 
that might have proven otherwise too alluring--even after death--in the 
exquisite round and ivory polish of her bare arms from which the 
pearl bracelets had not yet been removed. i remain long in mute 
contemplation, and the more i gazed, the less could i persuade myself 
that life had really abandoned that beautiful body for ever. i do not 
know whether it was an illusion or a reflection of the lamplight, but it 
seem to me that the blood was again commence to circulate under that 
lifeless pallor, although she remain all motionless. i laid my hand 
lightly on her arm; it was cold, but not cold than her hand on the 
day when it touched mine at the portals of the church. i resume my 
position, bend my face above her, and bathing her cheek with the warm 
dew of my tears. ah, what bitter feelings of despair and helplessness, 
what agony unutterable did i endure in that long watch! vain did i 
wish that i could have gather all my life into one mass that i might 
give it all to her, and breathe into her chill remains the flame which 
devour me. the night advanced, and feeling the moment of eternal 
separation approach, i could not deny myself the last sad sweet pleasure 
of imprint a kiss upon the dead lip of her who had been my only 
love.... oh, miracle! a faint breath mingle itself with my breath, and 
the mouth of clarimonde respond to the passionate pressure of mine. 
her eyes unclosed, and light up with something of their former 
brilliancy; she utter a long sigh, and uncross her arms, pass 
them around my neck with a look of ineffable delight. ‘ah, it is thou, 
romuald!’ she murmur in a voice languishing sweet as the last 
vibration of a harp. ‘what ail thee, dearest? i wait so long for 
thee that i am dead; but we are now betrothed: i can see thee and visit 
thee. adieu, romuald, adieu! i love thee. that is all i wish to 
tell thee, and i give thee back the life which thy kiss for a moment 
recalled. we shall soon meet again.’ 

her head fell back, but her arms yet encircle me, as though to retain 
me still. a furious whirlwind sudden burst in the window, and enter 
the chamber. the last remain leaf of the white rose for a moment 
palpitate at the extremity of the stalk like a butterfly’s wing, then 
it detached itself and flew forth through the open casement, bearing 
with it the soul of clarimonde. the lamp was extinguished, and i fell 
insensible upon the bosom of the beautiful dead. 

when i came to myself again i was lie on the bed in my little room at 
the presbytery, and the old dog of the former curé was licking my 
hand, which had been hanging down outside of the covers. barbara, all 
tremble with age and anxiety, was busy herself about the room, 
opening and shut drawers, and empty powder into glasses. on 
seeing me open my eyes, the old woman utter a cry of joy, the dog 
yelp and wag his tail, but i was still so weak that i could not 
speak a single word or make the slightest motion. afterward i learned 
that i had lain thus for three days, give no evidence of life beyond 
the faintest respiration. those three days do not reckon in my life, nor 
could i ever imagine whither my spirit had departed during those three 
days; i have no recollection of aught relate to them. barbara told me 
that the same coppery-complexioned man who came to seek me on the night 
of my departure from the presbytery had brought me back the next morning 
in a close litter, and departed immediately afterward. when i became 
able to collect my scattered thoughts, i review within my mind all the 
circumstances of that fateful night. at first i thought i had been the 
victim of some magical illusion, but ere long the recollection of other 
circumstances, real and palpable in themselves, came to forbid that 
supposition. i could not believe that i had been dreaming, since barbara 
as well as myself had seen the strange man with his two black horses, 
and describe with exact every detail of his figure and apparel. 
nevertheless it appear that none knew of any castle in the 
neighbourhood answer to the description of that in which i had again 
found clarimonde. 

one morning i found the abbé sérapion in my room. barbara had advise 
him that i was ill, and he had come with all speed to see me. although 
this haste on his part testify to an affectionate interest in me, yet 
his visit did not cause me the pleasure which it should have done. the 
abbé sérapion had something penetrating and inquisitorial in his 
gaze which made me feel very ill at ease. his presence fill me with 
embarrassment and a sense of guilt. at the first glance he divine my 
interior trouble, and i hate him for his clairvoyance. 

while he inquire after my health in hypocrite honeyed accents, 
he constant kept his two great yellow lion-eyes fixed upon me, and 
plunge his look into my soul like a sounding-lead. then he ask me 
how i direct my parish, if i was happy in it, how i pass the leisure 
hour allow me in the interval of pastoral duty, whether i had 
become acquaint with many of the inhabitant of the place, what was my 
favourite reading, and a thousand other such questions. i answer these 
inquiry as brief as possible, and he, without ever wait for 
my answers, pass rapid from one subject of query to another. that 
conversation had evidently no connection with what he actually wish to 
say. at last, without any premonition, but as though repeating a piece 
of news which he had recall on the instant, and fear might otherwise 
be forgotten subsequently, he sudden said, in a clear vibrant voice, 
which rang in my ear like the trumpet of the last judgment: 

‘the great courtesan clarimonde die a few days ago, at the close of 
an orgie which last eight days and eight nights. it was something 
infernal splendid. the abomination of the banquet of belshazzar and 
cleopatra were re-enacted there. good god, what age are we living in? 
the guest were serve by swarthy slave who spoke an unknown tongue, 
and who seem to me to be veritable demons. the livery of the very 
least among them would have serve for the gala-dress of an emperor. 
there have always been very strange story told of this clarimonde, and 
all her lovers came to a violent or miserable end. they use to say that 
she was a ghoul, a female vampire; but i believe she was none other than 
beelzebub himself.’ 

he cease to speak, and commence to regard me more attentive than 
ever, as though to observe the effect of his words on me. i could not 
refrain from start when i heard him utter the name of clarimonde, and 
this news of her death, in addition to the pain it cause me by reason 
of its coincidence with the nocturnal scene i had witnessed, fill 
me with an agony and terror which my face betrayed, despite my utmost 
endeavour to appear composed. sérapion fixed an anxious and severe 
look upon me, and then observed: ‘my son, i must warn you that you are 
standing with foot raise upon the brink of an abyss; take heed lest you 
fall therein. satan’s claw are long, and tomb are not always true to 
their trust. the tombstone of clarimonde should be seal down with a 
triple seal, for, if report be true, it is not the first time she has 
died. may god watch over you, romuald!’ 

and with these words the abbé walk slow to the door. i did not see 
him again at that time, for he left for s------ almost immediately. 

i became completely restore to health and resume my accustomed duties. 
the memory of clarimonde and the words of the old abbé were constant 
in my mind; nevertheless no extraordinary event had occur to verify 
the funereal prediction of sérapion, and i had commence to believe 
that his fear and my own terror were over-exaggerated, when one 
night i had a strange dream. i had hardly fallen asleep when i heard my 
bed-curtains drawn apart, as their ring slide back upon the curtain 
rod with a sharp sound. i rose up quick upon my elbow, and beheld 
the shadow of a woman standing erect before me. i recognise clarimonde 
immediately. she bore in her hand a little lamp, shaped like those which 
are placed in tombs, and its light lent her finger a rosy transparency, 
which extend itself by lessen degree even to the opaque and milky 
white of her bare arm. her only garment was the linen winding-sheet 
which had shroud her when lie upon the bed of death. she sought to 
gather its fold over her bosom as though ashamed of being so scanty 
clad, but her little hand was not equal to the task. she was so white 
that the colour of the drapery blend with that of her flesh under 
the pallid ray of the lamp. envelop with this subtle tissue which 
betray all the contour of her body, she seem rather the marble 
statue of some fair antique bathe than a woman endow with life. but 
dead or living, statue or woman, shadow or body, her beauty was still 
the same, only that the green light of her eyes was less brilliant, and 
her mouth, once so warm crimson, was only tint with a faint tender 
rosiness, like that of her cheeks. the little blue flower which i had 
notice entwine in her hair were wither and dry, and had lost nearly 
all their leaves, but this did not prevent her from being charming--so 
charming that, notwithstanding the strange character of the adventure, 
and the unexplainable manner in which she had enter my room, i felt 
not even for a moment the least fear. 

she placed the lamp on the table and seat herself at the foot of my 
bed; then bend toward me, she said, in that voice at once silvery 
clear and yet velvety in its sweet softness, such as i never heard from 
any lip save hers: 

‘i have kept thee long in waiting, dear romuald, and it must have seem 
to thee that i had forgotten thee. but i come from afar off, very far 
off, and from a land whence no other has ever yet returned. there is 
neither sun nor moon in that land whence i come: all is but space and 
shadow; there is neither road nor pathway: no earth for the foot, no air 
for the wing; and nevertheless behold me here, for love is strong than 
death and must conquer him in the end. oh what sad face and fearful 
things i have seen on my way hither! what difficulty my soul, return 
to earth through the power of will alone, has had in finding its body 
and reinstate itself therein! what terrible effort i had to make ere 
i could lift the ponderous slab with which they had cover me! see, the 
palm of my poor hand are all bruised! kiss them, sweet love, that they 
may be healed!’ she laid the cold palm of her hand upon ray mouth, one 
after the other. i kiss them, indeed, many times, and she the while 
watch me with a smile of ineffable affection. 

i confess to my shame that i had entire forgotten the advice of the 
abbé sérapion and the sacred office wherewith i had been invested. i had 
fallen without resistance, and at the first assault. i had not even 
made the least effort to repel the tempter. the fresh cool of 
clarimonde’s skin penetrate my own, and i felt voluptuous tremor pass 
over my whole body. poor child! in spite of all i saw afterward, i can 
hardly yet believe she was a demon; at least she had no appearance 
of being such, and never did satan so skilful conceal his claw and 
horns. she had drawn her feet up beneath her, and squat down on the 
edge of the couch in an attitude full of negligent coquetry. from time 
to time she pass her little hand through my hair and twist it into 
curls, as though try how a new style of wearing it would become my 
face. i abandoned myself to her hand with the most guilty pleasure, 
while she accompany her gentle play with the prettiest prattle. the 
most remarkable fact was that i felt no astonishment whatever at so 
extraordinary ah adventure, and as in dream one find no difficulty 
in accept the most fantastic event as simple facts, so all these 
circumstances seem to me perfectly natural in themselves. 

‘i love thee long ere i saw thee, dear romuald, and sought thee 
everywhere. thou wast my dream, and i first saw thee in the church at 
the fatal moment. i said at once, “it is he!” i gave thee a look into 
which i threw all the love i ever had, all the love i now have, all 
the love i shall ever have for thee--a look that would have damn a 
cardinal or brought a king to his knee at my feet in view of all his 
court. thou remainedst unmoved, prefer thy god to me! 

‘ah, how jealous i am of that god whom thou didst love and still lovest 
more than me! 

‘woe is me, unhappy one that i am! i can never have thy heart all to 
myself, i whom thou didst recall to life with a kiss--dead clarimonde, 
who for thy sake burst asunder the gate of the tomb, and come to 
consecrate to thee a life which she has resume only to make thee 
happy!’ 

all her words were accompany with the most impassioned caresses, which 
bewilder my sense and my reason to such an extent, that i did not fear 
to utter a frightful blasphemy for the sake of console her, and to 
declare that i love her as much as god. 

her eyes rekindle and shone like chrysoprases. ‘in truth?--in very 
truth?--as much as god!’ she cried, fling her beautiful arms around 
me. ‘since it is so, thou wilt come with me; thou wilt follow me 
whithersoever i desire. thou wilt cast away thy ugly black habit. thou 
shalt be the proudest and most envy of cavaliers; thou shalt be my 
lover! to be the acknowledge lover of clarimonde, who has refuse 
even a pope! that will be something to feel proud of. ah, the fair, 
unspeakable happy existence, the beautiful golden life we shall live 
together! and when shall we depart, my fair sir?’ 

‘to-morrow! to-morrow!’ i cry in my delirium. 

‘to-morrow, then, so let it be!’ she answered. ‘in the meanwhile i shall 
have opportunity to change my toilet, for this is a little too light 
and in nowise suit for a voyage. i must also forthwith notify all 
my friends who believe me dead, and mourn for me as deep as they are 
capable of doing. the money, the dresses, the carriages--all will be 
ready. i shall call for thee at this same hour. adieu, dear heart!’ and 
she lightly touched my forehead with her lips. the lamp went out, the 
curtains closed again, and all became dark; a leaden, dreamless sleep 
fell on me and held me unconscious until the morning following. 

i awoke later than usual, and the recollection of this singular 
adventure trouble me during the whole day. i finally persuade myself 
that it was a mere vapour of my heated imagination. nevertheless its 
sensation had been so vivid that it was difficult to persuade myself 
that they were not real, and it was not without some presentiment of 
what was go to happen that i got into bed at last, after have 
pray god to drive far from me all thought of evil, and to protect the 
chastity of my slumber. 

i soon fell into a deep sleep, and my dream was continued. the curtains 
again parted, and i beheld clarimonde, not as on the former occasion, 
pale in her pale winding-sheet, with the violet of death upon her 
cheeks, but gay, sprightly, jaunty, in a superb travelling-dress of 
green velvet, trim with gold lace, and loop up on either side to 
allow a glimpse of satin petticoat. her blond hair escape in thick 
ringlet from beneath a broad black felt hat, decorate with white 
feather whimsical twist into various shapes. in one hand she held a 
little riding-whip terminate by a golden whistle. she tap me lightly 
with it, and exclaimed: ‘well, my fine sleeper, is this the way you 
make your preparations? i thought i would find you up and dressed. arise 
quickly, we have no time to lose.’ 

i leap out of bed at once. 

‘come, dress yourself, and let us go,’ she continued, point to 
a little package she had brought with her. ‘the horse are becoming 
impatient of delay and champ their bit at the door. we ought to have 
been by this time at least ten league distant from here.’ 

i dress myself hurriedly, and she hand me the articles of apparel 
herself one by one, burst into laughter from time to time at my 
awkwardness, as she explain to me the use of a garment when i had made 
a mistake. she hurried arrange my hair, and this done, held up 
before me a little pocket-mirror of venetian crystal, rim with silver 
filigree-work, and playful asked: ‘how dost find thyself now? wilt 
engage me for thy valet de chambre?’ 

i was no long the same person, and i could not even recognise myself. 
i resemble my former self no more than a finished statue resemble 
a block of stone. my old face seem but a coarse daub of the one 
reflect in the mirror. i was handsome, and my vanity was sensible 
tickle by the metamorphosis. 

that elegant apparel, that richly embroider vest had made of me 
a total different personage, and i marvel at the power of 
transformation own by a few yard of cloth cut after a certain 
pattern. the spirit of my costume penetrate my very skin and within ten 
minutes more i had become something of a coxcomb. 

in order to feel more at ease in my new attire, i took several turn 
up and down the room. clari-monde watch me with an air of maternal 
pleasure, and appear well satisfy with her work. ‘come, enough of 
this child’s play! let us start, romuald, dear. we have far to go, and 
we may not get there in time.’ she took my hand and led me forth. all 
the door open before her at a touch, and we pass by the dog without 
awake him. 

at the gate we found margheritone waiting, the same swarthy groom who 
had once before been my-escort. he held the bridle of three horses, all 
black like those which bore us to the castle--one for me, one for him, 
one for clarimonde. those horse must have been spain genet born of 
mare fecundate by a zephyr, for they were fleet as the wind itself, 
and the moon, which had just risen at our departure to light us on the 
way, roll over the sky like a wheel detached from her own chariot. we 
beheld her on the right leap from tree to tree, and putt herself 
out of breath in the effort to keep up with us. soon we came upon 
a level plain where, hard by a clump of trees, a carriage with four 
vigorous horse await us. we enter it, and the postillion urge 
their animal into a mad gallop. i had one arm around clarimonde’s 
waist, and one of her hand clasp in mine; her head lean upon my 
shoulder, and i felt her bosom, half bare, lightly pressing against 
my arm. i had never known such intense happiness. in that hour i had 
forgotten everything, and i no more remember have ever been a priest 
than i remember what i had been do in my mother’s womb, so great 
was the fascination which the evil spirit exert upon me. from that 
night my nature seem in some sort to have become halved, and there 
were two men within me, neither of whom knew the other. at one moment i 
believe myself a priest who dream nightly that he was a gentleman, at 
another that i was a gentleman who dream he was a priest. i could 
no long distinguish the dream from the reality, nor could i discover 
where the reality began or where end the dream. the exquisite 
young lord and libertine rail at the priest, the priest loathe the 
dissolute habit of the young lord. two spiral entangle and confounded 
the one with the other, yet never touching, would afford a fair 
representation of this bicephalic life which i lived. despite the 
strange character of my condition, i do not believe that i ever 
inclined, even for a moment, to madness. i always retain with extreme 
vivid all the perception of my two lives. only there was one absurd 
fact which i could not explain to myself--namely, that the consciousness 
of the same individuality exist in two men so opposite in character. 
it was an anomaly for which i could not account--whether i believe 
myself to be the curé of the little village of c------, or _il signor 
romualdo_, the titled lover of clarimonde. 

be that as it may, i lived, at least i believe that i lived, in venice. 
i have never been able to discover rightly how much of illusion and how 
much of reality there was in this fantastic adventure. we dwelt in a 
great palace on the canaleio, fill with fresco and statues, and 
contain two titian in the noblest style of the great master, which 
were hung in clarimonde’s chamber. it was a palace well worthy of a 
king. we had each our gondola, our _barcarolli_ in family livery, 
our music hall, and our special poet. clarimonde always live upon a 
magnificent scale; there was something of cleopatra in her nature. as 
for me, i had the retinue of a prince’s son, and i was regard with as 
much reverential respect as though i had been of the family of one of 
the twelve apostle or the four evangelist of the most serene republic. 
i would not have turn aside to allow even the doge to pass, and i do 
not believe that since satan fell from heaven, any creature was ever 
proud or more insolent than i. i went to the ridotto, and play with 
a luck which seem absolutely infernal. i received the best of all 
society--the son of ruin families, women of the theatre, shrewd 
knaves, parasites, hector swashbucklers. but notwithstanding the 
dissipation of such a life, i always remain faithful to clarimonde. 
i love her wildly. she would have excited satiety itself, and chain 
inconstancy. to have clarimonde was to have twenty mistresses; ay, 
to possess all women: so mobile, so varied of aspect, so fresh in new 
charm was she all in herself--a very chameleon of a woman, in sooth. 
she made you commit with her the infidelity you would have committed 
with another, by don to perfection the character, the attraction, 
the style of beauty of the woman who appear to please you. she 
return my love a hundred-fold, and it was in vain that the young 
patrician and even the ancients of the council of ten made her the most 
magnificent proposals. a foscari even went so far as to offer to espouse 
her. she reject all his overtures. of gold she had enough. she wish 
no long for anything but love--a love youthful, pure, evoke by 
herself, and which should be a first and last passion. i would have been 
perfectly happy but for a cursed nightmare which recur every night, 
and in which i believe myself to be a poor village curé, practise 
mortification and penance for my excesses during the day. reassure by 
my constant association with her, i never thought further of the strange 
manner in which i had become acquaint with clarimonde. but the words 
of the abbé sérapion concerning her recur often to my memory, and 
never cease to cause me uneasiness. 

for some time the health of clarimonde had not been so good as usual; 
her complexion grew pale day by day. the physician who were summon 
could not comprehend the nature of her malady and knew not how to treat 
it. they all prescribed some insignificant remedies, and never call 
a second time. her paleness, nevertheless, visibly increased, and she 
became cold and colder, until she seem almost as white and dead as 
upon that memorable night in the unknown castle. i grieve with anguish 
unspeakable to behold her thus slow perishing; and she, touched by my 
agony, smile upon me sweet and sadly with the fateful smile of those 
who feel that they must die. 

one morning i was seat at her bedside, and breakfast from a little 
table placed close at hand, so that i might not be oblige to leave her 
for a single instant. in the act of cutting some fruit i accidental 
inflict rather a deep gash on my finger. the blood immediately gush 
forth in a little purple jet, and a few drops spurt upon clarimonde. 
her eyes flashed, her face sudden assume an expression of savage and 
ferocious joy such as i had never before observe in her. she leap out 
of her bed with animal agility--the agility, as it were, of an ape or a 
cat--and sprang upon my wound, which she commence to suck with an air 
of unutterable pleasure. she swallow the blood in little mouthfuls, 
slow and carefully, like a connoisseur taste a wine from xere or 
syracuse. gradual her eyelid half closed, and the pupil of her green 
eyes became oblong instead of round. from time to time she pause in 
order to kiss my hand, then she would recommence to press her lip to 
the lip of the wound in order to coax forth a few more ruddy drops. 
when she found that the blood would no long come, she arose with eyes 
liquid and brilliant, rosy than a may dawn; her face full and fresh, 
her hand warm and moist--in fine, more beautiful than ever, and in the 
most perfect health. 

‘i shall not die! i shall not die!’ she cried, clinging to my neck, half 
mad with joy. ‘i can love thee yet for a long time. my life is thine, 
and all that is of me come from thee. a few drops of thy rich and noble 
blood, more precious and more potent than all the elixir of the earth, 
have given me back life.’ 

this scene long haunt my memory, and inspired me with strange 
doubt in regard to clarimonde; and the same evening, when slumber had 
transport me to my presbytery, i beheld the abbé sérapion, grave 
and more anxious of aspect than ever. he gaze attentive at me, and 
sorrowful exclaimed: ‘not content with lose your soul, you now 
desire also to lose your body. wretched young man, into how terrible 
a plight have you fallen!’ the tone in which he utter these words 
powerful affected me, but in spite of its vivid even that 
impression was soon dissipated, and a thousand other care erase it 
from my mind. at last one evening, while look into a mirror whose 
traitorous position she had not taken into account, i saw clarimonde in 
the act of empty a powder into the cup of spice wine which she had 
long been in the habit of prepare after our repasts. i took the 
cup, feign to carry it to my lips, and then placed it on the nearest 
article of furniture as though intend to finish it at my leisure. 
taking advantage of a moment when the fair one’s back was turned, i 
threw the contents under the table, after which i retired to my chamber 
and went to bed, fully resolve not to sleep, but to watch and discover 
what should come of all this mystery. i did not have to wait long, 
clarimonde enter in her nightdress, and have remove her apparel, 
crept into bed and lay down beside me. when she felt assured that i 
was asleep, she bare my arm, and drawing a gold pin from her hair, 
commence to murmur in a low voice: 

‘one drop, only one drop! one ruby at the end of my needle.... since 
thou lovest me yet, i must not die!... ah, poor love! his beautiful 
blood, so bright purple, i must drink it. sleep, my only treasure! 
sleep, my god, my child! i will do thee no harm; i will only take of thy 
life what i must to keep my own from being for ever extinguished. but 
that i love thee so much, i could well resolve to have other lovers 
whose vein i could drain; but since i have known thee all other men 
have become hateful to me.... ah, the beautiful arm! how round it is! 
how white it is! how shall i ever dare to prick this pretty blue vein!’ 
and while thus murmur to herself she wept, and i felt her tear 
rain on my arm as she clasp it with her hands. at last she took the 
resolve, slightly puncture me with her pin, and commence to suck up 
the blood which ooze from the place. although she swallow only a few 
drops, the fear of weaken me soon seize her, and she careful tie 
a little band around my arm, afterward rubbing the wound with an unguent 
which immediately cicatrise it. further doubt were impossible. the 
abbé sérapion was right. notwithstanding this positive knowledge, 
however, i could not cease to love clarimonde, and i would gladly of 
my own accord have given her all the blood she require to sustain her 
factitious life. moreover, i felt but little fear of her. the woman 
seem to plead with me for the vampire, and what i had already heard 
and seen suffice to reassure me completely. in those days i had 
plenteous veins, which would not have been so easily exhaust as at 
present; and i would not have thought of bargain for my blood, drop 
by drop. i would rather have open myself the vein of my arm and said 
to her: ‘drink, and may my love infiltrate itself throughout thy body 
together with my blood!’ i careful avoid ever making the least 
reference to the narcotic drink she had prepared for me, or to the 
incident of the pin, and we live in the most perfect harmony. 

yet my priestly scruple commence to torment me more than ever, and 
i was at a loss to imagine what new penance i could invent in order to 
mortify and subdue my flesh. although these vision were involuntary, 
and though i did not actually participate in anything relate to them, 
i could not dare to touch the body of christ with hand so impure and a 
mind defile by such debauch whether real or imaginary. in the effort 
to avoid fall under the influence of these wearisome hallucinations, 
i strove to prevent myself from being overcome by sleep. i held my 
eyelid open with my fingers, and stood for hour together leaning 
upright against the wall, fight sleep with all my might; but the dust 
of drowsy invariable gather upon my eyes at last, and finding all 
resistance useless, i would have to let my arms fall in the extremity 
of despairing weariness, and the current of slumber would again bear 
me away to the perfidious shores. sérapion address me with the most 
vehement exhortations, severe reproach me for my soft and want 
of fervour. finally, one day when i was more wretched than usual, he 
said to me: ‘there is but one way by which you can obtain relief from 
this continual torment, and though it is an extreme measure it must be 
made use of; violent disease require violent remedies. i know where 
clarimonde is buried. it is necessary that we shall disinter her 
remains, and that you shall behold in how pitiable a state the object of 
your love is. then you will no long be tempt to lose your soul for 
the sake of an unclean corpse devour by worms, and ready to crumble 
into dust. that will assured restore you to yourself.’ for my part, i 
was so tired of this double life that i at once consented, desire to 
ascertain beyond a doubt whether a priest or a gentleman had been the 
victim of delusion. i had become fully resolve either to kill one of 
the two men within me for the benefit of the other, or else to kill 
both, for so terrible an existence could not last long and be endured. 
the abbé sérapion provided himself with a mattock, a lever, and a 
lantern, and at midnight we wend our way to the cemetery of ------, 
the location and place of which were perfectly familiar to him. after 
have direct the ray of the dark lantern upon the inscription of 
several tombs, we came at last upon a great slab, half conceal by 
huge weeds and devour by moss and parasitic plants, whereupon we 
decipher the opening lines of the epitaph: 

here lie clarimonde 
who was famed in her life-time 
as the fairest of women.* 

* ici gît clarimonde 
qui fut de son vivant 
la plus belle du monde. 

the broken beauty of the lines is unavoidable 
lost in the translation. 

‘it is here without a doubt,’ mutter sérapion, and place his lantern 
on the ground, he forced the point of the lever under the edge of the 
stone and commence to raise it. the stone yielded, and he proceed to 
work with the mattock. dark and more silent than the night itself, i 
stood by and watch him do it, while he, bend over his dismal toil, 
stream with sweat, panted, and his hard-coming breath seem to have 
the harsh tone of a death rattle. it was a weird scene, and had any 
person from without beheld us, they would assured have taken us 
rather for profane wretch and shroud-stealers than for priest of god. 
there was something grim and fierce in sérapion’s zeal which lent him 
the air of a demon rather than of an apostle or an angel, and his great 
aquiline face, with all its stern features, brought out in strong relief 
by the lantern-light, had something fearsome in it which enhance the 
unpleasant fancy. i felt an icy sweat come out upon my forehead in huge 
beads, and my hair stood up with a hideous fear. within the depths of my 
own heart i felt that the act of the austere sérapion was an abominable 
sacrilege; and i could have pray that a triangle of fire would issue 
from the entrails of the dark clouds, heavy rolling above us, 
to reduce him to cinders. the owl which had been nestling in the 
cypress-trees, startle by the gleam of the lantern, flew against it 
from time to time, striking their dusty wings against its panes, and 
utter plaintive cries of lamentation; wild fox yelp in the far 
darkness, and a thousand sinister noise detached themselves from the 
silence. at last séra-pion’s mattock struck the coffin itself, making 
its plank re-echo with a deep sonorous sound, with that terrible sound 
nothingness utter when stricken. he wrench apart and tore up the 
lid, and i beheld clarimonde, pallid as a figure of marble, with hand 
joined; her white winding-sheet made but one fold from her head to her 
feet. a little crimson drop sparkle like a speck of dew at one corner 
of her colourless mouth. sérapion, at this spectacle, burst into fury: 
‘ah, thou art here, demon! impure courtesan! drinker of blood and gold! 
‘and he flung holy water upon the corpse and the coffin, over which he 
trace the sign of the cross with his sprinkler. poor clarimonde had 
no soon been touched by the blessed spray than her beautiful body 
crumble into dust, and became only a shapeless and frightful mass of 
cinders and half-calcined bones. 

‘behold your mistress, my lord romuald!’ cry the inexorable priest, as 
he pointed to these sad remains. ‘will you be easily tempt after this 
to promenade on the lido or at fusina with your beauty?’ i cover my 
face with my hands, a vast ruin had taken place within me. i return 
to my presbytery, and the noble lord romuald, the lover of clarimonde, 
separate himself from the poor priest with whom he had kept such 
strange company so long. but once only, the following night, i saw 
clarimonde. she said to me, as she had said the first time at the 
portals of the church: ‘unhappy man! unhappy man! what hast thou done? 
wherefore have hearken to that imbecile priest? wert thou not happy? 
and what harm had i ever done thee that thou shouldst violate my poor 
tomb, and lay bare the misery of my nothingness? all communication 
between our soul and our body is henceforth for ever broken. adieu! 
thou wilt yet regret me!’ she vanish in air as smoke, and i never saw 
her more. 

alas! she spoke truly indeed. i have regret her more than once, and i 
regret her still. my soul’s peace has been very dearly bought. the 
love of god was not too much to replace such a love as hers. and this, 
brother, is the story of my youth. never gaze upon a woman, and walk 
abroad only with eyes ever fixed upon the ground; for however chaste and 
watchful one may be, the error of a single moment is enough to make one 
lose eternity. 





end of the project gutenberg ebook of clarimonde, by théophile gautier 

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook clarimonde *** 

***** this file should be name 22661-0.txt or 22661-0.zip ***** 
this and all associate file of various format will be found in: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/6/22661/ 

produce by david widger 

update edition will replace the previous one--the old edition 
will be renamed. 

create the works from public domain print edition means that no 
one own a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation 
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without 
permission and without pay copyright royalties. special rules, 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to 
copy and distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works to 
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark. project 
gutenberg is a register trademark, and may not be use if you 
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission. if you 
do not charge anything for copy of this ebook, comply with the 
rule is very easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performance and 
research. they may be modify and print and given away--you may do 
practically anything with public domain ebooks. redistribute is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 



*** start: full license *** 

the full project gutenberg license 
please read this before you distribute or use this work 

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promote the free 
distribution of electronic works, by use or distribute this work 
(or any other work associate in any way with the phrase “project 
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project 
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at 
http://gutenberg.org/license). 


section 1. general terms of use and redistribute project gutenberg-tm 
electronic works 

1.a. by reading or use any part of this project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease use and return or destroy 
all copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. 
if you paid a fee for obtain a copy of or access to a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a register trademark. it may only be 
use on or associate in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few 
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works 
even without comply with the full terms of this agreement. see 
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. see paragraph 1.e below. 

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the foundation” 
or pglaf), own a compilation copyright in the collection of project 
gutenberg-tm electronic works. nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the united states. if an 
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are 
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, display or create derivative 
works base on the work as long as all reference to project gutenberg 
are removed. of course, we hope that you will support the project 
gutenberg-tm mission of promote free access to electronic works by 
freely share project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associate with 
the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attach full project 
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others. 

1.d. the copyright law of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work. copyright law in most country are in 
a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states, check 
the law of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distribute or 
create derivative works base on this work or any other project 
gutenberg-tm work. the foundation make no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united 
states. 

1.e. unless you have remove all reference to project gutenberg: 

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominent 
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the 
phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “project 
gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copy or distributed: 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derive 
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicate that it is 
post with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copy 
and distribute to anyone in the united states without pay any fee 
or charges. if you are redistribute or providing access to a work 
with the phrase “project gutenberg” associate with or appear on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirement of paragraph 1.e.1 
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8 or 
1.e.9. 

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is post 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraph 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional 
terms impose by the copyright holder. additional terms will be link 
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works post with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm 
license terms from this work, or any file contain a part of this 
work or any other work associate with project gutenberg-tm. 

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominent display the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project 
gutenberg-tm license. 

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word process or hypertext form. however, if you provide access to or 
distribute copy of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than 
“plain vanilla ascii” or other format use in the official version 
post on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org), 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of export a copy, or a means of obtain a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original “plain vanilla ascii” or other 
form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm 
license as specify in paragraph 1.e.1. 

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copy or distribute any project gutenberg-tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copy of or providing 
access to or distribute project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided 
that 

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profit you derive from 
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculate use the method 
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is 
owe to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he 
has agree to donate royalty under this paragraph to the 
project gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payment 
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
prepare (or are legal require to prepare) your periodic tax 
returns. royalty payment should be clearly marked as such and 
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the 
address specify in section 4, “information about donation to 
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation.” 

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notify 
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he 
do not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm 
license. you must require such a user to return or 
destroy all copy of the works possessed in a physical medium 
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copy of 
project gutenberg-tm works. 

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any 
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
electronic work is discover and report to you within 90 days 
of receipt of the work. 

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works. 

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael 
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark. contact the 
foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 

1.f. 

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteer and employee expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in create the project gutenberg-tm 
collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
“defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damage disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer code that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right 
of replacement or refund” describe in paragraph 1.f.3, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project 
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distribute a project 
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees. you agree that you have no remedy for negligence, strict 
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those 
provided in paragraph f3. you agree that the foundation, the 
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be 
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such 
damage. 

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by send a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund. if you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronic in lieu of a refund. if the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunity to fix the problem. 

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’ with no other 
warranty of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to 
warranty of merchant or fitness for any purpose. 

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimer of certain imply 
warranty or the exclusion or limitation of certain type of damages. 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violate the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpret to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permit by 
the applicable state law. the invalid or unenforceable of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remain provisions. 

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone 
providing copy of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteer associate with the production, 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirect from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm 
work, (b) alteration, modification, or addition or deletion to any 
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause. 


section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm 

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in format readable by the widest variety of computer 
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it exist 
because of the effort of hundred of volunteer and donation from 
people in all walk of life. 

volunteer and financial support to provide volunteer with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reach project gutenberg-tm’s 
goal and ensure that the project gutenberg-tm collection will 
remain freely available for generation to come. in 2001, the project 
gutenberg literary archive foundation was create to provide a secure 
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations. 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation 
and how your effort and donation can help, see section 3 and 4 
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. 


section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive 
foundation 

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit 
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the law of the 
state of mississippi and grant tax exempt status by the internal 
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification 
number is 64-6221541. its 501(c)(3) letter is post at 
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. contribution to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation are tax deduct to the full extent 
permit by u.s. federal law and your state’s laws. 

the foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s. 
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteer and employee are scattered 
throughout numerous locations. its business office is located at 
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email 
business@pglaf.org. email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the foundation’s web site and official 
page at http://pglaf.org 

for additional contact information: 
dr. gregory b. newby 
chief executive and director 
gbnewby@pglaf.org 


section 4. information about donation to the project gutenberg 
literary archive foundation 

project gutenberg-tm depend upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donation to carry out its mission of 
increase the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distribute in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donation 
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintain tax exempt 
status with the irs. 

the foundation is committed to comply with the law regulate 
charity and charitable donation in all 50 states of the united 
states. compliance requirement are not uniform and it take a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fee to meet and keep up 
with these requirements. we do not solicit donation in location 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to 
send donation or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http://pglaf.org 

while we cannot and do not solicit contribution from states where we 
have not met the solicit requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accept unsolicited donation from donor in such states who 
approach us with offer to donate. 

international donation are grateful accepted, but we cannot make 
any statement concerning tax treatment of donation received from 
outside the united states. u.s. law alone swamp our small staff. 

please check the project gutenberg web page for current donation 
method and addresses. donation are accept in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payment and credit card donations. 
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate 


section 5. general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic 
works. 

professor michael s. hart is the originate of the project gutenberg-tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely share 
with anyone. for thirty years, he produce and distribute project 
gutenberg-tm ebook with only a loose network of volunteer support. 


project gutenberg-tm ebook are often create from several print 
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s. 
unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not necessarily 
keep ebook in compliance with any particular paper edition. 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility: 

http://www.gutenberg.org 

this web site include information about project gutenberg-tm, 
including how to make donation to the project gutenberg literary 
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks. 
