inconvenient murder 
by bari weiss 

two years ago, a 27-year-old man name kobili traoré walk into the paris apartment of a 65-year-old kindergarten teacher name sarah halimi. mr. traoré beat ms. halimi and stab her. according to witnesses, he call her a demon and a dirty jew. he shouted, "allahu akbar," then threw ms. halimi’s batter body out of her third-story apartment window. 

this is what mr. traoré told prosecutors: "i felt persecuted. when i saw the torah and a chandelier in her home i felt oppressed. i saw her face transforming." 

one would think that this would be an open-and-shut hate crime. it was the coldbloode murder of a woman in her own home for the sin of being a jew. but france prosecutor decided to drop murder charge against mr. traoré because he … had smoke cannabis. 

if france’s betrayal of sarah halimi is shocking to you, perhaps you haven’t been pay much attention to what by now can be describe as a moral calamity sweeping the west of which her story is only the clearest example. a crisis, i hasten to add, that’s perhaps less known because it has been largely overlook by the mainstream press. 

the most generous read of this enormous blind spot is that the story is not always straightforward; there have been some laudable steps to fight back. on tuesday, for example, the france parliament formal adopt the international holocaust remembrance alliance’s definition of anti-semitism when it pass a motion declare anti-zionism a form of jew-hatred. yet on the same day, more than 100 jewish gravestone were found spray-painted with swastika in a cemetery near strasbourg — a potent reminder that government are only as good as the culture and the people uphold them. 

so allow me to put it plainly: we are suffering from a widespread social health epidemic and it is rooted in the cheapen of jewish blood. if hatred of jew can be justified as a misunderstanding or ignore as a mistake or play down as a slip of the tongue or wave away as "just anti-zionism," you can all but guarantee it will be. 

yet beneath the finger-pointing and the victim-blaming and the accusation of panic lob against a people that know a little something about persecution, there is the same old bigotry — the hatred of jew that has presage the death of so many seemingly civilize societies. a hatred that still, after centuries, exert its powerful allure during periods of politics and economic unrest, when the angry, the confused, the shortchange and the scared look for simple explanation and a scapegoat. and even those who seek to uplift the marginal can’t seem to find their voice when it come to jew facing anti-semitism. 

take a look at some of the event around the thanksgiving holiday, incident that have kept jew all over the world glue to their phones, and which have driven some to update their and their children’s passports. 

start with britain. last friday night, a rabbi who had just left a synagogue was beaten on the street by teenager screaming, "kill the jews." these now-regular occurrence come as there’s a decent chance that the labour leader jeremy corbyn will become the next prime minister — give anti-semites the imprimatur of a major western government. 

mr. corbyn’s long history of slur against jew and israel, his warm words about his "friends" in hezbollah, and his worldview, which find far more to admire in country like russia and venezuela than england itself, are well documented. to choose just the latest headline: the bbc, he said on iran state television, is "biased" toward saying that "israel has a right to exist." (my favorite remains his remark that britain zionist "who, have live in this country for a very long time, probably all their lives, don’t understand english irony.") 

the fish rot from the head, and so it has with labour. according to britain’s chief rabbi, ephraim mirvis, there are 130 case of outstanding complaint of anti-semitism against labour party members. ninety-three percent of britain jew say they won’t vote for labour. forty-seven percent say they will "seriously consider" emigrate if labour wins. and yet the latest polling show labour rallying. 

other issues, jew are told, are more important than their own safety. sometimes their fear are dismiss as "hysteria." the socialist filmmaker ken loach has call it a "witch hunt." the powerful union leader len mccluskey has accused the jewish community of "intransigent hostility." when rabbi mirvi took the extraordinary step of weigh in on the election, insist that the very "soul of our nation is at stake," he was accused, variously, of bad faith, of taking focus away from the real threat of right-wing bigotry, and of actually stoke anti-semitism himself. 

jewish voice for labour, the party’s pet jewish front group, has codify all of these gaslight tactics in a document that helpful lay out the strategy for how other politics group and movements with a will to power can shut down jewish concern about organized, systemic anti-semitism. 

over in italy, the town of schio decided against establish a holocaust memorial — the subtle, brass "stumbling stones" call stolpersteine that dot the street of europe city where survivor of hitler’s genocide still stroll — on the grounds that 14 stone in a city of 40,000 would prove too divisive. "let the victim rest in peace" said alberto bertoldo, a local politician. the memorial, he said, would risk "generating new hatred and division." 

while in schio the holocaust prove a divisive moral issue, in montreal it was a plan trip to israel. jordyn wright is a jewish sophomore who sit on the board of the students’ society of mcgill university. over winter break, she is planning, like hundred of other north america jewish college students, to go to israel with hillel. as a result of that trip, the student government vote to call for her resignation. never mind that the trip included time with palestinian in the west bank. never mind that another student government leader is also going; apparently because that student is not a jew, no resignation was required. 

i toggle over the weekend between ms. wright’s chill account of the history of anti-jewish discrimination at her school and the washington post, which had publish a frothy profile of valerie plame, the former c.i.a. officer who is now running for congress as a democrat in new mexico. 

there we learn that ms. plame looks "astoundingly good, at 56, as if the high-altitude desert air has preserve her skin since the day she arrive here 12 years ago." yet nowhere in the long article do the reader learn that two years ago, ms. plame tweet an essay call "american jew are driving america’s wars" by a man famous for his anti-jewish conspiracy thinking on a website that flirt with holocaust denial. she also share an article that link israel to the sept. 11 attacks. it somehow didn’t merit mention. 

elsewhere in the democratic party, linda sarsour, the activist who was remove from her leadership position in the women’s march thanks to her history of anti-semitic scandal and who now serve as a surrogate for the presidential candidate bernie sanders, gave a talk on friday to a group call america muslim for palestine. the part of her talk that circulate online focus on the apparent hypocrisy of progressive zionists: how, ms. sarsour ask about people who are the no. 1 target of white supremacists, can they claim to oppose white supremacy when they support "a state like israel that is built on supremacy, that is built on the idea that jew are supreme to everybody else?" 

lest you think this is "just anti-zionism," consider that the sander surrogate was speak at a conference that print the following sentence in its program: "zionism has come in like a disease to destroy the purity of al quds." (al qud is the arabic name for jerusalem.) 

should i tell you about a christian fundamentalist show on trunew host by a man name rick wiles? trunew was grant an interview by donald trump jr. and its representative was call on by president trump at a news conference. last week on his show mr. wiles claim that jew are behind the impeach proceedings against the president. a "jew coup," he call it, that would replace mr. trump with "a jewish cabal." 

should i tell you about the swastika found at sixth & i, a synagogue and a hub of jewish cultural and intellectual life in washington? or the one paint in red on a statue of the great yiddish writer sholem aleichem in ukraine? 

or that on monday morning in crown heights, brooklyn, a jewish subway rider report that another woman yell slur and threaten to throw her onto the tracks? and that the following day, also in crown heights, three teenager hurl rocks at a jewish elementary school bus, break a window. 

there is a theme here. the theme is that jew-hatred is surge and yet jewish victimhood do not command attention or inspire popular outrage. that unless jew are murder by neo-nazis, the one group everyone of conscience recognize as evil, jews’ inconvenient murders, their beatings, their discrimination, the single out of their state for demon will be explain away. 

when you look at each of these incidents, perhaps it is possible still to pretend that these are random burst of bigotry perpetrate by hooligan lacking any real organization or power behind them. 

but mr. corbyn’s electoral prospects in britain tell a different, far more distressing story — that a person with some of the same impulse as those hooligan can stand within spit distance of the office of prime minister. this is what happen when a culture decide that jewish lives are stumble stones. 
