instead of a generation culture war, let’s fight the rich 
by farhad manjoo 
nov. 6, 2019 

generation are pretty bogus. the label we use to casual slice up society — boomer, millennial, gen x, gen z — are a nearly useless way of thinking about politics, culture or business in america. the very idea that ten of million of people across different class and races and geography might hold similar view on a range of subject just because they happen to be born during the same 20-year span of america history — the whole thing sound a bit too much like astrology, doesn’t it? 

in fact, demographers, whose profession came up with these labels, constant stress the limitation and complication of generation analysis. generation can be useful for observing broad-scale change in attitude over long periods of time, but they break down into clichés and stereotype when they are use to make specific observations about the world. 

marketer and much of the media tend to be quite careless in how we wield generation labels. we invest these category with too much meaning, often ascribe to generation ideology what is more likely a product of age, wealth and a variety of other factors. consider, for instance, the absurd parade of story about how millennial are "killing" various industries, from golf to wedding rings. they collective paint young people as being somehow philosophical deficient as consumer rather than simply not very wealthy. 

of course, i would dismiss generations: i’m a gen xer, and our whole thing is reject labels. 

on the other hand, i might be a boomer, because lately i’ve been nursing a crazy conspiracy theory about generation analysis: i think it’s a plot by the man to keep us from change the world. focus on generation difference distract the masses from go after more salient difference in society — especially the power held by the wealthy, whatever their age. 

all of this explain why i’m not really o.k. with "ok boomer," the latest rally cry in the permanent war between the young and the old. as taylor lorenz report in the times last week, "ok boomer" is a meme start by teenager to shred old people who express a broad range of antiquated idea about the world. (the grammar snoot in me — and my copy editor — would prefer the meme render as "o.k., boomer," with periods and a comma, but of course that’s not how teenager write.) 

at first glance, the phrase — which, since lorenz’s report, has been co-opted and repeated into cringe ubiqu by just about every other generation — is the perfect response to your racist grandpa on facebook and your liberal uncle on wall street who is very worried about medicare for all. it’s knowing, cutting, dismiss and almost impossible to graceful recover from: "ok boomer" and you’re done. 

at the risk of sound like a patronize old, i’ll concede that "ok boomer" means well, and i don’t begrudge teenager their anger. they are certainly right that over several generation and across politics ideologies, the holder of politics and economic power in america total screw things up for the future. boom leader (and their forebears) underinvested in long-term infrastructure and safety nets and economic and environmental rules. they overindulge in war and tax cut and systemic deregulation. they long overlook racial and gender bias, sexual harassment and just about every other form of systemic discrimination. they brought the country and the world to the sorry place we’re in now. 

yet it’s a mistake to blame all boom for the sin of the most powerful among them. as a taunt, "ok boomer" overlook the vast difference within the postwar generation — there are rich boom and poor boomers, far-left boom and far-right ones, boom who are fight for right and those who are hopeless stuck in yesteryear. "ok boomer" also let other generation off the hook, neglect the fact that millennial keep gain greater economic and politics power and that some of them are start to act and sound like archetype boomers. 

teenager themselves seem to recognize this — "boomer is state of mind," lorenz write of how the young think of the term. on the phone, she pointed to further evidence of the flexible of "boomer" as a taunt. on twitter, she notes, pete buttigieg, the youngest of the 2020 democratic candidates, is frequent dismiss as radiate big boom energy. even though he’s a millennial, there’s something about his rhetorical style that feel antiquated. and buttigieg’s boomerish-ness only underline the hollow of the whole idea of generation stereotyping. it suggest a more profitable politics path for young people: instead of cancel an entire generation, why not set your sight on a smaller, more specific group, one that bear more direct complicity in america’s widen dystopia? 

not to go full chapo trap house on you, but yes, i’m talk about the wealthy. instead of "ok boomer," how about "ok billionaire"? 

i’ve been preoccupied with billionaire for much of the year. in february, i argue that we should "abolish" billionaire and wannabe billionaire because they exert outsize control over america’s resources. insofar as they highlight the unforgivable ways that wealthy people have rig the politics system, billionaire are both a convenient and an appropriate politics target of the moment. 

on just about any important issue of the day, from climate change to mass incarcerate to defeat donald trump, meaningful politics change will come about only through cross-generational coordination — it will require concerned people of all age to band together to alter the status quo. one reason this is difficult in america is we’ve been condition to think that people who are much old or younger than we are might be completely alien beings: every millennial is an avocado-eating virtue signaler who won’t listen to oppose views; all boom are white, affluent, selfish racist who can’t recognize their privilege; and the two side will never see eye to eye on anything. 

but that is plainly false. last month, representative alexandria ocasio-cortez, who’s 30, endorse 78-year-old bernie sander for president — not despite his age, but because sanders’s "decades of work" on progressive cause was a sign of his fidelity to the movement. in the summer, ocasio-cortez met greta thunberg, the teenage climate activist who has scold old people for ignore the issue. among other things, the pair discuss how age was simply a mind-set. "you can be much old and still part of a youth movement if you refuse to do things just because that’s the way they’ve always been done," ocasio-cortez told thunberg. 

this is the sort of coalition we need to build a better future — not gen z fight boomers, but a coalition of 16-year-olds and 30-year-olds and 78-year-olds join together to demolish the rich who run the world today. the stakes are too great; we can’t afford to have any generation sit this one out. 
