are there limit to the rights revolution? 
by thomas b. edsall 
dec. 18, 2019 

if you’re a democratic strategist, what do you do to reconcile the moral power of your party’s argument about the inherent dignity and civil rights of every america with the reality of an electorate that has not caught up with where the party has gone and is slightly — or more than slightly — averse to it? how do you decide whether what is right is also what is wise? 

as recently as 2004, propose state constitutional amendment ban same-sex marriage, particularly one in ohio, may have cost the democrat the presidency, so how do you handle president trump’s calculate assault on transgender rights? you can’t tell people "oh just wait for your rights, they’ll be coming soon" — that has never work for anyone — so i decided to ask philosophers, ethicists, transgender activist and other how the party should respond to trump’s provocations. 

the issue of politics strategy raise by the transgender rights movement have split liberal into two camps, one urge caution against moving too far in front of public opinion, the other calling for all out support of transgender men and women. 

on one side are democrat for whom the first priority is a strategy to defeat donald trump in november and who see some policy sought by transgender rights activist as potential alienate the moderate voter they believe are necessary to a democratic victory. 

on the other side are those who are equally hungry to see the president defeat but who hold a deep allegiance to the ethical and moral principles of freedom and equality, including for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender community. without these principles, they believe, the democratic party will not only lose votes, but also its core reason for being. 

president trump, ever the opportunist, has been aggressive moving since his inaugurate to attack the rights of transgender men and women — seeing a hot button or third rail issue he think he can deploy to his advantage as he attempt to carve up the democratic opposition. 

i ask scholar who specialize in the study of moral dilemma about the ethical and strategic choice trump’s current offensive against transgender rights forces on the liberal coalition. there is evidence that the democratic response to trump’s onslaught is split. 

peter singer, a professor of bioethic at the centre for human value at princeton, has been describe as "arguably the most famous and influential modern philosopher." he is unequivocal committed to a liberal worldview. 

"the failure of people in the rich nation to make any significant sacrifice in order to assist people who are die from poverty-related cause is ethically indefensible," he wrote in "achieving the best outcome," a 2002 essay: 
it is not simply the absence of charity, let alone of moral saintliness: it is wrong, and one cannot claim to be a morally decent person unless one is do far more than the typical comfortably-off person does. 

singe is specifically sympathetic to the difficulty facing transgender men and women, writing in 2012 "people who cross gender boundary suffer clear discrimination." 

weigh the tactical option facing democrats, singe was, nonetheless, forceful in his response to my emaile inquiry: 
as a consequentialist, i don’t believe that the party is obligate to support discriminate against group regardless of the consequences. after all, the re-election of trump, and republican control of congress, would be a greater disaster than the rejection of the legitimate claim of transgender people to express themselves as they wish. 

most importantly, singe continued, the re-election of trump 
would mean another four years in which the u.s. do little or nothing to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions, which make it difficult for other leader to take the strong stand that is needed, and that could bring about change that are catastrophe for hundred of million or even billion of people. 

the harm that a second trump term would produce, singe argued, "puts the transgender issue you mention in perspective. we may believe that people should be able to use whichever bathroom they choose, but standing up for that isn’t sufficient reason to risk the future of our planet," not to mention "the many other ways" that a "trump/republican victory would be bad." 

taking a different position, amie l. thomasson, professor of intellectual and moral philosophy at dartmouth, wrote by email: 
i think that however much democrat may want to win, we must not lose sight of our moral compass — especially in times like this. the commitment to protect the rights, equality, and well-being of everyone — not just those with power, wealth, or privilege — is absolutely central. 

this commitment is not subject to compromise: the democratic party, thomasson argued, 
would lose its soul to lose those commitments. what we need most in this country is an honest moral conversation — and that means not replace moral consideration with strategic calculations, or bury them to meet short-term goals. 

moral commitments, thomasson continued, 
are not things that should be sacrifice in hope of avoid right-wing attacks, or hope to maximize a calculation of expect votes. it does, of course, leave democrat with a job to do, of making clear that it is moral rights, human rights that are at stake here; of making clear why recognize transgender rights is not a threat; and of working through the detail of policy proposal regarding the impact on health care, etc. 

in fact, mara keisling, the executive director of the national center for transgender equality, do not expect democratic presidential candidate to support every priority set by her organization. 

in a phone interview, keisl said that her organization’s first priority is that the candidate "show they are compassionate people who care about marginal people." 

she said that if a democrat win the presidency, "we will have a policy agenda of maybe 200 items," but her group would not expect full support on every one of them. 

the center has been interview democratic candidate and so far all of them have shown that "they think about tran people in a compassionate way. that’s a lot," she said, and a sharp contrast to trump. 

i ask grace lavery, a professor of english at berkeley — who describe her work in trans-feminist study as "focused on the belief that transition works; that it is truly possible to change sex" — a series of questions, including: "how do you think democrat should deal with some of the more complex issue raise by the transgender rights movement?" 

she replied: 
the same way that anyone else should: by discuss them openly, and ensure that tran people’s account of our own experience are being heard. 

tran people, lavery continued, 
need access to health care, we need equitable treatment by a criminal justice system, and we need equal protection under existing civil rights/title ix legislation. given which, we don’t tend to care what cis people think about what trans means. 

the basic issue, lavery argued, 
is about safeguard the civil rights of a minority of people, at a moment in history when we are being single out for prejudicial treatment. there are no real policy issue to address other than prejudice and squeamishness. 

robin dembroff, a professor of philosophy at yale who use the pronoun they/them, wrote me that democratic candidate should treat "the trump campaign’s focus on transgender issues" as a "divisive tool for stoke fear, distract from economic, health care, and climate issues, and dismantle already tenuous women’s rights." 

dembroff argue that "recent threat to reproductive rights, lgbtq workplace protections, and transgender health care and facility access within the u.s. are part of this global movement to maintain the gender status quo." 

trump has clearly calculate that opposition to transgender rights will win him more vote than it will lose him, and he has translate that decision into action throughout the executive branch, rescind a wide range of pro-transgender regulations, while issue harsh new ones. while some of his decision have been temporary block by the courts, his intentions are clear. 

trump has barred transgender individual from serving in the military. he has withdrawn an obama administration regulation grant transgender student the right to use bathroom corresponding to their gender identity. he has expand a "conscience rule" that protect doctor and other health care worker who, on religious grounds, decline to provide care and who refuse to refer patient to personnel who will provide it. the administration has also propose the eliminate of obama-era rule ban discrimination against transgender medical patient by eliminate provisions that define discrimination "on the basis of sex" to include gender identity. 

for over five decades, start with the passage of the civil rights act of 1964, the democratic party has assume the broad role of politics home to the rights revolution for african-americans, latinos, women, gay and, now, transgender men and women. 

the general election will test whether the democratic nominee is willing — in the face of trump’s inflammatory foray against transgender rights — to bear the potential costs of fight for private health care coverage of gender transition surgery, including for those in the armed services, in prison, or on medicaid; participation in women’s athletic competition for transgender women; and nondiscriminatory access to public facilities, including bathroom in schools, library and public spaces. 

for david leege, a professor emeritus of politics science at notre dame, the issue of transgender rights now pose a possibly insoluble dilemma for democrat — something trump fully intend to exploit. 

leege wrote me: 
i think it is an area whose discourse is so new that a politics feasible solution has not yet present itself. if we can’t yet deal with toilets, where the answer are simple — unisex toilet compartment with locks on door — how can we deal with large public financial outlay for sex-change surgery? 

leege said he can foresee "politicians’ appeal to relative deprivation. ‘we’re go to spend taxpayers’ dollar for their sex-change surgery when there is not enough to pay for my cancer drugs’." 

as an example of the complexity of transgender rights, leege cite the question raise by the issue of whether transgender women should be able to enter women’s sports competitions: 
should she be forced to compete with men in running event or basketball rather than against women? what is fair to other women? to the transgender woman? are rights in conflict? is kindness violated? we don’t walk around with label specify level of male and female hormones. and we have thought of gender in binary terms for so long that it is hard to think that hormone could resemble bell-shaped curves. 

there are clear philosophical difference over democrats’ obligation to the transgender community. these difference translate, in turn, to sharp dissimilar strategy for how democrat should address transgender issues. 

bruce cain, a politics scientist at stanford, worry that democrat risk not only mobilize trump supporters, but also lose vote from their own constituents. "transgender rights," cain writes, "could indeed become a powerful wedge issue for president trump, especially if the democrat across the board take the strongest pro-transgender rights stances." 

cain noted that stand in favor of "using public money to pay for sexual transition or allow transgender access to public facilities will certainly fire up the conservative, republican base," but, he continued, "i would worry especially about the reaction in the black and latino community and among old moderate whites." 

the key to the 2020 election, in cain’s view, "is winning back states behind the blue wall and the swing states, keeping the focus on trump and away from bold issue that might lose vote in the swing areas." 

in contrast to cain, seana shiffrin, a professor of philosophy, law and social justice at u.c.l.a., argue that 
the democrat should take a matter of fact approach about these issues, with the tone that they are pretty straightforward. they shouldn’t hand-wring or talk about it as "a difficult matter," 

in shiffrin’s view, "showing strength and conviction here is also a strategic approach." 

she provided more specific example of how democrat could frame transgender issues: 
democrat are in favor of health care for all and so they are in favor of what transgender people require to function and flourish, just as they are in favor of the health care that any other member of society needs to function and flourish. we all have different health needs. some of the health needs of transgender people have been neglect and the costs they have suffer as a result are rather shocking. 

in the case of bathrooms, shiffrin argue that the issue should be placed in the large context of protect people from violence: 
the people in true danger of violence in restroom are transgender people who do not conform to gender expectations. force transgender women to use men’s rooms will subject them to potential violence. ergo, we should allow people to choose the restroom that best fit their identity and comfort levels. 

nance bauer, a professor of philosophy and a dean of academic affair for arts and science at tufts, argue in favor of orient strategy toward younger voters: 
my view is that the only way that democrat can win is if they embrace progressivism, not just because it’s on the side of justice, equality, fairness, compassion, and decency, but also because it’s the only politics strategy that will bring younger voter to the poll in significant numbers. i think that trump is monstrous and deep fear his re-election. but the best way to get rid of him is to build coalition of decent people and get out the vote. 

judith butler, a professor of comparative literature at berkeley whose books include "gender trouble: feminism and the subversion of identity," made a straightforward case for full support of transgender policy priorities: 
we are seek to win the election in order to restore faith in democracy, which include a commitment to equality and freedom. we do not seek to win for the sake of winning, but in order to preserve principles such as equality embody in civil rights protections. the right to health care and to social recognition and protection from discrimination should be regard as the fundamental rights of tran people in society. if we deny those rights, including the right to have access to medical care, we deny those rights and treat tran people different from other minority under the law. 

william galston, a senior fellow at brook and former deputy assistant to president bill clinton for domestic policy, make a different argument, in favor of more increment change: 
the task of decent politician in a democracy is to move their country as far toward justice and fair as the current state of public opinion will permit while do what they can to improve the chance that public opinion will continue to shift in the right direction. this task require judgment base on a solid understanding of public opinion and of the fact on the ground. 

this is not an easy task, especially for a politics party that support challenge to the traditional hierarchy. 

galston went on: 
as an elect official or aspirant for elective office, there is nothing dishonorable about define one’s policy aspiration at any given point in response to what the public is prepared to endorse or at least permit at that time. the higher the stakes in the election, the more defensible this practice becomes. if, as many people believe, the 2020 election implicate not only policy dispute but also the future of liberal constitutional democracy in the united states, then it would be justified to subordinate any policy issue to the overriding goal of protect our constitutional order. 

transgender rights pose a classic push-pull problem for the contemporary democratic party: in support the expansion of rights to previous discriminated-against constituencies, how far ahead of public opinion should the party go? 

the difficulty is only made more challenging by the fact that the pressure in primary is to move to the left while the pressure in the general election is to move to the center. 

by a number of measures, the country has become marked more liberal over the past half century, especially on social and cultural issue — even as the process has been slow, often painstaking slow, the pace more evolutionary than abrupt — as the public become acclimate to change. 

would democrat be wise to recognize this pace of change as they head into a define election? or should they attempt to enlarge their base by embrace an elemental argument about what the party stand for? this is an election in which turnout will be crucial. can democrat spur the legion who are focus on the environment, climate change, immigrate and women’s rights as well as transgender rights? can they expand the arena of concern? the stakes could not be higher. 
