jar kushner fail up, again 
by frank bruni 
nov. 26, 2019 

jar kushner just got a promotion. another one. at least i think we can call it that, and it’s a delicious perfect assignment. the pallid princele is now responsible for speeding construction of the border wall. in other words, a make-believe fix will oversee a fairy-tale fix. 

josh dawsey and nick miroff of the washington post broke the news, and when i read it, i realize that i hadn’t heard much about jar — or, for that matter, ivanka — in a good long while. they’re front and center when the administration is announce some ostensible sensible initiative or claim a pittance of progress. but when its corruption is being expose and the drizzle of subpoena become a downpour, they vanish, cuddle for warmth under the gilded umbrella of their hallucinatory virtue. 

we can pretty much chart the weather of the administration by the relative visibility of donald jr., so loud and hirsute, and jared, so smooth-cheeked and mute. donald jr. thrive when it’s nastiest, stomp gleeful through the muck. jar come out only if his suit won’t get dirty or his hair wet. 

during the impeach inquiry, we’ve seen a lot of donald jr. that’s partly because he has been hawking his new book, copy of which the republican national committee spent nearly $100,000 on. but it’s also because he’s such a ready, eager conduit for his father’s wrath, with a talent for exaggeration and misdirect that’s clearly chromosomal. 

jar kushner just got a promotion. another one. at least i think we can call it that, and it’s a delicious perfect assignment. the pallid princele is now responsible for speeding construction of the border wall. in other words, a make-believe fix will oversee a fairy-tale fix. 

josh dawsey and nick miroff of the washington post broke the news, and when i read it, i realize that i hadn’t heard much about jar — or, for that matter, ivanka — in a good long while. they’re front and center when the administration is announce some ostensible sensible initiative or claim a pittance of progress. but when its corruption is being expose and the drizzle of subpoena become a downpour, they vanish, cuddle for warmth under the gilded umbrella of their hallucinatory virtue. 

we can pretty much chart the weather of the administration by the relative visibility of donald jr., so loud and hirsute, and jared, so smooth-cheeked and mute. donald jr. thrive when it’s nastiest, stomp gleeful through the muck. jar come out only if his suit won’t get dirty or his hair wet. 

during the impeach inquiry, we’ve seen a lot of donald jr. that’s partly because he has been hawking his new book, copy of which the republican national committee spent nearly $100,000 on. but it’s also because he’s such a ready, eager conduit for his father’s wrath, with a talent for exaggeration and misdirect that’s clearly chromosomal. 

jar and ivanka have been strategic scarce, though ivanka did flutter into view, in a fashion, when president trump boast two week ago that she had create 14 million job since the inauguration. "fourteen million and go up!" he clarified, lest anyone get the misimpression that she thought her work was done. never! on behalf of the america people, ivanka is tireless. there’s no rest for the weary, and there’s even less of it for those who live at the crossroads of self-infatuation and delusion. 

in an interview last month on fox business, ivanka said that she and dad were "fighting every day for the america worker" and that she was determined to "drive hard every single day to make an impact." 

"your time and service — our time here — is finite," she mused, and while i’d love to believe that she was prophesy her and her father’s imminent evict from the white house, i think she was referring, in her deep spiritual way, to the span of a human life. "it’s sand through an hourglass." as ivanka serve us, she never forget the sand. 

democrat believe that the trump administration’s void of ethics will sour america voter on the president. but those voter are likely to abandon him for the administration’s vacuum of competence — for his nonsensical managerial style, capture in his magical thinking about jared. 

he task jar with reinvent the federal government. unless constant rash firings, unfill job and shakedown of foreign government constitute reinvention, this remains on jared’s infinite to-do list. the president put jar in charge of broker a durable peace between israel and palestinians. insert punch line here. he follow jared’s counsel that faith be placed in saudi arabia and its crown prince, mohammed bin salman. we know how that work out. 

the president somehow look at that track record and decided that the dynamo he should entrust with his central campaign promise — a secure barrier between the united states and mexico — was … jared! and so we have the trillionth gorgeous example of his investment in fiction. 

nearly three years into trump’s presidency, the border wall barely exists. subtract the upgrade of fencing and such that was already there and trump has, by some recent estimates, construct few than 25 mile of actually new barrier. the southwestern border is nearly 2,000 mile long. 

but jar is on the case! according to the post, he "convenes biweekly meeting in the west wing, where he question an array of government official about progress" and "explains the president’s wishes." huh. those wish are hardly cryptic, and how complicated can this questioning be? already, the post reported, there’s grumbling that jar is just an annoyance. 

that belittle his symbolic significance. many journalists, including me, have try to settle on the perfect mascot for the trump administration. there are choice galore. the greedy, vainglorious scott pruitt, who did his best to decimate the environmental protection agency, fit the bill, but he’s long gone. mike pompeo embody the faustian arc of so many of the president’s aide and allies, from principle-driven dismissal of trump during the 2016 campaign to reputation-torching submission when he dangle a ticket to the big time. 

but for naked opportunism and situation scruples, jared’s my guy. remember how he and ivanka were go to contain the president’s ego, blunt his cruelty, whisper sweet moderation in his ear? that was then. now he’s devote himself to an exorbitant, unnecessary monument to trump’s nativ and xenophobia. 

there’s an upside, though. with jar in the saddle, this horse won’t go far. 
