mayor pete’s gay reckoning 
by frank bruni 
feb. 1, 2020 

ankeny, iowa — you can listen to long stretch of pete buttigieg’s remark and hear little or no reference to the trailblaze nature of his campaign. you can almost forget. 

but as he wrap up a rally here on thursday night, with the clock ticking down fast to the iowa caucuses, he made soaring, stirring mention of it. you remembered. 

"iowa has a remarkable knack for making history," he told hundred of supporters, note that he’d initially visit the state to support barack obama during the democratic primary in 2008, when obama’s iowa victory set him on his way. "you change america’s — and the world’s — expectations for what was possible." 

then he allude to iowa’s legalize of gay marriage in 2009, six years before that happen nationally, and how it gave him hope that he might someday "be a happily married man." the crowd roared. i had one foot out the door — it had been a long, long day — and i stop in my tracks. as a gay man and an american, i felt a surge of pride. 

it’s do-or-die time for buttigieg, whose poll numbers recently have been moving in the wrong direction. he probably needs to finish first or a very strong second on monday to preserve any shot to be his party’s 2020 nominee. 

he needs neither to claim an enormous accomplishment. win or lose, buttigieg is the first openly gay america to become a serious presidential candidate, one who landed on the cover of prominent magazines, was fawn over on the most-watched television talk shows, raise exponential more money than any of the governor in the race, outpace beto o’rourke, outpoll kamala harris, caught president trump’s attention, qualified for all of the democratic debate and more than held his own in each of them. 

win or lose, he’s an example, an education and a hell of a story. that narrative is about youth — he just turn 38 — and the power of hyper-articulateness in an era of presidential crudeness. but it’s also about sexual orientation, which has and hasn’t factor into his pitch in surprising ways. 

he has grappled, on the national politics stage, with question that all l.g.b.t.q. people ask, so that his candidacy is a metaphor for our lives: to what extent am i define by my sexual orientation or gender identity? what do and doesn’t it tell you about me? 

buttigieg’s answer have disappointed some l.g.b.t.q. people — and were bound to, given the expectations placed on any politician who is blessed and cursed to become a symbol. female candidate have had experience similar to his; candidate of color, too. these pioneer are exhort to open door closed to the group they represent but to represent those group first and foremost, and that’s tough. check with obama. or hillary clinton. 

or, now, buttigieg. he has weather complaints, even derision, from l.g.b.t.q. progressives, many of whom say he’s not gay enough, his manner and mannerism too strait-laced, his policy preoccupation too moderate, his success infuriating reflective of how readily and well he assimilate into heterosexual america. "gays seem to be mayor pete’s worst critics" was the headline of a column in the washington blade, an l.g.b.t.q. publication. 

that sadden me. as i’ve written before, part of what so many gay people have fought so hard for is the recognition that we don’t fit into tidy boxes, otherwise known as stereotype — not sartorially, not ideologically. absolutely disagree with buttigieg’s opposition to "medicare for all" if you have a different view, but don’t suggest that he should support it because he’s gay. yawn at all those perfectly pressed white dress shirt that he wears, but don’t cast them as a betrayal. 

and don’t say that by discuss his own christianity, he’s consort with the enemy. yes, religion has been use cruel against l.g.b.t.q. people. but one of the most profound dimensions of buttigieg’s candidacy is how he has turn that around, for instance assert that his marriage to his husband, chasten, has brought him "closer to god." 

"that’s the thing that i wish the mike pence of the world would understand," he said in a speech last year, refer to the vice president’s anti-gay record. "that if you have a problem with who i am, your problem is not with me. your quarrel, sir, is with my creator." 

buttigieg has campaign frequent with his husband, embrace him onstage, and has mention his marriage in debates. and he doesn’t shy away from question about his sexual orientation, which he didn’t public acknowledge until the age of 33, shortly before his election to a second term as mayor of south bend, ind. 

but he doesn’t volunteer lengthy ruminate about its impact on how he see the world or showcase it in any other way. it’s there if you look and listen for it. but sometimes you have to look and listen hard. 

none of the voter at his rally in iowa brought it up when i ask them what drew them to buttigieg. they mostly rave about his intelligence. 

were there any particular obstacle he might face in a general election? 

"his youth," said louann cooling, 62, of le grand, iowa. it was the same answer — his youth, or his inexperience — that other gave. no one mention his being openly gay. 

being gay and an emblem of progress hasn’t given buttigieg any special traction with younger democrats, who respond much less favorable to him than old democrat do. it hasn’t establish any solidarity with other minorities, though he reach for such a connection when state a commitment to racial justice during the democrats’ november debate. 

"while i do not have the experience of ever have been discriminate against because of the color of my skin, i do have the experience of sometimes feeling like a stranger in my own country, turning on the news and seeing my own rights come up for debate," he said. "wearing this wedding ring in a way that couldn’t have happen two election ago let me know just how deep my obligation is to help those whose rights are on the line every day, even if they are nothing like me in their experience." 

those remark didn’t have the effect he intended. some african-americans accused him of equate very different kind of discrimination, and poll show that his support from black democrat remains abysmal. when they appraise buttigieg, they notice a whole lot beyond his sexual orientation, including worrisome friction between him and some black resident of south bend and a path of extraordinary privilege (harvard, a rhodes scholarship, a job with mckinsey) that brought him to this point. 

what do buttigieg’s being gay tell you? that he has trepidation and caution in him — he stay in the closet all those years — but that he has courage, too, enough to pursue the presidency despite the inevitable spotlight on him as a novelty. 

what doesn’t his being gay tell you? his musical tastes, for one. the last time i had a long talk with him was in mid-december, and he had just met the performer lizzo, who was a fellow guest on "cbs this morning." she’s an icon for outsiders, brim with delicious attitude, and i assume he’d be thrilled. 

but i’m not sure he really do "thrilled," and he confessed to being more a dave matthews band fan. in any case, he said, "i usually have a kind of celebrity blindness." 

a gay man who doesn’t twinkle at the stars around him? yep, our creator make us in all shape and stripes. thank you, mayor pete, for taking that message out on the trail. 
