of all trump’s defenses, this is the lamest 
by frank bruni 
jan. 25, 2020 

once the senate conclude its trial of president trump, it should go into recess. until next january. the house, too. lawmaker shouldn’t pass legislation, consider nomination or make any important decision whatsoever: this is an election year, and the voter will soon weigh in on the direction of america. the nation’s business should await that judgment, lest member of congress contradict it. 

a ludicrous proposal? indeed. but it’s in line with — and an extrapolate of — a favorite argument against trump’s conviction and removal from office. his republican supporter say that lawmaker shouldn’t speak for voter on such a crucial issue. to pre-empt the verdict at the ballot box, they say, is to subvert the people’s will. 

nice try. lawmaker are elect specifically to speak for voter on crucial issues. that’s the system. that’s their job. america government doesn’t operate by daily, hourly or issue-by-issue poll (at least not overtly). congress doesn’t have exponential more power one week after election day than it do one year later (though it may indeed have more politics currency). 

and lawmaker shouldn’t defer to their constituent at every turn. those constituent expect them, over the course of their legislative terms, to use their judgment as better-informed proxy for the people they represent. so do the constitution, which create america as a representative democracy, not a direct one. our lawmaker are supposed to lead as well as follow, to be responsive to public sentiment but not mesmerize or paralyze by it. that’s even true when the stakes are huge than when they’re small. 

republican have decided to sing a different tune. if it sound familiar, that’s because they turn to the same music when the supreme court justice antonin scalia died, president barack obama nominate merrick garland to replace him and the senate majority leader, mitch mcconnell, declared that a presidential election about eight month in the offing prevent the senate from taking any action. it was a song not of principle but of politics convenience. the same hold true now. 

"give the people back their power," the house minority leader, kevin mccarthy, implore a few month ago, argue against impeach itself. refer to the president’s transgress and the november 2020 election, mcconnell said, "the america people, if they think this is a very significant episode, can take it into account." senator lindsey graham chime in: "i really do believe that the best person — group of people — to pick a president are the voters, not a bunch of partisan politicians." pat cipollone, one of the president’s lawyers, added: "no one ever thought that it would be a good idea for our country — for our children, for our grandchildren — to try to remove a president from a ballot, to deny the america people the right to vote." 

no one? really? how about the frame of the constitution, who establish the impeach process to do essentially that and decline to add any asterisk about the next election’s imminence? "if the frame thought impeach in an election year was a bad idea, they could have set things up differently," noted jill lepore, a harvard history professor and the author of the 2018 book "these truths: a history of the united states." 

"they could have institute a mechanism for an interim election, for instance," lepore told me. "they did not. they could have said, ‘except not in an election year.’ they did not. you want there to be no impeach allow in an election year, ever? you have to get a constitutional amendment ratified." and that would never happen, because it would be license for a president to do anything he or she wanted, fearlessly, if it sync with the calendar just so. 

the framers, in fact, want a government that wasn’t too sensitive to voter — that mediate voters’ whim and prejudice through representative presumable taking a longer, cooler view. senators’ six-year terms reflect that. as alison lacroix, a university of chicago professor who teach constitutional law and america history, told me, "the senate is supposed to have a little more deliberative power and maybe be a little less beholden to the people." when senator say they should kick an issue back to the people, they’re arguable violate the spirit of the chamber. 

lacroix made another excellent point: what’s happening to trump isn’t muscle voter out of the process but, rather, taking into account what voter recently did. "you only get an impeach vote when people have change their minds," she said, refer to their opinion about a sitting president. "the vote come from the house, and we know, from things like the midterm elections, that some amount of people have change their minds. another party has gain control of the house. that has to be telling us something." 

granted, that switch in the house majority wasn’t a referendum on trump’s interaction with ukraine, which were the grounds for his impeach and hadn’t yet come to light. but they were absolutely a referendum, in part, on his behavior and character. lawmaker who are now assess and acting on the worst of that behavior and character are hardly turning a deaf ear to voters. 

if republican leader were really so invest in a government that didn’t diverge from voters’ desires, more of them would be questioning the electoral college. because of it, the country has a president, trump, who received about three million few vote than his opponent. because of it, george w. bush won the 2000 presidential election despite being the choice of few america than al gore. but both trump and bush are republicans. so it’s fine if the system and voter sentiment aren’t perfectly aligned. 

similarly, republican — democrats, too — are fond of tar opponent by saying that they’re too beholden to polls. the implication is that elect official should have the courage of their own conviction and not outsource their judgment to constituents. saying that only voter should decide trump’s fate is precisely such outsourcing. and election day is essentially the biggest poll of all. 

there’s an additional, profound important wrinkle in the case of trump’s impeach and trial. they stem specifically from action he took to corrupt the next presidential election by get a foreign government to smear a potential rival. to give those action a pass is to green-light more of the same or worse, meaning that voters’ verdict on trump’s behavior might be fatally tainted: not a clean expression of popular will but a product of, well, cheating. the election can’t be the remedy when the election is what’s at issue. 

but mccarthy, mcconnell and other republican are determined to spare their party the humiliate of trump’s removal and to protect themselves from his wrath (and his base’s fury) if he isn’t saved. so they reach for whatever argument they can. some are more plausible than others. the assertion that an election next november forbid honor this january is a joke, and the frame would have laugh at it. 
