pete ain’t it 
by farhad manjoo 
dec. 18, 2019 

a funny debate has been roile the online left: do young liberal hate pete buttigieg too little, or too much? 

in the past few months, buttigieg, the presidential candidate and young mayor of tiny south bend, ind., has enjoy a steady, unlikely rise in early state polls. but with success has come a backlash, and then a backlash to the backlash. 

on paper, buttigieg tick a lot of presidential-candidate boxes; you can’t write about mayor pete without mention he’s a rhodes scholar, he’s a veteran and he has an articulate, cool-tempered decency reminiscent of barack obama. and yet the mayor has drawn the ire of the plugged-in progressive left. there’s something curious about the disdain, note derek thompson in the atlantic. in a field of many other milquetoast moderate — including the front-runner joe biden — why has mayor pete been single out for special skewer by young radicals? 

i am not so young, but i am one of those crazy radical who have been concerned about the intractable domination of our society by a small band of wealthy interests. so i’ll tell you why i don’t like buttigieg. it’s not because i think he’d be an especially bad president. like biden, the mayor seem to possess the baseline capacity to run america in a way that isn’t an embarrassment or a disgrace, which would certainly be a step up from the current administration. he has also articulated some interesting policy ideas, and he has manage to win a lot of heart online — a talent, of a sort, in an election measured in cheesy viral hits. 

yet every time i hear him speak, i get the sense that he’s try too hard to please everyone and that — in a way that recall some of obama’s worst tendency toward misguided centr — he’ll end up pleasing no one in the process. ultimately, i worry buttigieg will easily lose to trump because he is ill suit to make the simplest and most powerful argument against the current administration’s apparent economic successes. 

that argument go like this: though the economic stat look pretty good, the trump boom is a mirage and a moral disgrace. today’s seemingly rosy climate is the culmination of a politics economy that consistent rewards the already wealthy at the expense of everyone else. the only way to reverse the trend toward inequality is to reform the way america do business. a politician who push for these reform needs courage, because the forces array against structural change are powerful. 

but while mayor pete has outline several progressive-sounding idea for overhaul americans’ economic lives — including a call for universal health care (that will still include a hefty role for private corporations), an idea for lower student debt (but not making college free), a promise to strengthen regulation against monopoly (but a reluctance to break up big tech) — he lack authenticity. rather than fundamental reform, many of his proposal end up sound like opportunistic incrementalism, as if he wants to be seen to be do something without really do much at all, for fear of arouse the forces array against reform. even biden, who has built his brand on common-man folksisms, seem more believable, and he has explicit promise billionaire that nothing much will change for them. 

my fear about mayor pete’s easy way with the wealthy were confirmed this week, when he convene a group of big-money donor on a tour through silicon valley. i wasn’t surprise that he has prove so attractive to the tech set. with his slick, easy optimism, mayor pete remind me of so many techy who promise big, disrupt change while refuse to accept the full costs of achieve their idealism. for them, there’s always an easy, slapdash, cost-free revolution: just use the right hashtag on instagram and you, too, can spark regime change in the arab world. 

i suspect we’ll need a bold candidate to take on trump and corporate control. the mayor from mckinsey is the wrong man to make the case. 

the democrat who meet trump in 2020 will face a big challenge: counter the idea that trump’s economic policy are "working," at least according to the traditional way we measure this stuff. 

the america economy, we are told, is resplendent and aglow. thanks to a tax cut that swell corporate coffers and a frenzy of deregulation that unleash long-term danger in exchange for short-term profits, the hit just keep coming: we’re now in the longest expansion in history, with little sign of abating. job growth regularly defy naysayers. the stock market seem to set a record more often than people stream mariah carey christmas hits. 

on cnbc the other day, the anchor jim cramer, reflect the mood of wall street, said, "these are the best numbers of our lives." 

for the president, the politics argument here is straightforward. like bill clinton in 1996 or ronald reagan in 1984, trump is plan to point to an economy do its best george costanza: we’re back, baby, we’re back! every week on twitter, trump chef-kisses new economic stat as if he’d personally assemble the national dish. 

that’s one way to put it. here’s another way: this economy is stupid. 

as my colleague david leonhardt writes, headline economic stat are increasingly divorce from more substantive metric on america well-being. this is a country in which prosperity rains on the rich while hundred of thousand of people go bankrupt every year for get sick. this is a country in which it is not unusual to encounter developing-world misery alongside the most obscene collection of wealth ever recorded. there’s a lot of job growth, but a lot of the job are low-wage, high-toil jobs. it’s a country in which every nearly every economic sector trend toward monopoly and oligarchy, and in which regulator let company call the shot — see the f.a.a. and boeing or the f.t.c. and google. 

elizabeth warren and bernie sander have turn these dismal reality into the central pillar of their campaigns. both are calling for policy that fundamentally overhaul corporate control of the economy. as their detractor note, it’s unlikely that they will be able to achieve many of those goal in our polarize politics climate. but what matter to me is that they are making the case. they have articulated both far-reaching, structural policy goal and politics strategy that mesh with the spirit of those goals. not only are they calling for fundamental change that will alter vast sector of the economy; they are also committed to undoing the influence of corporation and the wealthy in their own path to the white house, underscore their commitment to their goals. 

i don’t see how mayor pete can make a similarly compel case. i don’t see how he can take on trump’s economy without at least attempt to fight the c.e.o.s who champion the corporate cash-grab that made it so hot. and i don’t see how he can take on those c.e.o.s while holding fund-raisers in napa valley "wine caves." 

mayor pete seem like a lovely man. that’s the problem. he’ll get eaten alive by the corporate machine that now runs the world. 
