pompeo call me a ‘liar.’ that’s not what bother me. 
by mary louise kelly 
jan. 28, 2020 

ask journalist why they do the job they do, and you’ll hear a range of answers. here’s mine: not every day, but on the best ones, we get to put question to powerful people and hold them to account. this is both a privilege and a responsibility. 

january has been an interesting month on this front. i’ve had the opportunity to put questions, one on one, to the top diplomat of both the united states and iran, in their respective capitals. 

iran’s foreign minister, javad zarif, spoke to me on jan. 7 in tehran. secretary of state mike pompeo spoke to me last friday, in washington. each man represent a nation in conflict with the other; speak with them, i wonder what path either could see out of the situation. in both cases, i was allot 10 minutes for questions. 

it turn out you can cover a lot of ground in 10 minutes. when mr. zarif sat down with me, on the sideline of a big think tank conference focus on security in the persian gulf, it was just four days after an america drone strike had kill maj. gen. qassim suleimani. we start there. 

how might iran retaliate for general suleimani’s death? "the united states has committed a grave error," mr. zarif told me. "and it will pay for that grave error." i do not know whether, at that moment, he was aware that just hour later, iran would unleash missile on iraq military bases where america troops are housed. 

we move on to whether he would travel to new york later that week, to attend security council meeting at the united nations. 

"no," he told me, "because mike pompeo decided i was too dangerous for the united states." the united states had deny mr. zarif a visa, in what some have brand a violate of the 1947 united nation headquarters agreement, which generally require the united states to grant access to the united nation for foreign diplomats. 

next i ask whether we were witness the death of the 2015 nuclear deal. mr. zarif insist no — even as he acknowledge that iran was suspend compliance with centrifuge limits. 

the foreign minister and i end with a tense exchange on what is an uncomfortable question for him: the status of united states citizen imprison in iran, and whether future prisoner exchange were off the table. "we had propose a universal exchange of all prisoner and we were do that in good faith," mr. zarif said. but are those channel still open? no, he conceded, saying, "those talks are certainly suspend now." 

my interview with secretary pompeo came two week and three days later, in the east hall of the treaty room, on the seventh floor of the state department. by then an uneasy pause had taken hold; the united states and iran appeared, for the moment, to have step back from the brink of war. 

i kick off with a question on diplomacy. is there any serious initiative underway to reopen diplomacy with iran? "we’ve been engaged in deep diplomatic effort since the first day of the trump administration," mr. pompeo replied, underline america effort to build a coalition to counter and contain iran. 

but in terms of america engagement with iran, i went on, are there any plan for talks? "the diplomatic effort on this front has been vigorous, robust and enormously successful," mr. pompeo said, change the subject back to engaging america ally to put pressure on iran. 

another question i was curious to hear secretary pompeo answer was how the trump administration plan to prevent iran from building nuclear weapons, should it decide to do so, given that iran is close to a nuclear weapon capability than when president trump took office. 

here’s the relevant portion of the interview: 

kelly: how do you stop iran from get a nuclear weapon? 

pompeo: we’ll stop them. 

kelly: how? sanctions? 

pompeo: we’ll stop them. 

he did not offer specifics. nor did he elaborate, when pressed on how to square his resolve with what mr. zarif had just told me — that all limit on iran’s centrifuge program have been suspended. 

"yeah," mr. pompeo said. "he’s blustering." 

do you have evidence that he’s blustering? he did not directly answer. (in fairness, i could hardly expect him to telegraph what intelligence the united states may possess on the iran regime’s nuclear ambitions.) 

i write about all this now to refocu attention on the substance of the interviews, which has been overshadow by mr. pompeo’s subsequent swear at me, calling me a liar and challenging me to find ukraine on an unmarked map. 

for the record, i did. that’s not the point. the point is that recently the risk of miscalculate — of two old adversary misread each other and accidental escalate into armed confrontation — has felt very real. it occur to me that swap insult through interview with journalist such as me might, terrifyingly, be as close as the top diplomat of the united states and iran came to communicate this month. 

there is a reason that freedom of the press is enshrine in the constitution. there is a reason it matter that people in position of power — people charged with steer the foreign policy of entire nation — be held to account. the stakes are too high for their impulse and decision not to be examine in as thoughtful and rigorous an interview as is possible. 

journalist don’t sit down with senior government official in the service of score politics points. we do it in the service of ask tough questions, on behalf of our fellow citizens. and then share the answer — or lack thereof — with the world. 
