requiem for a dream 
by roger cohen 
jan. 31, 2020 

i have cover many story that marked me over the past 40 years, in war zone and outside them, but none that has affected me as personally as britain’s exit from the europe union. brexit day, now upon us, feel like the end of hope, a moral collapse, a self-amputation that will make the country where i grew up poor in every sense. 

poor materially, of course, but above all poor in its shrivel soul, divorce from its neighborhood, internal fractured, smaller, meaner, more insular, more alone, no long a protagonist in the great miracle of the postwar years — europe’s journey toward borderless peace and union. britain, in a fit of delude jingoism, has opt for littleness. 

the fiasco was capture this week when that pompous and pitiful britain nationalist, nigel farage, wave a miniature union jack in the europe parliament as he bid farewell and was cut off by the vice-president of the parliament, mairead mcguinness. "put your flag away, you’re leaving, and take them with you," she said. 

farage look like a sheepish schoolboy caught break rules. he blushed. an ireland woman from a country uplift by europe union membership reprimand the new breed of little-england male as he exit history in pursuit of an illusion: the symbolism was perfect. "hip, hip hooray!" farage’s flag-waving brexit party cohort chanted. save me, please, for i shall weep. 

speak of symbolism, the fact that president trump has been a fulsome supporter of this folly is apt. an ahistorical, amoral america leader cheering on a britain abdicate sum up the end of an era. the world was rebuilt after 1945 on something of more substance than british-american lie and bloviation; it took resolve. the torch has passed. to whom exactly is unclear, perhaps to a country slow to contain a plague. that is a problem. 

brexit belong to this era in one quintessential way. it is an act of the imagination, inspired by an imaginary past, carry along by misdirect grievances, borne aloft by an imaginary future. the age of impunity is also the age of illusion turbocharge by social media. 

inequality, poor infrastructure, low investment, inadequate school are real britain problem but the take-back-your-country transference of blame for them onto "brussels bureaucrats" prove that the imagination now overwhelm reality. truth withers. the mob roars. this, too, is a problem. 

yes, britain was undefeated in world war ii and help liberate europe. but it could do so only with its allies; and it was precisely to secure what it is now turning its back on: a free europe offering its people the "simple joy and hope which make life worth living." those are churchill’s words in 1946 in a speech that also contained this phrase: "we must build a kind of united states of europe." unbowed britain was once consequential britain; no longer. 

i use the word "abdication" advisedly. europe needs the great tradition of britain liberalism at a moment when hungary and poland have veer toward nationalism and, across the continent, xenophobic hatred is resurgent. it is perverse for britain to try to look away. europe is part of britain. visit the great norman monastery in england and tell me this is not so. the britain dead who lie in the continent’s soil have given their lives for its liberty tell the same story of interlace fate from a different perspective. 

to be so orphan is painful. the 47 years of britain membership cover the entire arc of my adult life. europa was our dream. i cover anwar sadat, the egypt president, speak to the europe parliament about hope and peace in 1981, eight month before his assassination. so much for dreams. 

yet they persist, for otherwise life is unlivable. i wander from brussels to rome to paris to berlin to london and everywhere i live i experienced some iterate of europe’s beauty, as a physical thing, as a cultural bond and as a transform idea. 

the sensation was most acute in germany, where the idea of the union was the most effective escape from postwar shame and the rubble of 1945, a form of atonement. but it was ubiquitous, the guarantor of our deliverance and the symbol of our capacity to reinvent the world and even make it better. 

every europe country, through the goal of ever close union, change itself. they grew richer, no small thing. but they also reframe their self-image. 

italy and spain left mussolini and franco behind to become stable, prosperous democracies. france found its tortuous way to truth after the humiliate and predation of vichy and discover a europe avenue to express once more its universal message of human rights found on human dignity. 

central europe country stabilize their escape from the deaden soviet imperium to which yalta had confine them. britain cease equate europe with scourge like intellectuals, rabies and garlic, as it had in my childhood. hyde park became a babble of europe tongues. the britain economy surged. britain had given up its colonies and found a new identity in association with europe, or so it seemed, flickeringly. 

then i live in sarajevo covering the bosnia war and i saw, in inert body torn by shrapnel, and in history revive as galvanize myth of might and conquest, the horror from which the europe union had save my generation. it had laid bad history to rest. that was enough to be forever a europe patriot. 

but not enough for the britain a quarter-century later. in the words of my friend ed vulliamy, who also cover that war, britain has become a country "that boards cheap flight for stag outing to piss all over krakow." 

hip, hip hooray! 

when i live in berlin, i would cross the nearby polish border and never fail to marvel that where million had perish decade early a nonexistent frontier trace its invisible line across field of wheat. i would pass from the germany world to the lands of the slav and nobody ask me who i was, what papers i bore or what was my intent. 

if german-polish reconciliation has been possible, anything is possible, my only solace at this moment. a bunch of flag-waving fantasists, at the wrong end of actuarial tables, have rob britain youth of the europe they embrace. they will be look on as 450 million europe across the way forge their fate. their automatic right to live and work anywhere from lisbon to stockholm will be lost. 

i’ve lost a limb; more than a limb, my heart. europe help britain grow big and more open and more prosperous. now it will shrink. another suffering friend, patrick wintour, the diplomatic editor of the guardian, sent me these lines of auden: 

in the nightmare of the dark 

all the dogs of europe bark, 

and the living nation wait, 

each sequester in its hate; 

intellectual disgrace 

stare from every human face, 

and the sea of pity lie 

lock and frozen in each eye. 

a better epitaph for the abort story of britain in europe and the tragedy of a disoriente nation’s willful infliction of enduring self-harm is impossible to imagine. 
