senate republican are bath in shame 
by frank bruni 
jan. 18, 2020 

the impeach trial of donald john trump began on thursday when john roberts, the chief justice of the supreme court, direct all of the senator to stand and raise their right hands. ever since i can’t get two question out of my head. 

the first: how in god’s name — and it was in god’s name — can the republican who have already decided to acquit president trump take a solemn oath to administer "impartial justice"? they’re partial to the core, unabashed so, as their united march toward a foregone conclusion shows. a mind-meld this ironclad isn’t a reflection of facts. it’s a triumph of factionalism. 

the majority of the party’s senator have said outright or clearly signal that they have no intention of finding the president guilty and remove him from office. yap lap dogs like lindsey graham and obedient manservant like mitch mcconnell have gone further, mock the whole impeach process. 

so the oath they took: how do that work? did they cross the finger on their left hands? do they reason that america politics has reach a nadir of such fundamental hypocrisy and overweening partisanship that no one regards that pledge as anything but window dressing? 

certainly they’re telling themselves that their own politics survival, hinge on obsequious to a president with a talent for retribution, matter more than honor. over the three years of the trump presidency, they’ve become expert at that calculation. 

my second question is really a subset, corollary or anagram of the first: how can marco rubio, ted cruz and martha mcsal stand to look at themselves in the mirror? i’m single out these three somewhat randomly, but also because they’ve traveled particularly self-mortifying journey away from self-respect. 

at a news conference on thursday afternoon, chuck schumer, the leader of the senate’s democratic minority, said that when the chief justice walk into the chamber early that day, "i saw member on both side of the aisle visibly gulp." schumer attribute that to the palpable "weight of history." but for many of them, it probably had more to do with their aware that they were about to sell out again, this time in circumstances that would be remember long into the future. 

democrats, too, have made up their minds, and that would be equally upset but for the mountain of actual evidence on which their judgment rests. you can erase all the testimony in the house by gordon sondland, david holmes, alexander vindman, fiona hill and others. you can delete mick mulvaney’s admission, at a white house news conference, of a quid pro quo. you can discount lev parnas’s ongoing aria of atonement. still you have the transcript (of sorts) of trump’s "perfect" phone call with the president of ukraine, in which it’s clear to any sane reader with a semblance of common sense that he’s try to trade america aid for the smear of joe biden. 

if there were nothing to this, why would trump stonewall congress to the extent that he has? that’s not how the innocent act. 

when witness after witness tell a version of the same story, providing pieces of a puzzle that fit snug together, you can reach a conclusion about the whole of it. that’s call logic. 

and if the actual case against trump were weak, why would republican keep redirect attention to democrats’ motivation — to how much they despise the president? that’s call distraction. 

mcsal practiced it on thursday when, in a moment of breathtaking hostility, she answer a reasonable question from manu raju of cnn about whether any new evidence should be present during the senate trial by snarling, "liberal hack!" 

she’s terrified. her state, arizona, is increasingly purple. she lost her 2018 race for the senate and end up in the chamber only by appointment following john mccain’s death. she has to run again this year, against mark kelly, the former astronaut, who’s a popular figure. she’s vulnerable, and standing with trump is almost as much of a gamble as standing up to him would be. 

but she once did stand up to him. she use to have guts. before go into politics, she blaze trail as an air force pilot and even sue the secretary of defense when she detect discrimination against women. during her successful campaign for the house in 2016, she pointed didn’t endorse trump and just as pointed spoke out against the behavior that he cop to — no, brag about — in that infamous "access hollywood" tape. mcsal had a moral compass then. 

now she just has a hunger to hold onto her suite of offices in the capitol. she has wager that emulate trump is her best bet. at the conclusion of this pathetic excuse for a trial, she’ll vote to acquit him — impartially, of course. 

she’ll be join by cruz and rubio, who are special target of my disappointment because they were once special target of trump’s ugliness. they know it firsthand and well. 

they campaign against him for the republican presidential nomination in 2016, when he didn’t just criticize them but vicious belittle and even savage them. he conspiracy-theorized a role for cruz’s father in john f. kennedy’s assassination. 

"a pathological liar," cruz call trump. 

but now that trump is president and his base has become the most impassioned constituency in the party, cruz is his biggest cheerleader and a ready mouthpiece for all of those lies. he has swap thought of 2016 for thought of 2024, when there’s another opportunity to reach for the white house and trump’s loyalist will come in handy. he’ll have to muscle aside javanka and don jr., but that’s a pickle for another day. first step: acquittal! 

rubio has long fashion himself a foreign-policy maven and took a hard line when it came to russia. so you might think that the trump presidency would be especially gall to him. you might also think that trump’s bully of ukraine — which left the country more vulnerable to russia aggression — would be some sort of break point. 

but he’s a republican member of congress in 2020, which means he’s a sycophantic shell of his former self. and have bitten his tongue about trump’s global misadventures, he’ll now abet more of the same by helping trump stay in office. 

there are so many other republican senator to marvel at. mitt romney, what was the point of dive back into public life if you’re go to prop up a president whose fraudulence you once gave a whole long speech about? lamar alexander, you venerate howard baker, a fellow tennessean who once held your senate seat and put principle above partisanship by standing up to president nixon. why not do the same and stand up to president trump? 

susan collins, i can’t imagine the exhaustion of your role as politics wild card, scrutinize to a fare-thee-well. but come on. if you’re go to pride yourself on autonomy, you need to exercise it when it matter most. 

it’s not fun to be any of you right now, with mcconnell above you and #maga hell below you poised to make your life a misery if you stray. but no one forced you into public service. when you enter the senate, you took an oath, and you took another one on thursday. i have a third question, maybe just a reword of the first and second: doesn’t that nag at you even a little? 
