steve job was right: smartphone and tablet kill the p.c. 
by farhad manjoo 
nov. 13, 2019 

i got an ipad pro recently, and i’ve fallen madly in love with it. 

this was unexpected. i’ve had ipad before, but like a lot of people, i hadn’t found them to be very useful. tablet were good for surf the web and watch netflix, but they’ve always been dogged by the charge that you couldn’t get a lot of work done on them. 

apple’s latest ipad are different. not only can you get work done on them; in many ways they’re productivity dream machines. today’s ipad are power by custom-designed process that are fast than the chip on some of the mac apple makes, and the ipad’s separate sold keyboard is better and more durable than the accursed, falling-apart mess of a keyboard that apple is shipping on its much-maligned current line of laptops. 

apple unveil a new 16-inch macbook with a revamp keyboard on wednesday, good news for the many apple lovers who’ve been grumbling about the company’s lackluster slate of recent macs. but i think the ipad is already beginning to eclipse the traditional personal computer. in the four month i’ve had this latest model, the ipad pro has eaten into the time i spend on my phone and my old-school laptop and desktop. among other things, i now research and write just about every column use an ipad (i still compose many first draft by speak into my headphones, but i’m an odd duck). 

i thought i had gotten out of the gadget-reviewing business for good last year. since the smartphone had gobble up everything from camera to music player to portable game systems, i declared the whole field of gadgetry dead. but just when i thought i was out, they pull me back in. 

the history of the ipad is a story about consolidation, focus and the power of scale in the tech business. it’s a story about how thorough one company, apple, has dominate the entire hardware business this decade. and it is also, really, a story about the only thing that matter in tech in the 2010s — the smartphone — and the way that one device became the gravitation center of the entire tech business, shape every market in the industry, and much of the non-tech world beyond it. 

the ipad has always been freight with great expectations. although the ipad was unveil in 2010, three years after the iphone, development of the ipad predate development of the phone, and steve jobs, apple’s co-founder, always seem to have his heart in the tablet. 

in one of his last interview before his death in 2011, job declared the ipad to be the future of computing. "pcs are go to be like trucks," he told the journalist kara swish and walt mossberg — meaning the traditional mac and window machine would still be around, but like big rigs, they’d be use by a small set of power user for a dwindle set of specific, high-power tasks. the "cars" of the tech industry, as job saw it, would be phone and tablets. 

for a while, he was only partially right. the ipad sold well at launch, but after a few years it hit some hurdles. after jobs’s death, apple left the ipad to languish, and did something similar with the mac. 

meanwhile, something amazing happen with the iphone and the many android-based copycat phone it inspired. in the 2010s, smartphone became more popular, more powerful and more profitable than anyone in the tech industry thought possible. within a few years, their sales and usage eclipse that of pcs, and for much of the decade they were the fountain of most new consumer innovation across the technology industry. smartphone made uber and instagram and snapchat and tiktok possible. smartphone camera began to surpass stand-alone cameras, turning much of culture and society into a meme-soaked playground where visual media matter more than text. 

the smartphone also alter the business dynamics of the tech industry. when the iphone came out, apple was just one of many successful hardware company in the world. but the smartphone decimate a host of phone brand (remember nokia? motorola?), and as smartphone gain more power, they began making life impossible for a slate of hardware start-ups, from gopro to jawbone. 

on the strength of the iphone, apple began capture a greater and greater slice of the tech hardware business; although it didn’t sell a majority of units, its commitment to the high end of the market allow it to make the bulk of profits. in the last quarter of 2017, according to one estimate, apple made 86 percent of profit in the smartphone industry. 

apple’s dominance came despite the fact that the company made some big mistake and was late to many big innovations. samsung, not apple, invent huge-screen phones. apple’s mac line was plague by delay and dead ends, including a 2013 redesign of the mac pro that look like a trash can and prove just as useful. and on the ipad, for many years, apple just seem to fall asleep. the ipad’s stylus and keyboard-forward design? microsoft did it first on the surface. 

yet none of this mattered. because of its hold on the smartphone business and a very sticky software ecosystem that user found hard to leave, apple has been able to incorporate many innovation pioneer elsewhere and sell its customer on a series of peripheral billion-dollar businesses, including the apple watch and airpods. 

and ultimately, it’s the ecosystem that explain why i can’t stop raving about the ipad. when it came out, the big knock on the ipad was that it was just a big phone; today, that’s what i love about it — like the watch or airpods, the ipad feel intuitive and natural to me because it works just like the device i use most often, my phone. 

like a phone, in most scenario i find the ipad to be faster, more portable and easy to use and maintain than any traditional p.c. i’ve ever owned. the ipad’s limited screen space and emphasis on full-screen app also make for few distraction than on a traditional personal computer. the ipad, like my phone, let me log in to my bank use my face; the mac, in 2019, doesn’t even have a touch screen. 

the ipad still can’t do everything a laptop can, and i still have to log in to a "real" computer sometimes. i had a long chat recently with dan seifert, the deputy editor of the verge, who use an ipad every day on the subway but often find the device infuriating. 

"for someone like me, who’s been use a desktop operate system for a long time, there’s a lot of built-in convention that i’m use to that can be frustrating," seifert said. in particular, the ipad doesn’t work with antiquated work flow that are built for pcs. say you need to log into your company’s bespoke publishing system or expense program? it’s possible those won’t work on your ipad — at least not yet — because they were built for much old devices. 

but seifert agree with me that many of these use are a special case. he still use p.c.s because often, in jobs’s parlance, he needs a truck. most people, however, don’t need trucks, and few of us will need them in the future. seifert isn’t teaching his kid how to use desktop operate system like the mac or windows, and neither am i. 

it took long than he expected, but steve job was right. over the past decade, for most people, in most use cases, phone kill the p.c. to get work done, now you just use a big phone — which apple happen to call an ipad. 
