tech lose a prophet. just when it needs one. 
by kara swish 
jan. 29, 2020 

it’s nothing but noise, all the time. we get hammer every second from an incessant sousaphone of tweet and from the righteous rage machine that scream at us in this digitize 24/7/365 communications world that we have built. 

what you might not know is that we have long had a name for what start this all: "disruptive innovation." the concept was pioneer by clay christensen, a high-profile and well-regarded harvard professor of management who die of cancer last week at 67. professor christensen’s remarkable legacy grew out of a seminal book he publish in 1997, "the innovator’s dilemma." 

the book cover esoteric industry like the disk drive market and excavate to analyze and illustrate the power of disrupt technologies. his idea exploded through the then-nascent internet scene and throughout silicon valley. i recall reading an early copy and thinking that it was a manifesto that the tech world would embrace — and that professor christensen was tech’s prophet. 

the intel founder and chief executive andy grove was a fan. so was the apple legend steve jobs. both men were doubtless attract to the idea that start-ups made up of outsider could find ways to create new market and new value — and disrupt and overwhelm establish companies. 

in the face of disruption, old company could do almost nothing. it wasn’t that they couldn’t see the new threat of start-ups, but that they were stuck on serving their current businesses, and they fail to change their product and service out of fear of cutting into profits. 

professor christensen’s formula was elegant: "first, disrupt product are simple and cheaper; they generally promise lower margins, not greater profits. second, disrupt technology typically are first commercialize in emerge or insignificant markets. and third, leading firms’ most profitable customer generally don’t want, and indeed initially can’t use, product base on disrupt technologies." 

it was that simple. professor christensen’s book came out a year before google was founded, seven years before facebook, eight years before youtube and 11 years before uber. each of these companies, knowingly or unknowingly, would follow his map. 

while professor christensen would go on to write a sequel and many more books on adjacent topic ripe for disruption, like education ("disrupting class" in 2008) and health care ("innovator’s prescription" in 2009), it was his initial idea that was devastating insightful. 

i use the term devastate because, though no fault of professor christensen’s, disrupt innovation took a turn for the worse in tech. silicon valley fail to marry disrupt with a concept of corporate responsibility, and growth at all costs became its motto. the more measured approach that professor christensen taught was ignored. 

thus, in tech, the idea was more like "destructive innovation," which to me was distill in facebook’s famous sign that was once plastered all over the wall at its headquarters: "move fast and break things." 

i have always wonder why the company chose those words. i have no problem with "move fast," which professor christensen would not have quibble with, since being nimble was a core competent that he touted. it was the word "break" that stuck in my head like a bad migraine. 

why use a violent and thoughtless word like "break" and not one more hopeful, like "change" or "transform" or "invent"? and, if "break" was to be the choice, what would happen after the breaking? would there be fixing? could there be any fix after the breaking? "break" sound painful. and, back to today’s subject, professor christensen never talk about that. 

in fact, professor christensen’s approach was quite the opposite. he learned in 2010 that he had lymphoma, then he had a stroke. within two years, he publish the book that i like best, titled "how will you measure your life?" it is at turn spiritual and sometimes self-helpy, taking professor christensen’s management thinking and apply it to how to live a life. 

this book should be newly relevant, as tech is casting about for its next act; we’ve been talk about the negative impact of tech’s disrupt innovation for a while now. techy measure everything — and so professor christensen’s bracing prescription are perhaps perfect as the tech industry seek redemption. 

for example, he wrote: 

"it’s easy to hold your principles 100 percent of the time than it is to hold them 98 percent of the time." 

and: "in fact, how you allocate your own resources can make your life turn out to be exactly as you hope or very different from what you intend." 

and, most of all: "decide what you stand for. and then stand for it all the time." 

perhaps the tech industry do not deserve the kind and good advice that professor christensen imparted, but it should take it anyway. that way, while he rest in peace, it could give us some, too. 
