that beloved hospital? it’s driving up health care costs 
by elisabeth rosenthal 
sept. 1, 2019 

as voter fume about the high cost of health care, politician have been target two well-deserved villains: pharmaceutical companies, whose price have risen more than inflation, and insurers, who pay their executive million in salary while raise premium and deductibles. 

but while the democratic presidential candidate have devoted copious airtime to debate health care, many of the country’s leading health policy expert have wonder why they have given a total pass to arguable a primary culprit behind runaway medical inflation: america’s hospitals. 

data show that hospital are by far the biggest cost in our $3.5 trillion health care system, where spend is grow fast than gross domestic product, inflation and wage growth. spend on hospital represent 44 percent of personal expenses for the private insured, according to rand. 

a report this year from research at yale and other university found that hospital price increase a whopping 42 percent from 2007 to 2014 for inpatient care and 25 percent for outpatient care, compare with 18 percent and 6 percent for physicians. 

so why have politician on both the left and right let hospital off scot-free? because a web of tie bind politician to the health care system. 

every senator, virtually every congressman and every mayor of every large city has a powerful hospital system in his or her district. and those hospital are as politics untouchable as soybean grower in iowa or oil producer in texas. 

as hospital and hospital system have consolidated, they have become the biggest employer in numerous city and states. they have replace manufacture as the hometown industry in a number of rust-belt cities, including cleveland and pittsburgh. 

can kamala harris ignore the request of sutter health, kaiser permanente, u.c.l.a. or any of the big health care system in california? can elizabeth warren ignore the needs of partner healthcare, boston’s behemoth? (bernie sander may be somewhat different on this front because vermont doesn’t have any national rank hospitals.) 

beyond that, hospital are often beloved by constituents. it’s easy to get voter rile up about a drug maker in silicon valley or an insurer in hartford. it’s much risky to try to direct their venom at the place where their children were born; that employ their parent as nurses, doctor and orderlies; that sponsor local little league teams; that was associate with their catholic church. 

and, of course, there’s election money. hospital trade groups, medical center and their employee are major politics donors, contribute to whichever party hold power — and often to the out-of-power party as well. in 2018, pac associate with the greater new york hospital association, and individual link to it, gave $4.5 million to the democrats’ senate majority pac and $1 million to their house majority pac. its chief lobbyist personally gave nearly a quarter of a million dollar to dozen of campaign last year. 

senator sander has call on his competitor for the democratic nomination to follow his lead and reject contribution from pharma and insurance. can any candidate do the same for hospitals? the campaign committee of all 10 candidate participate in the upcoming democratic debate have plentiful donation link to the hospital and health care industry, according to open secrets. 

but the symbiosis between hospital and politician operate most insidious in the subtle fuel of each other’s interests. zack cooper, a health economist at yale, and his colleague look at this life cycle of influence by analyze how member of congress vote for a medicare provision that allow hospital to apply to have their government payment increased. hospital in district of member who vote yea got more money than hospital whose representative vote nay, to the collective tune of $100 million. they use that money to hire more staff and increase payroll. they also spent million lobby to extend the program. 

member who vote yea in turn received a 25 percent increase in total campaign contribution and a 65 percent increase in contribution from individual working in the health care industry in their home states. it was a win-win for both sides. 

to defend their high prices, medical center assert that they couldn’t afford to operate on medicare payments, which are generally lower than what private insurer pay. but the argument isn’t convincing. 

the cost of a hospital stay in the united states average $5,220 a day in 2015 — and could be as high as over $17,000, compare with $765 in australia. in a rand study publish early this year, research calculate that hospital treat patient with private health insurance were paid, overall, 2.4 times the medicare rate in 2017, and nearly three times the rate for outpatient care. if the plan had paid according to medicare’s formula, their spend would be reduce by over half. 

most economist think hospital could do just fine with far less than they get today from private insurance. 

while on paper many hospital operate on the thinnest of margins, that is in part a choice, result from extravagance. 

it would be unseemly for these nonprofit medical center to make barrel of money. so when their operation generate huge surplus — as many big medical center do — they plow the money back into the system. they build another cancer clinic, increase c.e.o. pay, buy the newest scanner (whether it is need or not) or install spa and zen gardens. 

some rural hospital are genuine struggling. but many america hospital have been spend capital "like water," said kevin schulman a physician-economist at stanford. the high cost of hospital today, he said, is often a function of the cost of new infrastructure or poor management decisions. "medicare is supposed to pay the cost of an efficient hospital," he said. "if they’ve made bad decisions, why should we keep pay for that?" 

if hospital were paid less via regulation or genuine competition, they would look different, and they’d make different purchase decision about technology. but would that matter to medical results? compare with their europe counterparts, some america hospital resemble seven-star hotels. and yet, on average, the united states doesn’t have better outcome than other wealthy nations. by some measure — such as life expectancy and infant mortality — it score worse than average. 

as attorney general in california, kamala harris in 2012 initiate an antitrust investigate into hospitals’ high charges. but as a senator and presidential candidate, she has been largely silent on the issue — as have all the other candidates. 

as uwe reinhardt, the revere princeton health economist who die in 2017, told me, "if you want to save money, you have to pay less." that means taking on hospital pricing. 

so fine, go after drug maker and insurers. and for good measure, attack the device maker who profit from huge markups, and the pharmacy benefit manager — the middlemen who negotiate drug price down for insurers, then keep the difference for themselves. 

but with congress return to washington in the coming days and a new democratic debate less than two week away, our elect official need to address the elephant in the room and tell us how they plan to rein in hospital excesses. 
