beware the pandemic panic 
by farhad manjoo 
jan. 29, 2020 

coronaviru is start to freak me out — not the illness itself but the amped-up, ill-considered way our frightened world might respond to it. 

yes, the novel virus appear to be spread quick at the outbreak’s epicenter in the china province of hubei, but after a late start the china government is now imposing unprecedented measure to contain it. as the world health organization declared last week, it remains too early to call the outbreak a global public health emergency. 

so far, the wuhan coronaviru is not much more frighten than the outbreak of other recent coronaviruse like sar in 2003 or mer in 2012, each of which kill few than a thousand people around the world. the new virus’s death toll has just exceed 130; for context, according to the cdc, about 15 million america have been sicken by the seasonal flu so far in the 2019-2020 flu season, and 8,200 have die from it. (the flu kill between 300,000 and 650,000 people around the world annually.) 

what worry me more than the new disease is that fear of a vague and terrify new illness might spiral into panic, and that it might be use to justify unnecessary severe limit on movement and on civil liberties, especially of racial and religious minority around the world. 

i also worry that the online world may give rise to dangerous skepticism, and that in the event of an actual pandemic a large number of people may delay treatment or refuse vaccine because they don’t believe the science or are suspicious of the government. 

"i predict that the next major outbreak — whether of a highly fatal strain of influenza or something else — will not be due to a lack of preventive technologies," warn heidi larson, the director of the vaccine confidence project, in a 2018 article in the journal nature. "instead, emotional contagion, digital enabled, could erode trust in vaccine so much as to render them moot." social media, she added, "should be recognize as a global public-health threat." 

tech giant have been racing to tamp down conspiracy theory and hoax about the wuhan virus, but i worry that their effort won’t be very successful, because society seem to have no good answer to the kind of emotional contagion dr. larson describes. it’s not just that many people get their news from a medium given to rumor, exaggeration and wild misinformation, especially on issue about health or science — see the persistence of antivaxer or climate-change deniers. there is also a grow partisan divide over how america interpret scientific expertise and health policy, leave decision about public health vulnerable to the kind of partisan squabble you hear on cable news every night. 

i also worry about the hair-trigger state of geopolitics. from donald trump to xi jinp to boris johnson, strongmen with authoritarian tendency run many of the world’s most powerful governments. it is worth remember that disease, or the fear of disease, can bring out the worst in humanity — pandemic often feed scapegoat (jews were widely blame for the black death), create a fertile field for demagogues. when you put all these factor together, you’ve got a dangerous recipe for global repression. 

already, china’s response appear to be driven by politics consideration more than epidemiologic ones. the government has impose a travel lockdown on more than 35 million people, which expert say is a quarantine of unprecedented size and scale, yet it may not even turn out to be very effective. expert say that quarantine work best during the earliest stage of an outbreak, but that they can also backfire, cause medical shortages, corrode trust in health official and push some people to look to evade care to escape any restriction on their rights. china took week to mount a full-scale response to the virus. according to wuhan’s mayor, five million people left the city before restriction were imposed, suggest the country is effectively lock the barn door after the horse has run off. 

"they’re do it because people who are in politics leadership always think that if you do something dramatic and visible that you’ll gain popular support," lawrence o. gostin, a professor of global health law at georgetown university, told the washington post. "they couldn’t have any sound public health advice." 

we should keep this sense of caution in mind in case america politician begin push for travel bans, overbroad quarantine or other measure that might not be support by the science. 

you might wonder what the great harm is — if the government needs to temporary limit people’s movements or prevent some people from enter the country, shouldn’t it take those measure in the face of dangerous illness? perhaps, but given the checker history of quarantine — throughout history, they have been use to persecute the marginal — lawmaker and the media should rigorous examine the bases for any such restrictions. we should especially make sure any restriction impose are indeed temporary and adhere to the science — something we don’t always do. consider that 30 years after the aids outbreak, men who have sex with men are still restricted from donate blood in the united states, long after the scientific basis for such a ban has passed. 

so far, president trump has offer a measured response to the virus. "we have it total under control," he said this week. but online, misinform about the scale of the virus is already trending. (it is not, as you might have read on twitter, "thermonuclear pandemic level bad.") so are racist meme blame china people and china culture for the virus. 

i fear that the conditions are ripe for a situation similar to what occur in the summer of 2014, when an outbreak of ebola overran west africa. after the obama administration scramble to bring home two america health worker who had become infect with the disease in liberia, trump went on a monthslong twitter tirade about ebola. 

the future president favored extreme isolationism, seeing no benefit to america help in africa. "people that go to far away place to help out are great-but must suffer the consequences!" he wrote — ultimately spark a grow partisan movement against the government’s response to the virus. 

today, trump runs an administration that is hemorrhage scientific expertise, and his politics agenda is rife with effort to target immigrants, minority and the poor. in 2016, a terrorist attack prompt trump to propose ban muslim from the country; when he won the white house, he institute a version of that ban. 

i fear that panic about a foreign virus offer society another chance to target marginal people. so let’s keep our fear in check; panic will hurt us far more than it’ll help. 
