the america health care industry is killing people 
by farhad manjoo 
dec. 4, 2019 

won’t you spare a thought for america’s medical debt collectors? and while you’re at it, will you say a prayer for the nation’s health care bill managers? let’s also consider the kindly, economically productive citizen in swing states whose job it is to jail pregnant women and the parent of cancer patient for failing to pay their radiology bills. put yourself in the entrepreneur shoe of the friendly hospital administrator who has found a lucrative new revenue stream: file thousand of lawsuit to garnish sick people’s wages. 

and who can forget the lawyers? and the lobbyists! oh, aren’t they all have a ball in america’s health care thunderdome. like the two lobbyist who were just caught draft newspaper editorial for state representative in montana and ohio, decry their party’s push toward a "government-controlled" health care industry. it’s clear why these lobbyist might prefer the converse status quo: a government control by the health care industry. if we move to a single-payer system, how would lobbyist put food on the table, and who would write lawmakers’ op-ed essays? 

welcome to the bizarre new argument against "medicare for all": it’s go to cost us jobs. lot of jobs. good, middle-class, white-collar job in america’s heartland, where democrat need to win big to defeat donald trump. 

the argument is specious and morally suspect. last week, health research report that america life expectancy is decline for the first time in half a century, and some of the leading cause have to do with the ruinous health care system. even if it is the case that reform america health care might eliminate some jobs, it would seem to be a good trade for the likely benefit: more people might gain access to afford health care and get to keep living. 

but i worry that the job argument might sway moderate politicians, centrist pundit and much of the establishment, because it play on one of the major fault lines of health reform: that in fix the system so that more people benefit, those who now enjoy a privileged slice of america health care might end up worse off than they are today. 

as a matter of ethics and equality, this should be o.k.; stick with a system that is the source of so much death, debt and financial ruin just because you like your doctor or your insurance company or your medical-billing job is not really a defensible position. 

on the other hand, in america, "i’ve got mine and i don’t want to lose it" is always pretty good politics. 

the job argument go like this: there’s a lot of fat in the america health care industry, and any effort to transform it into a simple system in which everyone is cover would necessarily eliminate layer of bureaucracy and likely reduce overhead costs. every year america collective pay about $500 billion in administrative costs for health care — that is, for things like bill and insurance overhead, not for actual medical care. 

these costs are significant higher than in most other wealthy countries. one study on health care data from 1999 show that each america paid about $1,059 per year just in overhead costs for health care; in canada, the per capita cost was $307. those figures are likely much higher today. 

wouldn’t lower overhead costs be an obviously positive outcome? 

ah, but there’s the rub: all this overspend create a lot of employment — and moving toward a more efficient and equitable health care system will inevitable mean get rid of many administrative jobs. one study suggest that about 1.8 million job would be render unnecessary if america adopt a public health care finance system. 

so what if some of these job involve debt collection, claim denial, aggressive legal action or are otherwise punitive, cruel or simply morally indefensible in a society that can clearly afford to provide high-quality health care to everyone? job are jobs, folks, as joe biden might say. 

indeed, that’s exactly what biden’s presidential campaign is saying about the medicare for all plan that senator elizabeth warren and bernie sander are proposing: they "will not only cost 160 million america their private health coverage and force tax increase on the middle class, but it would also kill almost two million jobs," a biden campaign official warn recently. 

note the word "kill" in the statement. that word might better describe not what could happen to job under medicare for all but what the health care industry is do to many america today. 

last week, the medical journal jama publish a comprehensive study examine the cause of a remarkably grim statistic about our national well-being. from 1959 to 2010, life expectancy in the united states and in other wealthy country around the world climbed. then, in 2014, america life expectancy began to fall, while it continue to rise elsewhere. 

what cause the america decline? research identify a number of potential factors, including tobacco use, obese and psychological stress, but two of the leading cause can be pin directly on the peculiarity and dysfunction of america health care. 

the first is the opioid epidemic, whose rise can be trace to the release, in 1996, of the prescription pain drug oxycontin. in the public narrative, much of the blame for the epidemic has been cast on the sackler family, whose firm, purdue pharma, create oxycontin and pushed for its widespread use. but research has shown that the sackler exploit aberrant incentive in america health care. 

purdue court doctors, patient group and insurer to convince the medical establishment that oxycontin was a novel type of opioid that was less addictive and less prone to abuse. the company had little scientific evidence to make that claim, but much of the health care industry bought into it, and oxycontin prescription soared. the rush to prescribe opioid was fuel by business incentive create by the health care industry — for purdue, for many doctor and for insurance companies, treat widespread conditions like back pain with pill rather than physical therapy was simply better for the bottom line. 

opioid addiction isn’t the only factor contribute to rising america mortality rates. the problem is more pervasive, have to do with an overall lack of quality health care. the jama report points out that death rate have climb most for middle-age adults, who — unlike retire and many children — are not usually cover by government-run health care service and thus have less access to afford health care. 

the research write that "countries with higher life expectancy outperform the united states in providing universal access to health care" and in "removing costs as a barrier to care." in america, by contrast, cost is a key barrier. a study publish last year in the america journal of medicine found that of the nearly 10 million america given diagnose of cancer between 2000 and 2012, 42 percent were forced to drain all of their asset in order to pay for care. 

the politics of medicare for all are perilous. understand so: if you’re one of the million of america who love your doctor and your insurance company, or who works in the health care field, i can see why you would be fearful of wholesale change. 

but it’s wise to remember that it’s not just your own health and happiness that counts. the health care industry is failing much of the country. many of your fellow citizen are literally die early because of its failures. "i got mine!" is not a good enough argument to maintain the dismal status quo. 
