the bernie sander fallacy 
by david brook 
jan. 16, 2020 

this is a golden age for "theyism." this is the belief that there is some malevolent, elite "they" out there and "they" are destroy life for the rest of us. 

there is donald trump’s culture-war theyism: the coastal cultural elite hate genuine americans, undermine our value and opening our borders. and there is bernie sanders’s class-war theyism: the billionaire have rig the economy to benefit themselves and impoverish everyone else. 

each of these story take a genuine tension in society and blow it up into an all-explaining cartoon in which one part of america is try to destroy the other part. 

the g.o.p. has been swallow by trump’s culture war, and many democrat seem to be rush to join sanders’s class war. 

these democrat are do this even though it’s politics suicide. class-war progressiv always lose to culture-war conservatism because swing voter in the midwest care more about their value — guns, patriotism, ending abortion, masculinity, whatever — than they do about proletarian class consciousness. 

democrat are do this even though the sander class-war story is wrong. 

sander start with a truth: worker need more bargain power as they negotiate wages with their employers. but then he blow this up into an all-explaining ideology: capitalism is a system of exploit in which capitalist power completely dominate worker power. this ideology crash against the facts. 

in the first place, over the past few years wages for worker toward the bottom of the income stream have been rising fast than wages for those toward the top. if the boss have the worker by the throat, how can this be happening? 

second, wages are still generally determined by skill and productivity. for example, edward lazear of stanford university find that between 1989 and 2017, productivity in mostly high-skill industry rose by roughly 34 percent and wages in those industry rose by 26 percent. productivity in industry with mostly less-skilled worker rose by 20 percent while wages grew by 24 percent. 

as michael strain of the america enterprise institute put it, capitalism is do what it’s supposed to do. it’s rewarding productivity with pay, and some people and company are more productive. if you improve worker bargain power, that may help a bit, but over the long run people can’t earn what they don’t produce. 

third, and most important, most of the increase in earnings inequality has happen between companies, not within them. as john van reenen of m.i.t. has found, all over the world superstar business are racing ahead of their competitors. as those company grow more productive, they earn more profit per employee and pay their worker more. company that can’t match that productivity don’t, and their worker lag behind. 

a recent brook institution/chumir foundation report also note that there is a grow productivity gap between superstar company and everybody else. whether it is in tech, retail, manufacturing, utility or services, productivity growth at the leading company in each industry has remain very strong. those productive business are capture large and large market shares. but productivity is not grow fast among the lagging companies. worker in those business suffer. 

today’s successful boss are do what they should be doing: increase productivity, grow their business and offering great service. a side effect of their efficiency is they spend a small share of their revenue on labor even while raise their workers’ wages. in a global information-age economy, the rewards for being best are huge. 

thus, the core problem is not capitalist exploit their workers; it’s the rise of productivity inequality. it’s the company and individual who don’t have the skill to take advantage of new technologies. 

the real solution, therefore, is not class war to hammer successful businesses. it’s to boost and expand productivity for everybody else. that’s done the old-fashioned way — by have better school and better vocational training, by have more open competitive markets, by create incentive to expand investment, by making sure superstar business don’t use lobbyist to lock in their advantages. 

i understand if you want to stick to an us-versus-them politics ideology. it’s emotionally satisfying to base your politics ideology on blame people you dislike. in fact, i strong recommend michael lind’s new book, "the new class war," which is the best version of us/them. 

lind make a lot of vague generalization about the "managerial elite," which he blame for our problems. but at least he’s interesting and provocative. at least he understand that a politics plausible "theyism" is economically left and social right — combine the culture war and class war into a tidy narrative. 

but if you want to deal with our real problems, stop the us/them warfare and start dealing with productivity inequality. 

successful executive are do what’s best for their companies, gathering as much talent as they can. this isn’t evil. it’s not exploitation. 

the job of public policy is to make it easy for everybody to do what successful people are doing. productivity is the key to national prosperity. every time we increase productivity for one person, we all thrive a little more, together. 
