the future of america politics 
by david brook 
jan. 30, 2020 

men and women are primarily motivate by self-interest. no other partial truth has done as much damage as this one. 

if you base your politics and social system on the idea that the autonomous self-interested individual is the basic unit of society, then you will wind up with an individualistic culture that widen the maneuver room between people but shred the relationship and community between people. 

you will wind up with a capitalism in which superstar performer get concentrated in superstar city and everybody else get left behind. in a system base purely on competitive individual self-interest, those who are advantage get to race out further ahead year by year. the sense of common community and equal dignity is annihilated. 

this is the flaw of unrestrained liberalism, what the radical call "neoliberalism" or "late capitalism." and they are not entire wrong. 

populist on the right and the left look at this current reality and they come to a swift conclusion: the game is rigged! liberalism is a con! then they come to a different conclusion. the essential logic of society is not actually individual seek their self-interest. it’s group struggle for power. society is an arena where certain group crush other groups. 

on the trumpian right it’s the coastal cultural elite try to crush and delegitimize the white christian patriot of the heartland. on the cultural left it’s the whole michel foucault legacy. language is a tool the oppressor class use to permanent marginal the oppressed. on the economic left it’s the bernie sander class war. the greedy capitalist class rig the system and immiserate the working class. 

the populist narrative differ but all have the same underlying structure. we’re lock in a life-or-death struggle of oppressor vs. oppress groups. it’s us versus them — the good people here and the bad people there. the problem in society didn’t just happen; they were conscious engineer by the evil other, who must be broken. our very existence is at stake! 

if the anthropology of unrestrained liberalism is the autonomous individual making his own way, the anthropology of populism is warrior ant in a ruthless tribal war. these are very different view of human nature, but they have something in common: both narrative make us miserable! 

in one, life is isolation, inequality and the feeling of being invisible. in the other, it’s malice, fear and constant war. and that’s because both of these politics tendency are wrong about human nature. they create society that pulverize who we are and are made to be. 

human being didn’t evolve into the world’s dominant species because we are more autonomous. we didn’t do it because we’re more vicious in tooth and claw. we thrive as a species because we are better at cooperation. 

we evolve complex social network in our brains to make us better at bonding, teaching and collaborating. we don’t cooperate only to get things we want individually. often, we collaborate to build share environment we can enjoy together. often, we pick a challenge just so we can have the joy of collaborating. relationship are end to themselves. 

thus, the best future for america politics is not base on individual competition or group war. it’s base on this narrative: we are an incredible diverse society that got good at collaboration because we had to. the best future politics put collaborate pluralism, weaving, at the center. 

that means, first, elect leader who are master at cooperation. no offense, but if you’re support donald trump or bernie sander this year, collaboration skill are not high on your list of priorities. 

second, it means infuse cooperative weaver value into all of our organizations. there’s a fantastic community organization in baltimore call thread that has a few core competent that shape its culture. we’d be in much better shape if every organization in america live out these values: 

show all the way up. be fully present, honest and vulnerable in all interactions. recognize your own value. push through discomfort to connect deep with others. 

learn from all voices. most of our challenge are complex. it take every perspective to see an issue whole. assume people have the best of intentions, and active focus on the value they bring. be intentional about being with those different from you. 

treat relationship as wealth. human bonds are the chief resource of your organization. recognize the inherent value of each person and meet each person where she or he is. 

fail forward. life is iterative. your vision is not always the answer, but rather a step in a creative learning process. set up feedback mechanism that support change and personal growth. dogma won’t get you to the solution. open and adjust will. 

the third task of weaver politics is reform institution so they encourage collaboration. some of our institutions, like congress, have been completely subsume by tribal warfare. other institutions, as yuval levin write in his book "a time to build," are no long formative place where we learn and serve; they have become platform individual use to broadcast their supreme selves. 

still other institution have become dehumanized. our schools, hospitals, prison and welfare system don’t embed people in thick relationships. they treat them as unit to be process and shove out the door. still other institution cease to exist. why do we still not have a national service program? 

america has an enormous task of institution reform ahead of it, just as it did in the progressive era. 

the fourth and final task of this kind of politics is transform policy that directly address our most serious divides. for example, reparations are a way to acknowledge the wrong inflict on african-americans and to begin to heal that breach. congressman ro khanna has a proposal that would show rural america that everyone has a place in the new economy. he would fund research and technology hub throughout the country — a land grant college system for the 21st century. 

the politics of weave grow out of the acknowledgment that there is no dominant majority in america. there is no moderate center. your group will never pulverize and eliminate your oppose group. there’s no choice but to set up better collaborate system across difference. this is not a problem, it’s an adventure. 

yes, human being are partly selfish and self-interested. but we are also supreme social and collaborative. this is the part we have to work on now. 
