the shaky future of .org domain 
by josephine wolff 
jan. 27, 2020 

online commerce and for-profit activity have largely shaped the internet over the past 25 years, but a few important corner of the internet have remain staunch nonprofit, retain some of the internet’s early charm and resistance to commercial interests. one of those corner is the .org top-level domain, the go-to domain for nonprofit and nongovernmental organization look to establish an afford and reputable online presence. 

domain name for websites, like nytimes.com or un.org or tufts.edu, are the key real estate of the internet. without a domain, it is next to impossible to have an online presence; there are now more than 350 million domain name register worldwide. those domain name are sold to customer by registrar (like godaddy) which partner with registry (like verisign, which manage the .com top-level domain or all the domain name ending in .com). domain name are big business — there’s a lot of money at stake when divvy them up among all the registrar and registries. 

at the top of the domain name hierarchy sit the internet corporation for assign name and numbers, a nonprofit that designate which registry control which top-level domain and help resolve dispute around domain ownership. icann has a unique governance structure: it is run by a board of director that incorporate feedback from different advisory committee compose of government officials, industry representative and civil society members. it is a model that icann refer to as "multistakeholder" governance base on the premise "that all user of the internet deserve a say in how it is run." 

since 2002, domain ending in .org have been purchase through an agency call the public interest registry, which is own by the internet society, a well-regarded nonprofit working to expand access to the internet across the world. but, in november, the internet society announce it was plan to sell the public interest registry — along with control of all the .org domain — for $1.1 billion to a recently form private equity company call ethos capital with close tie to former leader of the internet governance community. 

the propose sale has spark outrage from many people at prominent internet nonprofits, including the wikimedia foundation and the electronic frontier foundation, and rightly so. one worry is that ethos, in an attempt to make the .org top-level domain as profitable as possible, will rapid raise price for its customers. for years, a 2013 contract cap the cost of an .org domain at $8.25 with an allow increase of no more than 10 percent a year — a restriction that kept .org domain affordable. today, a .org domain costs $9.93 a year. 

but in june 2019, icann approve a new contract with the public interest registry eliminate the price cap, even though thousand of people voice opposition to that decision during a period of public comment. ethos has said it will continue to raise price for .org domain by no more than 10 percent per year, but it’s not clear how those promise will be enforced, or by whom, and the timing of the sale — following immediately on the eliminate of the price cap — has contribute to some of the skepticism surrounding the deal. 

another fear is that ethos will cave to pressure from foreign government about which organization should and should not be allow to own .org domains. currently, .org is an open domain so anyone is allow to register a .org domain, and there are more than 10 million of them register worldwide. but the public internet registry has the authority to suspend domain name for illegal activity, and one of the concern raise in a public letter oppose the sale is the potential for government to target ngo by accuse them of illegal activity and pressure the public internet registry to take down their domains. just last month, for instance, the china government sanction five united states-headquartered ngo for their involve in the protest in hong kong; all five of those ngo have .org domains. 

there are other reason to be worried about the sale. the circumstances of the deal between ethos and the internet society seem at odds with the multistakeholder model of cooperative, transparent governance that the internet community has work so hard to develop. beyond just threaten the integrity of the .org top-level domain, the sale of the public interest registry without any further community involve or oversight from icann threaten the integrity of that governance model and the public’s trust that the organization responsible for running the internet have their best interests at heart. 

icann has the ability to block the deal, as well as to question the involved party about how they would manage the .org domain and protect customers, but in a statement to the financial times, icann said it "does not have authority over the propose acquisition," a claim that is patently false. icann itself, in a blog post last month, acknowledge that "pir must obtain icann’s prior approval before any transaction that would result in a change of control of the registry operator" and pledge to take "its responsibility in evaluate this propose transaction very seriously." but while icann say it has ask pir for more information about the sale, it has told the public very little about those inquiry or the ensue responses, and it has not solicit any public comment on the transaction. 

icann’s reasoning seem to be that since the sale do not threaten the security, reliability or stability of the .org domain, it is not its place to intervene. but icann regularly make decision about domain ownership that are unrelated to issue of security and stability — just last year, for instance, it grant amazon ownership of the .amazon top-level domain over the objection of several south america countries. that decision resolve a seven-year-long dispute, date to 2011 when icann decided to open up more top-level domain beyond the standard one like .com, .org and .gov. icann received nearly 2,000 application in 2012 for new top-level domain like .google, .love, .microsoft and .wine, and for each application the applicant had to pay icann $185,000, in addition to ongoing fee for maintain the domains. 

this brought a massive influx of cash for icann that help fund its subsequent international expansion and the process of sever its final tie with the united states government in 2016. the point of sever those tie was to engender greater international trust in icann and, by extension, the system of global internet governance that it oversees. but instead, icann seem at risk of being capture by commercial interests — a risk that first became apparent with the lucrative 2012 expansion of the top-level domain that benefit no one besides icann. odds are that seven years later you’ve still never interact with a website ending in one of those domain and, if you have, it was probably only a means of deliver spam or malware to your computer. 

today, icann is in a very delicate position because it derive its authority not from a contract with the united states but instead from its ability to balance the interests of all its various stakeholder from government official to civil society group and for-profit company and maintain credibility with the worldwide community. it’s easy to see why it is not eager to jump into the fray and interfere with, or even question, the ethos deal for fear of drawing criticism. but the real risk to icann is in failing to protect the remain corner of the internet preserve for public good and letting its for-profit stakeholder become the dominant voice in its decision-making processes. just as icann’s former relationship with the united states government prove problematic for it in try to sustain a credible role in global governance activities, so will a too-close relationship with the for-profit sector at the expense of individual internet users. 

icann should public investigate this sale so that all of its stakeholder can see exactly which safeguard will be put in place to protect .org customers. and if those safeguard are not sufficient or enforceable, if they meet with widespread disapproval and dissatisfaction from .org customer and registrars, then icann should make good on its promise to provide consensus-based multistakeholder governance and, if necessary, block the deal from go through. icann cannot and should not be hiding from controversial domain disputes. it is the only entity with authority over these decisions, and its willing to exercise that power will ultimately be good not just for the internet and internet user but also for icann itself. 
