the three crucial flaw in trump’s ‘peace vision’ 
by micah goodman 
jan. 29, 2020 

president trump’s “ultimate deal" for israeli-palestinian peace isn’t ultimate, and it isn’t quite a deal. release on tuesday, the plan — or “peace vision," as it’s call in its official document — has three flaws. none are fatal. 

first, the dissonance between its pretension and its timing: it purport to change history, but coming just one month before israel’s elections, it serve petty politics. second, there is a mismatch between the plan’s state aim and the actor who are meant to put it into place: it seek to bring peace between israel and the palestinians, but the palestinian are not full partner in its implementation. third, and the biggest problem: the plan doesn’t meet the palestinians’ minimum conditions. can anyone imagine that the palestinians, who have previous reject plan that offer them nearly 100 percent of the west bank, might be happy with just 70 percent? the peace plan, in other words, will not bring peace. 

but these three flaw should not distract us from the big opportunity the plan presents: it clever redivides, even temporarily, the territory in dispute. this division can rearrange the conflict. if put in place, the plan would create a palestinian state with almost full sovereignty on some 70 percent of the west bank, while fully address israel’s security needs. the conflict would not end, but it would be functional different. the israeli-palestinian conflict is a conflict between occupier and the occupied. but after the plan it would become a conflict between two separate politics entity — and that’s an entire new paradigm. this should be the plan’s big ambition: instead of seek to end the battle, it should fundamentally redraw the battle lines. 

the problem with the “ultimate deal" is the mismatch between the plan and its state aim. as a peace plan, it’s laughable. but sometimes, all that’s need to fix a problem is to rethink the purpose of the solution. and here, we can stop pretend that the united states plan will end the conflict, and admit that it might be better at transform its character. and with more modest goals, it might enjoy better success. 

to turn the trump administration’s proposal from a bad plan to end the conflict into a good plan to transform the conflict, all reference to ending the conflict should be removed. the palestinian cannot be expect to recognize israel as a jewish state, formal renounce the right of return or sign a document announce an “end to claims." 

what would israel gain from a plan to reconfigure the conflict? plenty. most israel are trap between two national aspirations. on the one hand, they don’t want to rule over the palestinian people, but on the other, they don’t want to live under the threat of rocket from a palestinian state. the tension between these two impulse has paralyze israel’s ability to address the conflict. a plan to reconfigure the conflict would dramatic reduce israel’s control over the palestinian and do so without putt israel in danger. in other words, for israelis, the trump plan would smash the zero-sum game between security and ending the occupation. israel would be able to greatly reduce their rule over the palestinian without being any more threaten by them. 

and what do the palestinian stand to gain from a plan to reconfigure the conflict? also plenty. the palestinians, too, are trapped. on the one hand, they want an independent state of their own, but on the other, most of them want the palestinian refugee to “return" — that is, to be relocate to israel. moreover, a large section of palestinian society is unwill to recognize non-muslim sovereignty over any part of the holy land. reconcile with israel would be a religious concession, and relinquish the “right of return" would be a national concession. for many palestinians, those two concession would mean renounce their most sacred beliefs, which form a part of palestinian identity. for many years, the various peace plan propose to the palestinian expect them to forgo these two axioms. but the palestinian have always refuse a deal in which they would have to relinquish core elements of their national identity as the price for independence. a plan to rearrange the conflict would give the palestinian a state without expect them to pay for it by renounce their demand for a right of return and thereby concede a plank of their national identity. 

under the plan, the new palestinian state will not be completely sovereign, but it will be mostly sovereign, and the elements of the occupation that immiserate palestinian in their day-to-day lives — namely restriction on movement, construction and economic growth — will be swept away. 

in other words, any plan would need to drop the pretense of realize either side’s perfect deal. this plan begin to do that. under it, the palestinian could dramatic enhance their sovereignty without concede their aspirations, and israel should control far few palestinian without concede its security. neither side will give up on what is truly important to it, and both will reduce what is truly painful. it won’t be peace. it won’t be a new middle east. but it will be progress. 

conflict between neighbor are not only healthy than conflict between occupier and the occupy — they are also more likely to support negotiations. talks in the future would be between two sovereign states. in other words, reconfigure the conflict will create new opportunity to continue shrink it. 

it’s time to stop devote our energy and politics capital to ending the conflict in a single, “ultimate deal," and start focus on a much more modest mission — transform its nature. instead of reject the plan — we should think again about what it can and should realistic achieve. that’s the way to break through the deadlock, minimize suffering and forge a new reality. 
