the white house motto: watch your back 
by michelle cottle 
nov. 14, 2019 

there’s no honor among thief nor, apparently, among anxious politics hack who bound themselves to a president with a penchant for subordinate the national interest to his own. 

once-eager presidential enable have turn on one another with feral abandon as the fact of what mr. trump’s flunky were do in ukraine have become clear and the impeach investigate move into its public phase. 

john bolton, the former national security adviser, appear to be spoil for a fight. he has a deal worth around $2 million to write a book about his time in the administration, which he left on not-so-friendly terms in september. in a private speech last week, mr. bolton offer a harsh assessment of the president’s foreign-policy chop and suggest that mr. trump’s policy toward turkey has been driven by personal and business interests, according to nbc news. mr. bolton’s lawyer told impeach investigate that mr. bolton has information about "many relevant meeting and conversations" concerning ukraine that he might be willing to share if the court give him the go-ahead. 

mr. bolton is await the outcome of a lawsuit brought by his former deputy, charles kupperman, ask the court to decide whether a congressional subpoena outweigh the president’s order to ignore it. 

mick mulvaney, the acting white house chief of staff, try to glom onto mr. kupperman’s lawsuit, but mr. bolton was have none of it. on monday, a lawyer who represent both him and mr. kupperman ask a judge to deny mr. mulvaney’s request, citing, among other objections, that mr. mulvaney may have waive any immune from testify when he acknowledge in a news conference last month that mr. trump had sought a quid pro quo from ukraine in exchange for military aid and said that people need to "get over it." 

mr. mulvaney, who subsequent insist he hadn’t said what he said, was a key player in the pressure campaign to have ukraine announce an investigate of former vice president joe biden, while mr. bolton reportedly said he want nothing to do with "the drug deal" mr. mulvaney was "cooking up" with gordon sondland, the ambassador to the europe union. 

surprise by the blowback, mr. mulvaney drop his court request and now say he will abide by the president’s edict not to cooperate. 

even so, he has been clash with pat cipollone, the white house counsel, over what each see as the other’s mishandle of the president’s impeach defense. mr. mulvaney also face danger from house republican look for someone to blame other than mr. trump for the ukraine mess. he is among the most promising scapegoats, according to the washington post, along with the president’s lawyer rudy giuliani and mr. sondland, two of the principal players. but mr. mulvaney has imply to people that he know too much to be fired. 

mr. giuliani, now under criminal investigate over his ukraine dealings, is facing newly reveal accusation from his "associate" lev parnas. mr. parna say mr. giuliani direct him to help pressure ukraine official to investigate mr. trump’s politics rival. 

for his part, mr. giuliani is contemplate start an impeachment-themed podcast, which should terrify everyone concerned. 

the president, meanwhile, is said to want to fire not only mr. mulvaney but also the inspector general of the intelligence community, michael atkinson, who alert congress to the whistle-blower complaint, kick off the impeach inquiry. 

more publicly, mr. trump has been berate republican lawmaker for suggest that his behavior toward ukraine was anything other than "perfect" — as he has taken to rant on twitter. 

while secretary of state mike pompeo isn’t under attack from his peer — yet — there are warning flags. last month, his former senior adviser michael mckinley told investigate that mr. pompeo ignore his plea to protect marie yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, who became the target of a giuliani smear campaign that contribute to her oust from kiev — plea that the secretary claim never to have heard. who know where this could lead? 

even white house player not directly tie to impeach are get in on the action. peddle her new memoir, nikki haley, the former ambassador to the united nations, has been accuse former secretary of state rex tillerson and former white house chief of staff john kelly of have sought her aid in undermine the president’s policy aim during their time in the administration. for his part, mr. kelly say he warn the president before being pushed out that if he were replace by a "yes man," mr. trump would end up being impeached. (looking at you, mick.) 

then there’s "anonymous," the senior administration official who publish a september 2018 op-ed in the times, who is out with a new tell-all book painting an unflattere picture of the president and charging, "the white house, quite simply, is broken." 

to be fair, with so many people have been pull — willing or otherwise — into mr. trump’s ukraine scheme, it can be hard for the lackey to keep their story straight and avoid incriminate even themselves. for instance, mr. sondland originally told impeach investigate that he had no knowledge of a quid pro quo involve ukraine. less than three week later, he amend his testimony to say that he did recall telling ukraine official that they were unlikely to receive their promise military aid until they public announce the investigate sought by mr. trump. this recover memory brought mr. sondland’s testimony more into line with that of other witnesses. 

all this should serve as a warning for the president’s many apologists. as the impeach inquiry grind on, the circular fire squad is likely to grow still large — and potential armed with higher-caliber ammunition. 
