trump has made us all stupid 
by david brook 

donald trump is impulse-driven, ignorant, narcissistic and intellectual dishonest. so you’d think that those of us in the anti-trump camp would go out of our way to show we’re not like him — that we are judicious, informed, mature and reasonable. 

but the event of the past week have shown that the anti-trump echo chamber is becoming a mirror image of trump himself — overwrought, uncalibrated and incapable of have an intelligent conversation about any complex policy problem. 

for example, there’s a complex policy problem at the heart of this week’s iran episode. iran is not powerful because it has a strong economy or military. it is powerful because it sponsor militia across the middle east, destabilize regime and spread genocide and sectarian cleansing. over the past few years those militias, orchestrate by qassim suleimani, have felt free to operate more in the open with greater destructive effect. 

we’re not go to go in and destroy the militias. so how can we keep them in check so they don’t destabilize the region? that’s the hard problem — one that stymie past administrations. 

in the middle east, and wherever there are protract conflicts, nation have a way to address this problem. they use violence as a form of communication. a nation try to maintain order will assassinate a terrorism leader or destroy a terrorism facility. the attack says: "hey, we know we’re in a long-term conflict, but let’s not let it get out of hand. that’s not in either of our interests." 

the attack is a way to seize control of the escalate process and set a boundary marker. 

these sort of operation have risk and rewards. a risk is that it won’t cease the escalation, just accelerate it. the radical on the other side will get enrage and take to the streets. their leader will have to appease that rage. 

a reward is that maybe you do halt the escalation. the other side implicit says: "message received. we’ll do some face-saving things to appease the streets, but we don’t want this to get out of hand, either." another reward is that you’ve manage to eliminate an effective terrorist like suleimani. talent doesn’t grow on trees. 

the decision to undertake this sort of operation is a matter of weigh risk and reward. and after the suleimani killing, you saw america security professional talk in the language of balance risk and reward. stanley mcchrystal, a retired general, and michael mullen, a retired admiral, thought it was worth the risk. susan rice, a former national security adviser, thought it wasn’t. 

but in the anti-trump echo chamber, that’s not how most people were thinking. led by bernie sander and elizabeth warren, they avoid the hard, complex problem of how to set boundary around militias. instead, they pontificate on the easy question not actually on the table: should we have a massive invasion of iran? 

a great cry went up from the echo chamber. we’re on the brink of war! trump is leading us to more endless war in the middle east! we’re on the precipice of total chaos! this was not the calibrate language of risk and reward. it was fear-stoking apocalyptic language. by being so overwrought and exaggerated, the echo chamber drown out any practical conversation about how to stabilize the middle east so we could have another righteous chorus of "donald trump is a monster!" 

this is trump’s ultimate victory. every argument on every topic is now all about him. hate trump together has become the ultimate bonding, attention-grabbing and profit-maximization mechanism for those of us in anti-trump world. so you get a series of exaggerate fervor — the mueller report! impeachment! the steele dossier! — that lead ultimately nowhere. 

most of this week’s argument about the middle east wasn’t really about the middle east. it was all narcissistic about ourselves! democrat defend terrorists! republican are warmongers! actual iran are just bit player in our imperialistic soap opera, the passive recipient of our great or perfidy. 

the world is more complicated than this cartoon. love or hate him, trump has use military force less than any other president since jimmy carter. when it come to foreign policy, he is not like recent republicans. he is, as my colleague ross douthat put it, a jacksonian figure, wanting to get america out of foreign entanglement while lob a few long-distance attack to ensure the crazy foreigner stick to killing one another and not us. 

and this is the final paradox. for all the sturm und drang that surround trump, populist republican and democrat are gravitate toward the same foreign policy: we’re in the middle of a clash of civilizations; the middle east is so screw up, we should just get out; we’re too stupid/ineffective/racist/imperialistic to do any good there anyway. 

we fight vicious about trump, but underneath, a populist left-right curtain is descend around america, separate us from the mideast, china, even europe. the real high-risk move is the one both party are making together: that if we ignore the world it will ignore us. (it won’t.) 

maybe once the inflammatory one is finally gone from the scene we can have an intelligent conversation about that. 
