trump’s contempt for true professional 
by frank bruni 
nov. 12, 2019 

the impeach inquiry and the event that led to it tell many stories. one, obviously, is about the abuse of power. another illuminate the foul mash of mendacity and paranoia at the core of donald trump. 

but this week, as several longtime civil servant testify at the inquiry’s first public hearings, a third narrative demand notice, because it explain the entire tragedy of the trump administration: the large scandals, the lesser disgrace and the current moment of reckoning. 

that story is the collision of a president who has absolutely no regard for professionalism and those who try to embody it, the battle between an arrogant, unscrupulous yahoo and his humble, principled opposites. 

right now the opposite have the microphone. 

i mean william taylor, america’s top diplomat in ukraine, who is, tellingly, the first impeach witness to testify on live television. stephanie grisham, the white house’s peerless nasty press secretary, has sought to discredit taylor’s account of the pressure on ukraine’s new president by saying that he belong to a cabal of "radical unelected bureaucrats." 

hardly. he’s a west point graduate and vietnam veteran with a half-century career that’s devoid of obvious partisanship and entire about the public good. he took the ukraine post despite profound qualm because he felt he owe his country his expertise. he’s a creature of duty and discipline and earnest accrue knowledge — all precious commodity that are worthless in trump’s eyes. in other words, he’s a true professional, and it was as such that he recoil from what trump, rudy giuliani and the wretched rest of them were up to. 

marie yovanovitch, the former ambassador to ukraine, has a diplomatic résumé that’s three decade long and include three ambassadorships, an unusual feat. the fault that giuliani and trump found in her was her respect for correct procedure, her resistance to corrupt politics and her reluctance to tweet out dopey praise for the president. they quibble with her professionalism, which had no place in their schemes. 

trump’s disregard — no, contempt — for professionalism is in some ways an anagram of his aversion to norms, to tradition, to simple courtesy. or at least these attitude exist as a venn diagram with enormous overlap. they’re hostile to any set of value that place personal glory below other ideals. 

but trump’s war on professionalism and professional is also its own distinct theme in his business career, which is rife with cheating, and his politics life, which is grease with lies. 

go back to his initial staff of senior post and recall how shoddy the vet process was. also notice two prominent class of recruits: people who had profound questionable preparation for the job that he nonetheless gave them (ben carson, betsy devos, stephen miller, javanka) and genuine professional who wager that their skill would be critical necessary — and thus highly value — and that trump would surely rise to the establish code and expect conduct of his office. 

now look at how many of those professional (james mattis, h.r. mcmaster, gary cohn, dan coats) are gone. and tell me whether trump has ever had the epiphany that the presidency is, in fact, a profession. 

a crisis of professionalism define his administration, in which backstabb is the new glad-handing, fire are cruel, exit are ugly, the turnover is jaw-dropping, the number of unfill position is mind-boggling, and many official have title that are preface with "acting" — a modifier with multiple meaning in this case. 

trump sly market his anti-professionalism as anti-elitism and a rejection of staid, cautious thinking. but it’s really his way of excuse his ignorance, costume his incompetence and greenlight his hooliganism. 

he reject professionalism because it temper self-promotion and forbid such grandiose claim as his insistence that he know more about the islam state than any military general. "i alone can fix it," he boast at the republican convention in 2016. "i’m the only one that matters," he said the following year when dismiss any concern about job vacancies. a true professional would have trouble utter those words. they roll easily off a true huckster’s tongue. 

professionalism involve credentials, benchmarks, all sort of yardstick by which a person can be judged, sometimes unkindly. trump wants only affirmation. and professionalism is a reality-based enterprise. trump prefer fiction: the ukraine call was "perfect." "read the transcript" because it exonerate him. his critic are partisan hacks. he’s the target of an interminable "witch hunt." 

but robert mueller was no more hunting witch than bill taylor is an agent of the deep state. in fact mueller stand out as a consummate professional, so much so that he politics neuter himself, and "deep state" is trump’s deep cynical pejorative for "seasoned professionals." 

it’s the professional who keep push back at him, whether at the federal reserve, the birmingham, ala., office of the national weather service or the state department, which is where taylor, yovanovitch and this week’s other impeach witness, george kent, worked. 

michael mcfaul, a former united states ambassador to russia, wrote about taylor and yovanovitch recently in an essay for the new york review of books titled "the deep dedicated state," observing: "both always have struck me as first-rate government servants, singularly focus on advance america national interests. both have serve republican and democratic presidents, and even after decade of interact with them both, i could not guess how either of them votes." 

he characterize them as "accidental heroes" who aren’t "likely to seek the limelight." "they are extremely well trained, competent, and highly regard professionals," he summarized. 

that’s why they bucked trump. and that’s why he can’t bear them. 
