we made the coronaviru epidemic 
by david quammen 
jan. 28, 2020 

the latest scary new virus that has capture the world’s horrify attention, cause a lockdown of 56 million people in china, disrupt travel plan around the globe and spark a run on medical mask from wuhan, hubei province, to bryan, texas, is known provisional as "ncov-2019." it’s a clunky moniker for a lurid threat. 

the name, picked by the team of china scientist who isolated and identify the virus, is short for "novel coronaviru of 2019." it reflect the fact that the virus was first recognize to have infect human late last year — in a seafood and live-animal market in wuhan — and that it belong to the coronaviru family, a notorious group. the sar epidemic of 2002-3, which infect 8,098 people worldwide, killing 774 of them, was cause by a coronavirus, and so was the mer outbreak that began on the arabia peninsula in 2012 and still linger (2,494 people infect and 858 death as of november). 

despite the new virus’s name, though, and as the people who christen it well know, ncov-2019 isn’t as novel as you might think. 

something very much like it was found several years ago in a cave in yunnan, a province roughly a thousand mile southwest of wuhan, by a team of perspicacious researchers, who noted its existence with concern. the fast spread of ncov-2019 — more than 4,500 confirmed cases, including at least 106 deaths, as of tuesday morning, and the figures will have risen by the time you read this — is startle but not unforeseeable. that the virus emerge from a nonhuman animal, probably a bat, and possibly after passing through another creature, may seem spooky, yet it is utterly unsurprise to scientist who study these things. 

one such scientist is zheng-li shi, of the wuhan institute of virology, a senior author of the draft paper (not yet peer review and so far available only in preprint) that gave ncov-2019 its identity and name. it was ms. shi and her collaborate who, back in 2005, show that the sar pathogen was a bat virus that had spill over into people. ms. shi and colleague have been tracing coronaviruse in bats since then, warning that some of them are unique suit to cause human pandemics. 

in a 2017 paper, they set out how, after nearly five years of collect fecal sample from bats in the yunnan cave, they had found coronaviruse in multiple individual of four different species of bats, including one call the intermediate horseshoe bat, because of the half-oval flap of skin protrude like a saucer around its nostrils. the genome of that virus, ms. shi and her colleague have now announced, is 96 percent identical to the wuhan virus that has recently been found in humans. and those two constitute a pair distinct from all other known coronaviruses, including the one that cause sars. in this sense, ncov-2019 is novel — and possibly even more dangerous to human than the other coronaviruses. 

i say "possibly" because so far, not only do we not know how dangerous it is, we can’t know. outbreak of new viral disease are like the steel balls in a pinball machine: you can slap your flipper at them, rock the machine on its leg and bonk the balls to the jittery rings, but where they end up drop depend on 11 level of chance as well as on anything you do. this is true with coronaviruse in particular: they mutate often while they replicate, and can evolve as quick as a nightmare ghoul. 

peter daszak, the president of ecohealth alliance, a private research organization base in new york that focus on the connection between human and wildlife health, is one of ms. shi’s longtime partners. "we’ve been raise the flag on these virus for 15 years," he told me on friday with calm frustration. "ever since sars." he was a co-author of the 2005 bats-and-sars study, and again of the 2017 paper about the multiple sars-like coronaviruse in the yunnan cave. 

mr. daszak told me that, during that second study, the field team took blood sample from a couple of thousand yunnanese people, about 400 of whom live near the cave. roughly 3 percent of them carry antibody against sars-related coronaviruses. 

"we don’t know if they got sick. we don’t know if they were expose as children or adults," mr. daszak said. "but what it tell you is that these virus are making the jump, repeatedly, from bats to humans." in other words, this wuhan emergency is no novel event. it’s part of a sequence of related contingency that stretch back into the past and will stretch forward into the future, as long as current circumstances persist. 

so when you’re done worry about this outbreak, worry about the next one. or do something about the current circumstances. 

current circumstances include a perilous trade in wildlife for food, with supply chain stretch through asia, africa and to a lesser extent, the united states and elsewhere. that trade has now been outlaw in china, on a temporary basis; but it was outlaw also during sars, then allow to resume — with bats, civets, porcupines, turtles, bamboo rats, many kind of bird and other animal pile together in market such as the one in wuhan. 

current circumstances also include 7.6 billion hungry humans: some of them impoverish and desperate for protein; some affluent and wasteful and empower to travel every which way by airplane. these factor are unprecedented on planet earth: we know from the fossil record, by absence of evidence, that no large-bodied animal has ever been nearly so abundant as human are now, let alone so effective at arrogate resources. and one consequence of that abundance, that power, and the consequent ecological disturbance is increase viral exchange — first from animal to human, then from human to human, sometimes on a pandemic scale. 

we invade tropical forest and other wild landscapes, which harbor so many species of animal and plant — and within those creatures, so many unknown viruses. we cut the trees; we kill the animal or cage them and send them to markets. we disrupt ecosystems, and we shake virus loose from their natural hosts. when that happens, they need a new host. often, we are it. 

the list of such virus emerge into human sound like a grim drumbeat: machupo, bolivia, 1961; marburg, germany, 1967; ebola, zaire and sudan, 1976; h.i.v., recognize in new york and california, 1981; a form of hanta (now known as sin nombre), southwestern united states, 1993; hendra, australia, 1994; bird flu, hong kong, 1997; nipah, malaysia, 1998; west nile, new york, 1999; sars, china, 2002-3; mers, saudi arabia, 2012; ebola again, west africa, 2014. and that’s just a selection. now we have ncov-2019, the latest thump on the drum. 

current circumstances also include bureaucrat who lie and conceal bad news, and elect official who brag to the crowd about cutting forest to create job in the timber industry and agriculture or about cutting budget for public health and research. the distance from wuhan or the amazon to paris, toronto or washington is short for some viruses, measured in hours, given how well they can ride within airplane passengers. and if you think fund pandemic preparedness is expensive, wait until you see the final cost of ncov-2019. 

fortunately, current circumstances also include brilliant, dedicated scientist and outbreak-response medical people — such as many at the wuhan institute of virology, ecohealth alliance, the united states center for disease control and prevention (c.d.c.), the china c.d.c. and numerous other institutions. these are the people who go into bat caves, swamp and high-security containment laboratories, often risk their lives, to bring out bat feces and blood and other precious evidence to study genomic sequence and answer the key questions. 

as the number of ncov-2019 case has increased, and the death toll along with it, one metric, the case fatality rate, has remain rather steady so far: at about or below 3 percent. as of tuesday, less than three out of 100 confirmed case had died. that’s relatively good luck — worse than for most strain of influenza, better than for sars. 

this good luck may not last. nobody know where the pinball will go. four days from today, the number of case may be in the ten of thousands. six month from today, wuhan pneumonia may be recede into memory. or not. 

we are face with two mortal challenges, in the short term and the long term. short term: we must do everything we can, with intelligence, calm and a full commitment of resources, to contain and extinguish this ncov-2019 outbreak before it becomes, as it could, a devastating global pandemic. long term: we must remember, when the dust settles, that ncov-2019 was not a novel event or a misfortune that befell us. it was — it is — part of a pattern of choice that we human are making. 
