we really must stop start war 
by farhad manjoo 
jan. 9, 2020 

let us not go again to war. let us not go to war because we cannot afford to "win" another war. there would be no winning this war. there is only losing, at a cost that staggers every dimension on all side — in lives, in money, and in the squander opportunity to do anything better with our collective time and resources on this already beset planet. 

i’m speak here of war with iran, our current precipice. but i issue the warning more generally, too. bookmark this page and pull it up as prophylaxis anytime the drum of war begin rattling anew: war isn’t just tragic. it is increasingly dumb and pointless, too. 

war is becoming an outdated means of human conflict resolution. technology is turning armed conflict into an endeavor increasingly dominate by what war scholar call "asymmetric warfare" — meaning that weak powers like iran can now marshal so much strength that they are no long very weak, exacting a mighty cost of victory even to the world’s pre-eminent global superpower. then there is climate change, which has ratchet up the opportunity cost of every conflict; anytime we are fight each other, we are abscond in the large and more important fight for the habitable of the planet. 

you may debate whether any particular historical war work out well for its agitators. but there should be no debate that many of america’s recent war have end in misery for all. our politician talk of war as a last resort, but that is only to keep up appearances, because the truth is too terrible to admit: that our ever-more-expensive war machine (a cost of nearly $740 billion in 2020) can buy us little peace. rather than a last resort, war now offer no resort. war can no long be defend as the thing to do after everything else has failed. war must instead be seen as failure itself. 

i had thought the futility of war might be grasp by most america politician by now. one of donald trump’s rare bright spot as a candidate was his departure from the post-9/11 bush-cheney doctrine that double down on heedless america military interventionism. in his oft-stated aversion to "endless war," trump’s sentiment match the public’s — a pew poll this summer show that most americans, including most military veterans, now believe that our war in afghanistan and iraq have not been worth fighting. trump seem to be heed the public’s caution back in the summer when he abrupt call off a strike against iran in retaliation for its shoot down an america surveillance drone. 

but in killing iran’s most important military leader, maj. gen. qassim suleimani, trump open the door to war. now iran is retaliating, and a cycle of escalate looks possible — even if, for now, trump is backing away from further conflict. it’s beginning to feel a lot like 2003 again, with some of the same pundit and politician who were in favor of a war with iraq now repeating similar talk points about iran. while note that he’d like to avoid war, trump himself has suggest that war with iran would be a cakewalk: "it wouldn’t last very long, i can tell you that," the president told fox business in june. 

don’t fall for it. it’s plain dishonesty: how could anyone who has live through the quagmire of iraq and afghanistan think war with iran will be anything but long and brutal? in those conflicts, america’s overwhelming military might stumble on local culture, geography, ethnic and religious rivalries, and most of all the determination of an entrenched, committed foe that could melt in and out of the local population. 

as vox’s alex ward points out, iran has almost three times as many people as iraq did when we invade in 2003. it also has treacherous geography, and it control a great many proxy forces across the middle east and even in likely sleeper cell in europe and latin america. iran also possess a sophisticated cyberwar operation — it is believe to be behind recent hack into america bank and other target and to have spread disinformation and propaganda on social network around the world. 

the united states would overwhelm iran in a conventional head-on war, but like china and russia, iran has adopt a deep capacity to mount "hybrid war" — conflict that involve both conventional and unconventional means of war. (for example, iran could expand its operation on oil tanker in the strait of hormuz, dealing a costly rise in global energy prices.) as ward concludes: "a u.s.-iran war would be a bloody hell during and after the fighting." 

this get to the immense folly at the heart of our military might. though the united states spend more on the military than the next nine country combined, we have not been able to purchase much peace through strength. that’s because our strength is clearly of a type, and our years in iraq and afghanistan have made plain our vulnerabilities. 

among other shortcomings, our military is still buy mostly big, old defense technology (like aircraft carrier and bombers) from the military-industrial complex, even if many of these technology face obsolescence under a future of artificial intelligence, unmann battlefield robot and other cyberweapons. our country’s effort at adopt artificial intelligence technology in the military might not be enough to counter our rivals, including russia and china. 

the upshot is this: the united states hold military supremacy over the world’s waters and the airspace, but our control is limited and contestable. the last two decade have made clear that even for america, war is never simple. we should fear it. we should avoid it. 

and we ought to look for more fruitful things to do with our money and our lives, like making life on earth more livable, not less. 
