‘bojack horseman’ end with a necessary reckoning 
by charles dunst 
feb. 1, 2020 

this essay contain spoil for the final season of "bojack horseman." 

"i haven’t done anything. since i got out of rehab, i have been on my best behavior," proclaim bojack horseman (voiced by will arnett), the eponymous protagonist of the animate netflix show. in the second half of the sixth and final season, bojack, a washed-up 1990s sitcom star and anthropomorphic horse, has found out reporter are plan to publish a damning exposé of his pre-rehab behavior. 

"they can’t get me on old [expletive]," he pleads. "i’m a different person now." 

but they do "get him." after bojack give a prince andrew-like interview, he’s ostracize and falls off the wagon, almost drunken drown to death in the pool of his former home. he’s convict and sentence to 14 month in prison for break and entering, although, he admits, "it was kind of for everything" — including seduce and almost sleep with an ex-girlfriend’s 17-year-old daughter and providing a former co-star with the heroin on which she fatally overdoses. 

male antihero tv character like bojack — the don draper and walter whites who dominate the late 2000s and early 2010s — are usually design to be empathetic. we’re supposed to root for them despite their wrongdoings, and cheer when they ride off into the proverbial sunset as some karmic justice restore the broken they’ve left behind. 

since it began, "bojack horseman" has offer an alternative, force viewer to repeatedly see the damage its destructive protagonist inflicts, while complicate any empathy they might feel for him. this unique approach arrive at its logical conclusion with the final installment of episode release friday, punishing bojack while also lay out a path for his redemption. 

if this remains a rare outcome on tv, it is even rare in real life — and it’s likely to resonate with viewer wrestle with what a transgressor’s path to atone might look like. 

in crucial ways, bojack bear resemblance to jon hamm’s don draper on "mad men" — both character treat women horribly, use their professional power to get what they want without any serious self-reflection. yet unlike don, bojack eventually try to better himself, address his drug addiction and repair the relationship he has broken. 

at first, there seem to be hope for a neat ending for bojack. but that would have betray the show’s underlying message that action have consequence — and that the acknowledgment of this fact is central to one’s personal penance and evolution. 

when a bowl or teapot falls and shatters, most people might throw it away, considering the object broken, ruin and without value. the japan art of "kintsugi" take a radical different approach, use precious metal to bring the broken piece back together. "bojack horseman" do something similar. 

take, for example, bojack’s confidant and former biographer, diane nguyen (alison brie). though thrive in her personal life, she’s struggle to write her promise collection of essays. as she try to focus, she’s interrupt by a surreal black-and-white mélange of key contributor to her emotional wreckage, including her father and bojack. a figment of her ex-husband, mr. peanutbutter (paul f. tomkins), appear in her mental chaos, offering tidbit of insight. "cracks in an object are part of its history," he says. 

bojack is also try to piece himself back together. after years of blame his misdeed on childhood trauma, he at last accept responsibility for his behavior. he emerge sober, thinking himself to be a new man, and mostly escape professional punishment. the movie he film right before enter prison has positive buzz. the industry has forgotten bojack’s indiscretions, allow him to walk entertainment’s dollar-paved road to rebirth. 

"people have short memories," say princess carolyn (amy sedaris), his agent and friend. "it’s the best and worst thing about people." 

but a stint in rehab cannot erase the hurt he’s cause the people in his life, just as similar periods out of the spotlight have not repair the damage inflict by real-life men who resurface in attempt comebacks. 

princess carolyn decline to continue represent bojack. hollyhock (aparna nancherla), his half sister, send him a letter, the contents of which are never reveal to the viewer but which clearly mark her permanent exit from his life. and diane, whom bojack has unfair imagine to be his savior, wish him well but imply their friendship has reach its end. 

this bittersweet ending show how within the last decade, writer and audience have come to think different about so-called "difficult men." 

many people admire don draper — whom jon hamm himself call "a pretty dismal, despicable guy" — despite seven season of narcissism, callous womanize and a layered, platonic relationship with his one-time secretary peggy olson that often border on the emotionally manipulate and abusive. by the show’s end, don appear to remain on good terms with some of those he wronged, and is set to look after his children in the eventual absence of his die ex-wife, betty. 

the series end with him, ostensible at peace, dream up the 1971 landmark coca-cola ad, "i’d like to buy the world a coke." 

viewer also rooted for walter white on "breaking bad," despite his deceitful and exploit action toward others, most notably jesse pinkman, his partner in crime, and skyler white, his wife. skyler (anna gunn) was the only character who truly challenge walter’s behavior: ms. gunn herself received hate mail as a result. the backlash was so strong that the actress pen a new york times op-ed in 2013, observing that "male character don’t seem to inspire this kind of public vent and vitriol," which is instead reserved for tv wives like skyler and betty draper on "mad men." 

we’re prime to extend empathy to the reckless antihero, rather than the character represent the moral consideration that probably should hold them in check. in its final episode, "breaking bad" valor walter, a man who once cold watch a woman die of an overdose without do anything to save her, among many other horrific deeds. he get to go out on his own terms after magnificent mow down a conglomerate of neo-nazis, perhaps the only character who outrank him in insidiousness. 

"bojack horseman" is unique out of step here. its creator, raphael bob-waksberg, doesn’t want to give his protagonist such a satisfying ending. mr. bob-waksberg has said he base season 5 of the show on the actor mel gibson, whose record racist rant fail to end his career. and while the showrunner said he found himself "unwilling to forgive" the actor, he admitted to believe "in the power of forgiveness, generally." this ambivalence speak directly to the tone of the final season of "bojack." 

as a viewer, it would have felt preposterous for bojack to be readily accept back into the fold by the people who care about him the most. it’s fitting that the show forces him to reckon with his past in a way character like don draper and walter white never did. the series’ arc match the public’s grow concern about how to measure and take part in accountable across all walk of life — the #metoo abuse and manipulators, yes, but also those who may have, for instance, said or done racist or homophobic things in their past. 

by the end, bojack come to understand that, rather than disappear or drag him down, his past wrong linger like precious "kintsugi" crack in his reform self, serving as indelible reminder of where broken once was — and to illuminate who he is now as a whole. 

"life’s a [expletive] and then you die," bojack tell diane in the final scene. they are sitting on a maroon-shingled roof, have what they both recognize is likely to be their last interaction with one another. but she disagrees. instead, she urge him to see the crack of his past as fortification for the future, offering a correction he seem to accept. "life’s a [expletive]," she says, "and you keep living." 
