why america needs a royal family 
by jennifer weiner 
jan. 10, 2020 

like everyone else on the internet, i’ve been watch the royal rumble, as prince harry and his america bride are attempt to carve out new role in the royal family, and i’ve reach a conclusion: we, the america people, need some royal of our own. 

i know. you’re thinking: didn’t we fight a revolution so we wouldn’t have kings? aren’t monarchy expensive and aren’t europe nation streamline their monarchy for this very reason? and isn’t prince harry quit so that he won’t have to participate in an archaic, obsolete system with unpleasant echo of imperialism and elitism that has made his wife a target for racists? 

all true. but hear me out, because, as the house of windsor burns, and as recrimination ricochet from instagram to the tabloids, with courtier and conference call and compete tale of who knew what when, there’s the kernel of something that might be worth pull out of the dumpster fire and reinvent as our own. 

base on my understanding of britain government (which, full disclosure, is largely informed by memory of my 10th-grade world history class, plus three season of "the crown"), the prime minister and parliament are democratic elected, and do the actual governing, while the dynastic, unelected royal have ceremonial roles. the kings and queens and their offspring live in the palace, wear fabulous jewels, drive (or are driven) in fancy car to event like troop the color (excuse me, the colour) and swan upping, which sound made up, but isn’t, all while drain the nation’s coffers to the tune of some £82.4 million this year (per the royal family) or £345 million (per republic, a group that advocate abolition of the monarchy). 

the subject pay the bills, and, in return, the royal live their lives in public, enjoy various rich-people pursuits, attend wedding in nice clothes and the aforementione jewelry, cutting ribbons, standing on balcony and waving. they are england’s celebrity in chief, the stars of one of the world’s longest-running reality shows. they either serve as expensive anachronism or useful distractions, depend on whom you ask. 

"that’s the thing about the monarchy," say helena bonham carter, play princess margaret on season 3’s finale of "the crown." "we paper over the cracks." 

the problem with a real-time soap opera that draw the entire world’s attention is that very few people are equip to be its stars. recent history prove the point: the beautiful princess becoming a desperate unhappy young mother who die tragically, try to escape the paparazzi (rest in peace, princess diana). her husband, the dashing prince, caught on tape muse about becoming his mistress’s tampon (really, who’s writing this dialogue?). an uncle, bounce out of the family business after consort with a notorious pedophile. is it any wonder that we now have a prince who wants to be written off the show, or, at the very least, become a recur guest star, not a series regular? 

in the united states, meanwhile, we expect our elect officials, with their unelected spouse and children, to serve that public, ceremonial role. which has meant first children go through adolescence on the world stage, and spouse who’ve work as lawyer and teacher pressed into thankless, unsalary and highly-scrutinized service as hostess in chief. 

wouldn’t it make sense to separate those spheres, the way they have in iceland, where there’s an elect president to handle ceremonial tasks, and a prime minister to govern? we, too, could give the power to an elect official and keep a different person around to handle the hosting/ribbon cutting/rose garden tour-leading/gossip lightning-rod stuff. 

we could keep it simple and give the gig to miss america, who’s already been chosen and already has a tiara. or we could have a televise reality contest (a roy-ality contest — see what i did there?) to elect our king and queen. we could recruit the glittering couple we think would be best suit for the job of represent america on the world stage (beyoncé and jay-z! jennifer lopez and a-rod! george and ame clooney! danny devito and rhea perlman! ina garten and jeffrey!). 

we would put the would-be royal through their pace — can she keep her cool while shake hand in four-inch heel for three hours? can he entertain foreign dignitaries, even if he doesn’t speak their language? can they wrangle a gaggle of corgi or visiting college football champs? do they look good in funny hats? 

we let people vote. we move the winner into the white house and relocate the president into some nearby, more modest digs. then, we let the president govern, while our king and queen cut the ribbon and host state dinners, pardon the thanksgiving turkey and light the christmas tree. we give them a salary and strict instruction about the value they are to uphold (one single brooch like princess michael of kent’s, and you’re out). and we give them crown and title because symbol have weight and meaning, and because fairy tale and hallmark movies have train us to believe that precious metal headgear and title confer prestige and desirability. there’s a reason we aren’t all binge a netflix series call "the baseball cap"; a reason that — no offense, iceland — cinderella and sleep beauty dream of a prince and not a president. 

elect royal couple would eliminate the problem of the unpaid first ladies, shift the burden of being a hostess, a charity patron and a fashion plate onto the shoulder of someone who has skill for it, allow the president’s spouse to continue on whatever path he or she previous chose — health care administrator, librarian, lawyer, pilates-class frequenter. 

even better, it would eradicate the possibility of a president who would rather be a king. any candidate who prefer campaign to governing, who would rather speak at a rally than sit through a briefing, or who understand the hierarchy of fox news but do not seem to have read the constitution can run to be a royal, not a president. give the power, with no crown, to the hard-working, camera-shy introverts; give a crown, with no power, to the preen spotlight hogs. for all we know, prince charles, who’s been kind of a yawn as a royal, could have been a solid politician, and our disastrous president might have been at least a contained disaster as king donald the first. 
