why donald trump hate your dog 
by frank bruni 
nov. 5, 2019 

reach for verb to describe abu bakr al-baghdadi’s final moments, president trump grab hold of "crying," "screaming" and "whimpering." 

reach for nouns, he said that al-baghdadi die "like a dog." 

i wasn’t aware that canine expire in a signature fashion, but trump know best, even if he doesn’t know so very many words. about a week later, when he took characteristic nasty note of beto o’rourke’s decision to abandon the presidential race, he said that o’rourke quit "like a dog." 

some simile demand repetition. 

this wasn’t one of them. 

but a lack of verbal ingenuity never stop trump. and an animus toward a certain animal has long, well, hound him. 

in his boundless unoriginality, he has liken women he dislike to dogs. in his infinite incoherence, he has repeatedly tweet of people being fire like dogs. i personally haven’t met all that many gainfully employ pooches, unless digging hole in the backyard is a profession, and when those excavator received orders to desist, none of them got a pink slip and a refer to career counseling. 

trump did recently make the acquaintance — from a distance — of a dog with a bona fide job. that dog is a belgium malinoi name conan. and conan’s job, brilliant executed, was to find, chase and corner al-baghdadi. trump call conan "a beautiful dog, a talented dog." the new york post put conan’s picture on its front page, along with the headline "zero bark thirty." trump also tweet a photoshopp image in which he drape a medal around conan’s neck. 

so this malinoi warrant decoration while "a dog" get derision? or is it just that every dog has its day? i use to believe that adage until trump came along. he has had more than 1,000 days in the presidency, even as the white house go to the dogs. 

journalist with many news organization (the washington post, new york magazine, slate and more) have had a field day with trump’s dogged use of "dog" as an all-purpose put-down. when it come to "like a dog," he’s like a dog with a bone. 

you’re no one until he’s divine the flea-bitten mongrel within you — and you’ve join a dog pound that include the likes of mitt romney, gen. stanley mcchrystal, bill maher, steve bannon, george will, omarosa manigault newman, my fellow times columnist gail collins and many more. 

fun doggy factoid cling to him like so much samoye fur. he’s the first president in more than a century who doesn’t have a dog. according to the china zodiac, he was born in the year of the dog. according to ivana trump, he provoke growl from her dog, chappy, a poodle who could suss out a peacock. the media’s nickname for his first defense secretary, james mattis, was "mad dog." and from the forehead up, he’s a dead ringer for a distress pomeranian. 

but no one has definitive solve the riddle of what seem like a rabid case of canine contempt. i have my own theories, but first i have the more erudite insight of justin frank, a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst and the author of the book "trump on the couch." 

frank noted that trump is "phobic about germs" and no doubt see dogs as four-legged germ factories. he probably also think "dogs are stupid because they obey," frank said. disobedience is trump’s prefer posture, at least for himself, although he broke with that to become, in frank’s words, "putin’s lap dog." disobedience, that is, and distemper. 

frank raise another issue that the president might well have with dogs: when they’re around, they often steal attention, becoming the object of people’s oohe and cooing. trump likes the oohe all to himself. 

my own sense? for trump, all relationship are transaction and god’s creature possess value only in accordance with their ability to elevate and enrich him. his affection for kellyanne conway hinge on her superhuman power not to break into laughter or spontaneous combust when she put the most ludicrous adulatory spin on his most transparent execrable deeds. if border collie perform that trick, he would keep a kennel of them at mar-a-loco. 

his regard for rudy giuliani depend on the hunch henchman’s open to unscrupulous errands. if doberman pinscher could pressure ukraine official to investigate joe and hunter biden, trump would repurpose camp david as a dog run and turn ivanka’s pump into chew toys. 

but they can’t, just as siberian husky can’t hack democrats’ email — for that, a husky siberian is handy — and golden retriever can’t retrieve gold. dogs are useless to trump, at least by the criteria he care about. 

there’s no money in most of them, no vote in any of them, and they can’t play golf with him and tell him along the way what a manly drive and graceful putt he has. that’s lucky for lindsey graham, who would otherwise be swap out for a labradoodle lickety-split. 

conan pass muster only by being a proxy for trump’s own imagine machismo. maybe chappy was merely yappy. like a donald. 
