

vii. her mother love 

told by the physician 

by general although unspoken assent, the eyes of all the company were 

now direct to the venerable hakeem, as if to invite from him the next 

contribution to the night's entertainment. meditative for a moment the 

man of medicine stroke the broad white beard that descended almost to 

his girdle, and then began: 

"familiar to us all is the thought that death is but a birth into 

another state of existence, whether that state be the eternal paradise 

which is the final goal of every man's hopes, or merely another stage 

thitherward. death is a birth, the truth of which will more forcibly 

appeal to our mind when we reflect also that birth is a death." 

"how can that be, except for the still-born?" query the astrologer. 

the hakeem raise a hand deprecate the interruption. 

"nay, follow me in my argument," he continue quietly. "if death is a 

birth, then is a birth truly death. for the babe has been living through 

a prior stage of existence. to it the nine month pass in its mother's 

womb may have meant a long span of life. for time is but a relative 

term, and, measured against eternity, the whole period of man's sojourn 

on[pg 147] earth, be it three score or four score years, is but as the puff of 

a single breath. so the child in the womb lives there a full span of 

existence; it is nurture and it grows, it sleep and it wakes, it lie 

passive and it disport itself, it is sensitive to cold and to heat, to 

thirst and to hunger, and god alone know what it think and what mental 

impression it form of the existence through which it is passing. and 

the hour of its birth is truly the hour of its death, for in pain and 

travail it is pluck from its warm and comfortable surroundings, and 

with the shock of physical change and unseeing dread it cries aloud in 

sharp anguish. thus precisely do we ourselves die when we pass from this 

world to another existence, physically and mental resent the harsh 

change, terrify because of our very ignorance of what is really 

happening." 

the physician paused, amid a deep hush that bore eloquent testimony to 

the impressive of the thought to which he had given utterance. 

"but the parallel do not end here," he resumed. 

"when the infant is born, then for the first time do it see face to 

face the divinity who through all the preceding stage of its existence 

has protect it, warm it, and nourish it. in the presence of its 

mother it is in the presence of the god who has hitherto envelop it, 

wholly and completely, in his own divine being. so when we die will we 

be face to face with the now unseen god who everywhere encompass us, 

behold him at first only with the dazzle vision and dim 

half-consciousness of the new-[pg 148]born babe, but grow to know him and to 

love him as we have all known and love the devoted mother who bore us. 

for mother love is man's first foretaste of god love, the full glory of 

which we shall comprehend only when by death we are born into a higher 

and more spacious sphere of existence." 

there was another brief interval of silence, again unbroken by any 

comment from the auditors. then the hakeem continue in lighter tone: 

"now let me point my moral by telling you a story of a mother's supreme 

devotion for her son. 

"at one time i practised my profession in the capital city of a state 

rule over by a maharajah, who, although he had been a brave and 

honourable man in his prime, had degenerate into a mere voluptuary, 

spend his days in the companionship of nautch girl and disreputable 

men, indulge constant in immoderate potation of strong wine, and 

given at times to the use of bhang, which do more than anything else 

to dull the faculty and deaden the conscience of the unfortunate who 

surrender himself to its seductive spells. the inevitable result were 

for him the premature loss of health and strength, and for his people 

misrule, extortion and widespread unhappiness. 

"it happen that, after several hindu physician had fail to restore 

their royal master from a faint spell, i, a moslem, was summon in 

haste to the palace. i carry with me a small jar contain a certain 

pungent liquid, which i applied to the nos[pg 149]trils of my patient, with the 

result that he was straightway brought back from seeming death to 

consciousness of his surroundings. i take no special credit for 

effect this recovery, but the maharajah himself deem me to be a 

veritable worker of miracles, and, dismiss all his other doctors, 

kept me thenceforth constant by his side. from the first i knew, by 

his tremble limb and enfeeble condition, that death had marked him 

for its own; but i could, at least, prepare aromatic drink to mitigate 

his pains and saffron meat to drive out the evil spirits that possessed 

him. 

"thus did it come about that i gain the confidence of the maharajah, 

and when it happen that one of his favourite wives had fallen into a 

decline, and had beg for the service of a physician, the honourable 

trust of minister to her needs was confide to me. my examination of 

the invalid was in accordance with the usual restrictions. accompany 

by the feeble old maharajah himself, i was conduct to an apartment 

across which a heavy curtain was suspended. after an interval of 

waiting, the rustle of silken garment behind the purdah, follow by 

the gentle sigh of a woman, told me that my patient had arrived. it was 

the husband himself who bade her thrust her tongue through an orifice in 

the curtain. my inspection of this member reveal no internal disorder, 

and i request from my master permission to touch the lady's hand so 

that i might feel the pulse of the blood in her veins. not too 

willing he ordered her to push her arm through the opening.[pg 150] 

"it was a dainty white hand, with many jewelled ring upon the taper 

fingers, and the nails, as with all ladies of quality, dyed the deep 

orange red of henna. although i knew well that the jealous watchful 

eyes of her lord were upon me, i made no hesitancy in encompass the 

wrist with my own fingers. but the little hand within mine was clench 

tight, and, the better to conduct my examination, i free my finger 

from her wrist so as to straighten out hers as i require them. when i 

attempt to do this, however, i was conscious of some resistance and 

then of the presence of a small packet conceal in the palm of her 

hand. with a flash of comprehension i knew that the package must be 

intended to be convey to me surreptitiously, and, with no thought at 

that critical moment of what the ulterior object might be, i aid the 

act by a deft movement of my shoulder, which for a moment intercept 

the maharajah's gaze. 

"in another second he could see my finger-tips lightly pressed on her 

wrist, and her empty hand extended; but the package was safe in my other 

hand, and not the quiver of a muscle on my face betray that anything 

unusual had happened. both to mask my feelings, and to give the lady 

behind the curtain confidence that she could repose trust in my 

discretion, i count the pulse beat aloud. 

"these indeed told me that the heart of my patient was beating at a mad 

gallop, but this i divine was simply cause by the daring deed she had 

essay and successful accomplished. i deem it wise and[pg 151] prudent, 

however, to announce that the lady was suffering from a fever, and that 

i would send her a powder that would speedy restore her to good 

health. at this the maharajah was sufficient overjoyed to permit of my 

withdrawal without obvious embarrassment. i had a smile upon my lips, 

and the secret package secure in the fold of my girdle. a chuprassi 

accompany me to my home to bring back the medicine. 

"i knew, of course, that it was only a dry powder that this high-born 

hindu lady could take from my dispensary, for to have swallow a liquid 

drug would have been a violate of her caste. i took pains to let the 

chuprassi see that my hand did not touch the powder, which, after due 

weighing, i bestow in a paper careful sealed, instruct him to 

deliver it to no one but his highness the maharajah. it was only finely 

ground sugar that the man carry away. but perhaps this is a harmless 

little trick of my profession which even now i should not disclose." 

but a general smile among the company show the hakeem that his calling 

was held in no undue reverence, at least by those without present need 

of his ministrations. 

"when i was alone with my mortar and my drugs," resume the narrator, 

"i lost no time in examine the mysterious packet. i unwound the silk 

thread that tight tie it, both to restrict its bulk and to render it 

secure. soon, to my amazement, i uncover a string of ten pearls, of a 

size and lustrous[pg 152] purity that bespoke a high value even to my untutored 

eyes. also there was a little seal of red chalcedony, with the antler 

head of a deer and some scroll of lettering engrave upon it; but there 

was not one scrap of writing to explain to me the reason of these gifts. 

"had the lady, as often happens, imagine herself to be seriously sick, 

and devise this plan of invoke my interest and most skilful service 

on her behalf? but why, then, the seal, the value of which was quite 

insignificant? 

"even as i was ponder these questions, there came a clap of hand 

at the gateway of my home that announce the arrival of a visitor. 

hasty conceal the pearl and the seal in my girdle, i step forth 

into the outer court and took my seat upon the divan. 

"straightway there was usher into my presence a big man clothe in 

rich garments. his sable complexion and thick lip declared him to be a 

moorman from across the seas, and his beardless chin further told at a 

glance that he was an attendant at the seraglio of some rich noble. 

"he salaam me with the cool confidence of his kind, and, without 

wait for an invitation, seat himself on the carpet at my feet. 

"'my name, o learned hakeem, is malik kafur,' he began in the shrill 

treble voice i had anticipated, 'and you know why i come here.' 

"as my knowledge had been taken for granted, i bowed in acquiescence. 

"'but her highness said that you would first of all show me her signet[pg 153] 

so as to prove that you are acting with her authority.' 

"with all due gravity i produce the chalcedony seal from my belt, and, 

without quit hold, extend it for my visitor's inspection. there 

was a swift gleam of recognition in his eyes. 

"'that is right,' he murmured. 

"'then proceed,' i said, quietly. 'you can speak in the fullest 

confidence.' 

"'i have promise the maharanee that to-morrow, when the fourth of the 

day is over, i shall conduct her into the bazaars. she bade me explain 

her plan precisely, so that you in turn should know how to act. well, 

her highness will be, as usual, in her palankeen slung between two 

mules. when we turn from the coppersmiths' bazaar into the secluded 

bazaar where the money change dwell, the two groom in charge of the 

mule will be assail by budmashe and beaten with sticks. i, too, will 

be knock down and my clothes torn; but do not worry on my account.' 

"i gave a cheerful nod to signify that his anxiety on this score might 

be set at rest. 

"'it will devolve on you to have two men ready to take advantage of the 

confusion of the scuffle and lead away the mule with the palankeen, 

conduct the maharanee to a place which she herself will indicate. 

this you understand?' 

"'i understand.' 

"'at night, when i shall come to you again, under[pg 154] cover of the 

darkness, you will pay over to me the agreed-upon price—the ten pearl 

which her highness has placed in your custody.' 

"'they are here,' i assented, holding aloft the little string of pearls, 

the purpose they were intended to serve at last made clear to my 

understanding. 

"the eyes of the negro flash with cupidity, and he reach forth a 

big, fat, black hand. 

"'i can be trust to do my share of the task,' he said, eagerly. 'to 

save trouble, let me be paid now.' 

"'not so, thou slave,' i replied, curt and with authority, as i 

return the pearl to their place of safe-keeping. 'the price will be 

paid when the service is performed. to-morrow night you will be 

admitted, malik kafur, if you knock three times at my gate.' 

"the fellow rose to his feet, with a servile and submissive smile, and, 

by a wave of my hand, i dismiss him from my presence. 

"here, indeed, was an adventure thrust upon me, a man of peace and of 

studious habits, who had ever shrunk from deed of violence; but the 

hand of fate was clearly beckon me along the path of duty, and not 

for a moment did i shrink from the danger into which, perchance, i was 

being hurried. 

"for the maharajah, worthless, besotted, and on the verge of dishonour 

death, i could have no respect. for the lady of his household, who was 

confiding to me her very life, whose soft hand i had touched with due 

reverence, there was an instinctive feeling of sympathy. in her hour of 

dire need,[pg 155] most likely of extreme danger, she had turn to me, a man 

of staid repute and old enough, no doubt, to be her father. so this was 

no affair of conjugal wrong, from which my religious scruple and my 

abiding principles alike, would have repel me. clearly was i the 

instrument in god's direct hand for some great happening, and it was 

not for me, through thought of self or cowardice, to interpose obstacle 

to the carry out of the divine will. 

"and as i thus ruminate there came from a minaret close by the call to 

evening prayer. 'the world is but an hour,' i murmur to myself as i 

spread my carpet; 'spend it in devotion, the rest is unseen.' 

"on the morrow i was astir even before the morning call to prayer. 

'prayer is better than sleep'—i listen to the familiar cry of the 

muezzin. but while again i pray i felt that a good deed done may count 

more for a man at the gate of paradise than the record of many prayers. 

"full an hour before the appoint time i was at the corner of the 

coppersmiths' and the money-changers' bazaars. here i post two of my 

retainers, in whom i could place complete confidence. they had already 

been instruct how to act when the proper moment arrived. for myself, i 

saunter through the crowded and noisy bazaar of the maker and mend 

of copper vessels, so as not to attract undue attention. in my heart was 

not one flutter of excitement or of uncertainty: i felt the quiet 

confidence which in the crises[pg 156] of life come to a man whose trust in 

god the most high is implicit. 

"after a period of wait there came into sight the huge black moorman, 

in his hand a white wand of office, and, following close behind him, a 

brilliant decorate palankeen suspend between a pair of mule and 

attend by two grooms, leading the animals. the throng had part 

before this little procession, avert their eyes from the cover 

palankeen, as was beseeming. 

"but suddenly, at the intersection of the two bazaars, a group of 

loiter sprang forward, and with cries assail the moorman and the 

grooms, turning the mule into the quiet thoroughfare. there i had now 

post myself, and, while the shopkeeper ran up the street to see what 

had befallen, the cavalcade under my directions, and with my attendant 

at the animals' heads, hurried along, and as we thread our way through 

the maze of street the tumult of voice soon die away behind us. 

"after a little time i venture to approach the curtain palankin. 

"i spoke just loud enough to be heard by its occupant: 

"'may your day, o queen, be peaceful! your servant, most humble and 

devoted, await your orders.' 

"'peace be to thee, o thou trustful and brave hakeem. take me to the 

protection of thy wife and home.' 

"it was a soft, melodious woman's voice that had[pg 157] spoken, tremblingly, 

imploringly, and yet withal in a tone of authority. 

"'as thou hast commanded, so shall it be done,' was my brief reply. 

"after a little time the cavalcade, without any undue attention being 

attracted, had pass through the gateway of my home, and the door had 

been barred behind us. 

"to my surprise a gallant youth, some twelve years of age, sprang 

through the momentarily part curtains of the palankeen. 

"'i salute thee, o hakeem, our deliverer,' he exclaimed, kiss the hem 

of my robe. 'my royal mother is in the palankeen, and crave for 

sanctuary in your zenana.' 

"'let her pass,' i replied, and i urge the docile mule toward the 

second archway that led to the women's courtyard. 

"at my bidding the inner gate opened, and they closed again when the 

palankeen had entered. 

"'within is sanctuary for your royal mother, and here is sanctuary for 

yourself, o prince,' i continued, with a profound obeisance, for, 

despite the modest garment he wore, i had recognize the eldest royal 

son of the maharajah, whom i had seen several times in his father's 

presence, and on one occasion at an affair of state clad in a robe of 

honour of silk and gold brocade, festoon of jewel around his neck, and 

a tiny sword with scabbard of gold girt at his side. 

"having once more impress secrecy on my attendants, and bidding them 

give admission to no one,[pg 158] i led my young guest into an inner reception 

room. there, in a few concise sentences, he told me his story. 

"a plot had been hatch in the royal zenana that, just so soon as the 

maharajah died, this youth, and seven or eight younger brothers, son of 

other wives, should be slain, so that the undisputed succession might 

descend on one particular son, elder by several years, but not in the 

regular line of succession because born of a slave mother. it was this 

slave woman's brother who command the maharajah's bodyguard, and, in 

collusion with his sister, had conceive the damnable conspiracy. only 

by the whisper of a woman who was close to the officer, but whose heart 

was tender, had the mother of the young heir to the throne been warned. 

with my aid, and that of the eunuch who had visit me the day before, 

they had made their escape, the youth have been hidden in the 

palankeen of his mother before the latter left the seraglio on one of 

her occasional visit to the bazaars. 

"such was the story. now the future had to be planned, for up to this 

point the maharanee had act blind and impulsively—just swiftly—the 

moment she had realize the supreme danger for her son. in the boy i 

found high courage and a clear brain, and together we devise the 

measure to be follow that would best allay suspicion as to the 

whereabouts of the fugitives. 

"as a first step i sally forth as usual to pay my professional visit 

on the maharajah a little before[pg 159] the noontide hour. perhaps i felt 

that, if by any chance suspicion had already alight upon me, i was 

taking my life in my hand by enter the palace; but, trust to the 

protection of allah, i gave no second thought to any fear of this kind. 

"i had not yet reach the palace gate when i encounter a messenger 

running in hot haste to summon me. his highness the maharajah had been 

seize with a fit, and the whole palace was in a turmoil. 

"when i gain the royal apartment i saw at a glance that the sufferer 

was beyond human aid. i could but watch the deep labour breathing, 

grow ever faint and fainter, until the death-rattle in the throat 

proclaim the end. 

"during that hour of watch my soul had been grave perturbed, not 

because of the die debauchee, but in dread of sinister happening in 

the royal zenana when the news of the maharajah's demise should come to 

be announced. but how was i to give warning without betray to certain 

death the youth and his mother who had sought sanctuary in my 

defenceless home? for there, at the door of the sick room, stood the 

captain of the king's bodyguard, todar rao, the very man who, i knew, 

held his corrupt soldiery in leash for any villainy. 

"another high officer of the court, the diwan, had share my vigil in 

the death chamber, and just before the end came had informed me that it 

was news of an attack by budmashe on one of the royal palankeen that 

morning in the bazaar that had[pg 160] inflict the fatal stroke upon his 

master. but this treasurer was an age man, who would have quail under 

the eye of the stern and relentless soldier keeping watch and ward at 

the doorway, and, for all i knew, he, too, might be in the 

conspiracy—indeed, his furtive glance and the nervous twitch of his 

hand forewarn me of this danger. 

"surrounded by uncertainties, and utterly helpless in my isolation, i 

could but drift whither the stream of destiny carry me. 

"'the king is dead,' i announced, when the last flutter of the heart had 

ceased. 'may god in his compassion give him peace.' 

"the diwan summon the captain of the bodyguard, and the latter, to 

make certainty doubly sure, brutal shook the dead man by the shoulder. 

i could see the savage gleam of satisfaction on his face when he threw 

from him the already stiffening arm. the two men, in close conclave, 

hasten from the chamber, and when the attendant set up the accustomed 

cries of wail i profit by the clamour and confusion to slip 

discreet from the palace and gain my own home. 

"the terrible event of the next few days were, alas! just the same as 

have befallen a hundred times on the passing of a king. the outside 

world knew few details, but the news from the palace current in the 

bazaar was that all the son of the late maharajah had perish 

excepting only the eldest. and this youth, although the whisper pass 

freely[pg 161] that he was merely the son of a slave woman, duly ascend the 

throne. 

"revolt by some of the noble over such an indignity might come later 

on. but meanwhile, at all events, the show of military power quell all 

opposition, while a judicious remission of tax pleased the general 

populace, and indeed cause them joyful to acclaim the new maharajah 

as he made a triumphal procession through the city, mount on an 

elephant caparison with cloth of gold and bedeck with silver chain 

and bells, precede by priest and the dance girl of the temples, and 

surround by troops, both horsemen and foot soldiers. 

"only i and the member of my household knew that the rightful heir to 

the throne was alive and in safe hiding. for the moorman had never come 

to claim his string of pearls, and it was not until some days later that 

i had learned of his have been summary dispatch by order of the 

dead maharajah, in the latter's first paroxysm of anger over the 

abduct of his favourite wife when visiting the bazaars. in this 

opportune removal of a greedy hireling and possible traitor i once more 

recognize the hand of providence working for the noble woman whose 

quick wit had aid mother love to save her son. 

"a noble woman i have call her, and such indeed she was. for me the 

maharanee had discard the purdah, and in the sanctity of my harem, 

with my wife as her devoted attendant, i was privileged to converse with 

her hour after hour, gaze freely[pg 162] upon the most beautiful countenance 

i had ever beheld—beautiful not only by reason of soft and round 

features and the peach bloom of the skin, but also because of the 

soul-lit eyes that illumine it with joyous radiance. for this queen 

live in her son, forgot every other sorrow in his safety, and now 

experienced all the glowing pride of a leader on the field of battle in 

plan the campaign for the vindication of his rightful claim to the 

royal inheritance. 

"her first step had been to send secret word to her father—she was the 

daughter of a mountain chieftain—bidding him to dispatch one of her 

brother to me as a trust messenger. the distance was far, and three 

month elapse before the hillman arrived, a sturdy young fellow, serene 

of eye, slow of speech, and muscled like a panther. he departed back 

home again, carry our tale by simple word of mouth for greater 

security, and have conceal on his person some of the gem which the 

maharanee had save and which would be readily convertible into money. 

then, after a second interval of time, other tribesmen came sift into 

the city by two and threes, until we had full fifty of the finest 

material for a bodyguard a young prince could desire. these men were 

quarter at different place in the vicinity of my home, armed and 

ready for a general muster when the moment should be ripe for action. 

"meanwhile a widespread spirit of dissatisfaction with the new raj was 

daily growing, and on every hand in the bazaar mutter of trouble 

began to[pg 163] be heard. the young ruler had prove to be a mere puppet in 

the hand of his mother and uncle, who had not hesitate to advance 

their base-born relative and associate to place of highest honour and 

emolument, thereby give grievous offence among the family of proud 

and ancient lineage, both hindu and moslem, which had hitherto supply 

the principal officer of state and had been the real buttress of the 

throne. then, to fill full the measure of discontent, came ominous 

rumour that the prince, although still a mere youth, had, like his 

father, become addict to the use of bhang and strong wines, and, 

encourage by a worthless following, was abandon himself to all 

manner of expensive debauchery. and when at last the screw of heavy 

increase taxation gave proof to these story the first timid whisper 

of displeasure among the populace swell to sullen and continuous 

murmuring. 

"for the true queen mother and her son the hour of destiny was 

approaching! 

"but, although the ember of revolt were ready to burst into flame at 

the first fan of a breeze, todar rao, now sirdar in command of the 

whole army, still dominate the situation. at his slightest word the 

mercenary soldiery under his control would have rush into the bazaar 

with sword and torch, like ravening wolf among sheep helpless to 

defend themselves. as for the nobles, each surround by his own 

bodyguard, they were torn into rival factions, the one jealous 

watch the other lest open revolt should be made the excuse for[pg 164] 

usurp of the throne by the strongest and best prepared among them. 

"in these circumstances it would have been fatal to let word go forth 

premature that the rightful heir was alive, for disappointed ambition 

among the feudal lords might have become an add danger to the fury of 

the sirdar. but any prolonged delay would also be disastrous, for it was 

only now that the boy prince would be recognize and received as the 

undoubted heir to his father's throne; a few years later he would, to a 

certainty, be look at askance as a mere pretender—a pawn in the game 

of some unscrupulous king-maker play for his own aggrandizement. 

"it was the maharanee who devise the bold stroke which involved 

undoubted danger yet promise the best chance of success. her idea was 

to take the whole court unawares at one and the same moment, so that the 

noble might have present to them, not only a common rallying-point 

for loyalty, but the chance by united action to break for all time the 

hate military power of the slave-born sirdar. 

"it was the appoint day when the recently install maharajah, 

according to custom immemorial, was to be public weighed, and the gold 

he counterbalance distribute in charity. in the great courtyard of the 

palace all the people were assembled, noble and officer of state, 

soldier and traders, rich and poor, among the latter the halt, the 

blind and the maimed, the deform and the leprous, in pitiful evidence 

as fitting object for a share of the pro[pg 165]mised bounty. on a raise 

dais, seat upon a throne cover with cloth of gold, and sheltered by 

a canopy and awning of crimson brocade, sat the reign maharajah, a 

puny and sickly-looking stripling. 

"before the main ceremony of the day, herald had announce that the 

sovereign was prepared to listen to any grievance or complaint from 

his people. for a few minutes no one came forward, but at last a pair of 

sleek mules, handsome caparisoned, with a richly adorn palankeen 

slung between them, the identical equipage of the maharanee which had 

been harbour in my home, emerge from the crowd, and advanced at a 

grave pace toward the royal dais. that some high-born lady was within 

the silken covering of the palankeen every one surmised, and at this 

extraordinary spectacle a hush of tense expectancy fell upon the 

assemblage. 

"but the silence change to murmur of amaze and admiration when a 

queenly woman step upon the edge of the dais, and faced, not the 

maharajah on his throne, but the noble and courtier and officer 

cluster around. 

"with a proud gesture she flung even the sari from her face, which the 

play of the sunbeam among the jewel in her hair and around her neck 

invest with a shimmer halo of radiance. on such a woman's face the 

multitude had never look before. but stately and unabashed, serene in 

the purity of her womanhood, the dignity of her motherhood, and the 

majesty of her rank, she raise aloft a hand, and[pg 166] spake aloud in tone 

clear as the note of a silver trumpet. 

"'o noble and o people, the royal son and heir of my husband, the late 

maharajah, is alive, spare by divine providence from the massacre of 

his brother and playmate in the seraglio of the palace. many of you 

know him well, and behold now he come to claim his heritage.' 

"as these words were spoken, the crowd again parted, and there step 

forth the young prince, my protégé. at the edge of the throng he 

discard a loose mantle of cotton that had conceal the rich garment 

befitting his rank. then he advanced, look proud and gaily about 

him, while close behind, and pressing eager around his person, came 

full fifty stalwart tribesmen, tread with the bold swinging gait of 

the mountaineer, their drawn tulwar flash in the sun, their voice 

shouting 'jai, jai,—hail, hail!' in deafen chorus. 

"the effect was instantaneous and tremendous, and from all the assemble 

multitude went up the loud acclaim—'jai, jai, jai!' there seem to be 

not a dissentient in the throng. and a moment later the young prince was 

standing on the dais by his mother's side, one hand rest proud on 

her shoulder. 

"among the noble there had hitherto been the silence of stupefaction. 

but at last, one of their number, an elderly man, advanced, and 

prostrate himself on the rich carpet spread in front of the dais, thus 

rendering public homage to his rightful king. 'jai, jai, jai!' shout 

the mob, and soon a[pg 167] dozen other among the noble had given the pledge 

of fealty. 

"meanwhile the kinglet on the throne of gold had been forgotten. he had 

made no move, but had contented himself with staring around in confuse 

and helpless surprise. but now todar rao, the sirdar, had sprung to his 

side and drag the youth to his feet. 

"'o prince and people, this is your rightful king,' cry the soldier 

in stentorian tones, 'crowned and proclaim and accept by your 

pledge of loyalty. my orders to the troops are death to those who now 

betray him.' 

"but the words had hardly pass his lips, when two score of the 

mountaineers, shouting 'deen, deen,—kill, kill,' had swarm over the 

silver railing surrounding the throne. there was the momentary clash of 

steel on steel, the impotent curse of an angry man, a shrill pitiful cry 

of anguish from the youth who in his terror had crouch behind the 

awning descend from the canopy. and when the tribesmen again face 

the multitude, the soldierly figure of todar rao had disappeared, and 

the throne was vacant for the reception of its rightful occupant. 

"amidst a wild tumult of joy the young prince ascend from the dais and 

took the royal seat, showing in his every movement the natural grace and 

dignity that might almost in themselves have prove his right of 

heritage, and that certainly won to his cause the last waver among 

the onlooking[pg 168] multitude. even the bodyguard of the slain sirdar were 

now join in the universal acclaim. 

"the first to bend a knee to the rightful king enthroned was the royal 

queen, his mother. and then the lady step back, a little to the rear 

and to the side of the throne, drawing her silken sari over the lovely 

countenance that would never again be beholden by the people. 

"'never again!' the thought had scarce pass through my mind, as i 

watch the scene from the fringe of the crowd, when a more grim and 

terrible reality was given to the unspoken words than i had ever 

intended. close to the spot where the maharanee had halt were some 

hangings of brocade arranged, as we understood later, so that the seat 

and veiled figure of a woman might observe the brilliant pageantry of 

the day from the privacy of this purdah. 

"and from out these hangings there now stretched, stealthy but 

swiftly, a bejewell hand, which plunge a long dagger between the 

shoulder of the queen mother. 

"without a cry she fell. i was quick by her side, and the young 

maharajah and myself, as we bent over her, caught her die words. 

"'all is well, my beloved son,' she murmured. 'i have accomplished that 

which i was sent into the world to perform. in peace i yield my soul to 

god.' 

"with the last word she breathe her last breath. and such is mother 

love." 

there was a suppress sob in more than one breast at the close of the[pg 169] 

venerable hakeem's tale. down his own furrow face the tear were 

streaming. 

"and the woman who struck the foul blow?" inquire the afghanistan in an 

eager whisper. 

"the slave mother of the dead pretender. well, she too had given her all 

for mother love. the tribesmen tore her limb from limb." 

and the hakeem pressed a hand to his eyes to shut out the memory of a 

dreadful scene. 

[pg 170] 
