
"under the firm and just rule of our master akbar there has been peace 

for many years in our part of the world. except when, as now, i come to 

fathpur-sikri for my yearly month of service in providing[pg 8] part of the 

emperor's bodyguard, i live quiet among my own people. the soil around 

our village is tilled, our shopkeeper buy and sell, we worship in our 

temples, and we are happy, for no enemy come to disturb the peace of 

our beautiful little valley of jhalnagor embosomed among the hills. 

"one day it befell that i had gone on a hunting trip with a party of my 

friends. in the early dawn we had descended from the fort on the hill 

top which is my home and the rallying-place for my clan—a small clan, 

number but a few thousands, but nobly born as any tribe in rajputana, 

brave and of honour unsullied, men who have never yet given a daughter 

to the harem of a moslem." 

the features of the rajput flash with pride. his brother-at-arms, the 

afghan, met the defiant look, and said, with a quiet smile: 

"there are many rajput women wed to moslem lords." 

"yes, but not rajput women of jhalnagor. they would have die 

first—many of them did so prefer to die when the moslem host first 

swept over our land. in the hour of defeat, against overwhelming 

numbers, within the citadel of jhalnagor the women of my race, refuse 

to accept dishonour, bare their bosom to the spear of those they 

loved, husbands, brothers, and fathers, and so they died." 

with hand outstretched and eyes upraise in rapt pride and reverence 

for the deed of his ancestors, again the rajput fell into momentary 

silence. 

"the story of the little maid." it was the voice of[pg 9] the physician 

recall the narrator to his task. 

"yes, the story of the little maid," resume the rajput. "as i have 

said, we had gone to the hunt one morning—a party of twelve, riding on 

three elephants. for we were in pursuit of a tiger, a destroyer of men, 

which the villager had marked down in a patch of jungle by the river 

side. of the hunt i need say nothing; we kill the tiger, and, with the 

huge, striped body slung across the neck of my elephant, we were 

return home. it was toward evening, for we had rest in the forest 

during the heat of the day. 

"we were just enter the narrow gorge that leads to the fort on the 

hill, when, right on the pathway before me, i saw the prone figure of a 

child. almost my elephant's feet were upon it before the sage brute 

himself stop and trumpet a warning to us in the howdah, for, the 

tiger's body occupy the place where the mahout was wont to ride, the 

latter was walking, and he, too, had not notice the tiny bundle of 

bright yellow clothing lie on the road. 

"glancing down, i beheld a little girl with her forehead touching the 

dust. at my calling she arose, and spread her hand across her breast. 

"'listen, o chief, to my warning, listen, o my lord,' she call out in 

a shrill tone of supplication. already had i observe that her face was 

one of great beauty, although that of just a little child, but six or 

seven years old. 

"the other two elephant had halt behind mine,[pg 10] and some of the party 

had descended. but at the approach of these men the maid shrank away, 

and, keeping her eyes fixed in my direction, she continue to address 

me: 

"'listen to my words, o chief, and be save from death.' 

"in another moment i had sprung to the ground. as i advanced the child 

ran toward me, absolutely fearless. taking her in my arms, i sat me down 

by the roadside. close to my breast she nestled, and, with sob and 

tear now, told me her story. 

"a robber band was in the nullah—less than a mile further along—full a 

hundred strong, fierce men and murderers. for they had already slain the 

father and the mother of the little maid, humble woodcutters. i had 

known them well; they were poor, but of mine own people, and instantly 

in my heart i vow that i would be avenged. 

"the little girl, brenda her name, as she told me in her childish way of 

confidence, had hidden in the brushwood all day, tremble and afraid. 

but at last she divine that the men had come to slay me, for as the 

afternoon advanced they disposed themselves among bush and behind 

trees, also in the hut of her dead parents. and even now were the 

assassin in wait for me, for the girl had seen our party ride forth 

in the early morning, and she knew that i had not yet returned. 

"when, with wonderful intuition for a child so tender in years, the 

thought came to her mind that i was to be assailed, she stole down the 

gorge, moving[pg 11] cautious through the undergrowth, and await at the 

spot we found her to give me warning. 

"the child had describe to me the leader of the gang, and i had 

immediately recognize gunesh tanti, accursed son of a pig, a robber 

from across the desert of sindh, who had more than once ravage peaceful 

village of rajputana. he would know that i had treasure in the fort, 

and of an instant i could read his wily plan. moving through the 

country, he had doubtless heard a day or two before of this project 

expedition of mine for the killing of the man-eating tiger. so he had 

design to slay me on my homeward way, and, the deed accomplished, 

would rely on gain access to the citadel by load his ruffian into 

the howdah of my elephants. once over the drawbridge and within the 

portcullis gateway, his murderous scheme might have been easy, for my 

score of men-at-arms on duty would have been taken by surprise and so at 

a disadvantage. 

"but knowing now the danger, i laugh in my beard, for gunesh tanti, 

this human tiger and slay of innocent men, just as had been the tiger 

now slung across the back of my elephant, was fairly deliver into my 

hand. he who had come to trap me was himself entrapped. and thanks all 

to this little maid of the glen! at the thought, i pat her soft cheek 

with my hand, and in response she smile up into my eyes with wondrous 

trust and winsomeness. 

"our party, as i have said, number twelve, this[pg 12] without count the 

three mahouts, lithe and active men, and brave as any one of us. the 

neck of the gorge was narrow, and for a hundred yard on either side 

there were steep precipice down which rocks could be tumble on flee 

men. by a goat path over the hillside the fort could be reach by one 

sure of foot and knowing the way. such a lad was of our party, a cousin 

of my own, who could race with the deer. 

"in a few minutes he had gird his loins and was on his mission, 

disappear over the crest of the almost perpendicular crag up which he 

had clambered. he was to warn the garrison, turn out every man and boy 

fully armed, and bid them to sweep down on the ambush robbers. the 

mother and the maiden would hold the fort. no other garrison, when 

once on the alert, was need for such an enemy." 

again the rajput smile proudly, but the silence of intent listen was 

unbroken, and he continued: 

"the fire of a matchlock was to be our signal that my men held the 

upper end of the pass, and were descend on our enemies. meanwhile, my 

immediate follower prepared the rocks above the narrow neck of the 

defile and got them ready for instant rolling down. to this last task 

four of our number were deputed. the other abide with me. our plan was 

to block the narrow passage by range the elephant abreast of each 

other, and, so that the animal themselves might not be stampede by the 

unexpected din of battle, we chain their forelegs,[pg 13] first each animal 

separately, and then the middle one to his comrade on either side. 

"at last all our preparation were completed, the huge beast in line, 

my companion mount into the howdahs. i alone remain on foot, i and 

the little woodcutters' daughter, standing by my side, holding 

trustful to my hand, and no long weeping. 

"'you must come with me, my almond-sweet,' i said, as i raise the child 

in my arms, and pass her up into the howdah of my own elephant, the 

central one. then i myself clamber aloft. the tiger's corpse had been 

flung to the ground, and our three mahout sat in their proper places, 

iron goad in hand, ready to perform their task of keeping the elephant 

under control. 

"at last, after a tense period of waiting, the welcome report of the 

matchlock reverberate from among the hills. 

"the fight do not really concern my story," said the rajput, grimly. 

"it is sufficient to say that gunesh tanti and all his band perish to 

a man—some slain by the sword of my horsemen charge down the pass, 

some crush by the fall rocks, some of the last survivors, who flung 

themselves desperate against our living barrier, die on our 

handpike or being trample under foot by the elephants. not one of more 

than five score men live to carry back the tale of death to the robber 

haunt whence they had come. 

"on our side some lives were lost, seven in all; but this is the penalty 

that brave men have to pay in the[pg 14] do of righteous deeds. their 

memory is honoured. 

"as for the little maid, i had nest her in the best-protected corner 

of the howdah, and in the thick of the fray, when a shower of arrow had 

fallen upon us, i had cover her tiny form with my shield. but during 

the final hand-to-hand fight, when all was din and turmoil with the 

shouting of the men and the angry trumpet of the elephants, i had not 

paid her any special heed. from her lip came no sound to attract my 

attention—no cry of fear, nor wail murmur. 

"but at the end i look for the little child, lift the shield that 

had partly guarded her. she met my gaze with a smile. but straightway i 

notice that an arrow, descend almost perpendicularly, had pierce 

her soft little arm, and transfix it to her side. yet had she not 

cry out, nor even now, when i was tend her, did she whimper. 

"i drew forth the arrow, break it in twain, so as to let the shaft 

pass through the arm. although blood flow freely, i saw at a glance 

that the wound in the body was a mere puncture, and also that on the 

limb only a piercing of the flesh. therefore was her hurt not serious, 

although of a certainty painful, and terrify too for a child so 

young. but even now not one word of complain did she utter. she kept 

her sweet smile on me. brave little maid! 

"tearing a length of cambric from my turban, i had bound both arm and 

tender breast, and readjust the sari of yellow-dyed cotton that form 

her[pg 15] simple garment. and now she reposed, happy and contented, in my 

arms. i remain in the howdah, while my companion cut off the head of 

the robbers, and loaded these trophy of victory on one of the other 

elephants, so that a triumphal pile might be made in the courtyard of 

the citadel. then, with the tiger replace on the neck of my own 

elephant, we move for home, a group of fifty horsemen now form our 

escort. the headless body of our enemy were left as fitting spoil 

for the jackal and the vultures, the latter of whom, scent the 

carrion, were already beginning to drop down, it might seem, from the 

blue vault of heaven. 

"by the time we gain the fortress the dusk was gathering. across the 

drawbridge, prompt lower at the sound of our joyful shouting, i saw 

my wife standing beside the big carronade that command the roadway up 

the hill. the smoking match was in her hand, but at sight of me she 

stoop and smother in the dust the spark that would have dealt out 

death to the robber had they ever gain a near approach. descend 

from my elephant, i greet her and thank her for the courage of 

herself and all the other women, our love ones. 

"then my friends above hand down gently into my arms the form of the 

little maid. at sight of my wife's sweet and kindly countenance the eyes 

of the child were light with joyousness. but with a quick motion wife 

drew her veil completely over her features. ere this was done, however, 

i had caught a strange look in her face—a look of mingle sur[pg 16]prise and 

terror. at the same moment her old attendant and confidant, rakaya, 

flung herself at my feet, and began to babble for my forgiveness. 

"'what means this?' i asked, glancing in profound amaze from the 

woman's prostrate form up into my wife's eyes. there again i read the 

strange trouble expression. puzzled, yet restrain my curiosity 

before the other gather around, i placed the wound child in my 

wife's arms, and, with a gesture to signify that she and rakaya were to 

follow, i led the way to the women's quarters. 

"once within the zenana, i told my story briefly: how the little damsel 

of the glen had save me from certain death, and then, through danger 

and through pain, had been brave as the noblest-born rajput maid could 

be. after this recital, i commend the child to my wife's affections, 

bidding her love the orphan as she would a daughter. 

"then was the lovely countenance of my wife, the jewel of jhalnagor, 

suffuse with great joy. hug the child to her motherly bosom, she 

exclaimed: 
