

ii. the hollow column 

told by the tax-collector 

"every man's fate is fore-ordained," said the tax-collector, 

reflective stroke his beard. "although we may not understand it at 

the moment each particular event that happen is simply a means prepared 

for some destined end that may be many years remote in time. vishnu the 

preserver save the life of the little maid of jhalnagor so that her 

father's life might later on be saved. but none can read the future, so 

that we are all blind do the things of to-day without knowing their 

real bearing on the things of a far-away to-morrow. and one man can make 

or mar the happiness of another man, even though their lives be 

separate by hundred of league in space or hundred of years in time." 

"in your mind doubtless is some tale to illustrate the truth of what you 

teach," remark the astrologer, with a shrewd uplift of his 

eyebrows. "the stars can help us to read the future, as i can prove to 

you by a story of actual experience. but before i proceed to my 

narrative, pray, friend, let us hear from you." 

"gladly," assent the tax-collector. "the story of this noble rajput 

has brought to memory an incident in my own life many years ago, 

likewise serving[pg 20] to show that the gods prepare long years ahead for the 

working out of each particular man's destiny. listen: 

"as a youth i was a keeper of account in the service of a rich 

zemindar, whose estate lay in the country of the five rivers. he was a 

usurer as well as a landowner, as had been his father before him for 

many generations. so in his castle was an accumulation of great stores 

of wealth—gold and silver and precious stones, cloth of gold, silks, 

brocades, and muslins, ivory and amber, camphor, spices, dye stuffs, and 

other merchandise of divers kinds." 

the afghanistan general stirred, and the scabbard of his sword rattle on the 

floor as, raise himself from his elbow that rest on a cushion, he 

sat up and assume an attitude of keen attention. 

"where is this place?" he asked, a wolfish gleam in his eyes, and his 

lip curve to a smile that revealed, under the black, curl moustache, 

the white gleam of sharp-pointed teeth. 

the story-teller also smiled, knowingly, and raise a deprecatory hand. 

"nay, friend, this zemindar, my first master, was not fated to be 

relieved of his treasure, as my story will tell, even though a skilful 

plot had been laid for his spoliation. which is the very point of my 

tale, although i may seem to come to it by a roundabout way of telling." 

the afghanistan sank back on his cushion, but his gaze remain rivet on 

his narrator's face. 

"one day i was seat in my home, casting up my books of account, for i[pg 21] 

had only that morning complete the taking of tax from the crop of 

the rayats, the tenant of my lord. all of a sudden a white-robed figure 

enter the doorway and threw himself prostrate before me. when at last 

the face was raise i recognize the dhobi of the village that nestle 

under the hill on which was perch the castle of the zemindar. 

"'o thou washer of clothes,' i asked, 'what is thy plaint?' 

"'protector of the poor,' reply my visitor, 'behold my bandage feet, 

beaten with rod until they are swollen and torn.' 

"i looked, as requested, and saw the blood-stains soaked through the 

wrapping of linen. 

"'thou art an honest and a peaceful man, bhagwan. why this cruel 

punishment?' 

"'i know not, indeed. but i have come to thee, because i have endure 

the wrong at the hand of thy master.' 

"'tell me thy story.' 

"'as you have said, o my protector,' began the dhobi, assume a sitting 

posture and spread the fold of his loose-flowing cotton garment over 

his bandage feet, 'i am an honest man. and it is for that very reason i 

have suffered. yesterday, among the apparel i received from the home of 

the zemindar to be made clean and white was the bodice of a woman, and 

tie in one corner of this piece of raiment was a ring set with bright 

red stone that[pg 22] gleam as if they were aflame. straightway i return 

to the palace of the zemindar, and, enter the audience chamber where, 

as is his wont at that particular hour each day, he was seat receiving 

the complaint of the oppressed, did my humble obeisance, and then 

placed in his hand the jewel i had discovered. he ask me where i had 

found it, and when i reply truthfully, his eyes flash with anger, 

and his voice thunder at me in rebuke. although i had done no wrong, 

but rather a virtuous deed, i implore for pardon. but in vain. my mind 

grew confused, and the next thing i remember was the sharp cut of bamboo 

rod upon the sole of my feet. i was in a small vaulted chamber, bound 

to a wooden bench, surround by the zemindar's soldiers, and powerless 

except to scream out in the agony of each blow. thirty stroke were 

counted, and then i was flung out of the gate of the castle, to limp my 

way home.' 

"tears of self-pity were in the dhobi's eyes as he recount his tale of 

woe. even then i was reflect on the real cause of the zemindar's 

wrath. the jewel had been discover in the fold of a garment worn by 

one of the women in his zenana, and his quick access of anger show 

that the gift had come from some other hand than his. savage jealousy, 

therefore, had prompt the act of injustice inflict upon the 

unfortunate washerman. i knew my master so well his sullen moods, his 

outburst of passion, that already i could arrive at this conclusion 

with certainty. 

"'proceed,' i said, indifferently, for it is well that a[pg 23] man should 

keep his own counsel in such delicate affairs. 'what is my concern with 

your misfortune?' 

"'harken, o dispenser of bounties! last night when i lay nursing my 

wounds, i remember that the ring which had prove the cause of my 

misery had been wrap in a fragment of paper whereon were some strange 

mark and lines as in the books of learned men. this i had flung away, 

at that time deem only the ring to be of any consequence. but the 

thought came to me in the night that perhaps the paper might tell 

something about the ring. so all this day have i search among the 

bush by the stream where i beat the clothes on stone and wash them. 

and behold, i have found that for which i have been seeking.' 

"hereupon the dhobi loosen the loin cloth beneath his upper garment, 

and extract from its fold a tiny roll of paper. this he present to 

me, with a bow of deference to my superior understanding of such things. 

"'this time i have come to you,' he said, 'a man of learning and of 

justice, not like unto the cruel zemindar. do the paper tell why i 

should have suffer such shame and pain at his hands?' 

"i had unroll the scroll, the fold of which show that it had serve 

as a wrapping for the ring. the writing was in neat persian characters, 

and i had no difficulty in decipher it, for the four lines that met 

my eyes had been recite to me only a few days before by the very man 

who claim to be their author. 

"now did my very heart tremble with agitation.[pg 24] but to the dhobi i 

appear cold as the waters of the snow that melt on the mountains. 

"'this writing would only add to your troubles,' i said. 'here, let me 

destroy it.' and, turning to the red ashes burning in a brazier near at 

hand, i dexterous substitute a fragment of paper, on which i had been 

figure my accounts, for the paper received, from the dhobi, place 

the former on the glowing charcoal ember and bestow the latter in 

the security of my girdle. a curl of white smoke, a puff of flame, and 

the work of destruction was, to all appearance, completed. 

"'in view of your misfortune, my friend,' i resumed, 'i bestow upon you 

in the name of my master ten maund of dal, which will be sent to your 

home on the morrow.' 

"the recipient of this unexpected bounty prostrate himself before me. 

"'o prince of justice, no long do my wound pain me. the belly of my 

children will be fill for many long days to come.' 

"'then go thy way, rejoicing in thy heart even though limp on thy 

feet. and remember that silence is golden. say not one word more to 

anyone about the ring or the paper, your punishment or the reward that 

has now redress the wrong. go in peace.' 

"and the dhobi, after profuse expression of gratitude, hobble from my 

presence. 

"alone with my thoughts, i felt sorely troubled. the writer of the 

verse of ardent poetry written on[pg 25] the paper brought to me by the 

washerman was my cherish friend, a youth from far-away bokhara, abdul 

by name. this young man had come to our country only a year or so 

before, bring several beautiful arab horse for sale. these the 

zemindar had purchased, and had retain abdul in his service, for the 

youth was skilled in the management of horses, and in the rear of 

young stock. 

"abdul and myself were much of an age, and my regulation of expenditure 

in the stable had brought us constant together. so a close friendship 

had resulted, value greatly on my side, for i had soon come to know 

that abdul was a man of refinement and learning such as i had never 

before encounter in any man of so humble a calling. and despite the 

fact that he was a moslem and i a hindu, he had chosen me as his 

intimate friend, his only confidant. thus had it come about that at 

times he had read to me of an evening song of his own composing, and 

even on occasion had sung them to the accompaniment of a small harp, the 

strings of which he touched with wondrous skill and sensibility. 

"now did i know that this dear friend of mine had endanger not only 



