

iii. what the stars ordain 

told by the astrologer 

"and now, master star-gazer, your proffer story," said the 

tax-collector, bestir the company from its meditative mood. 

"as i have promised," respond the astrologer, "i shall recount an 

experience that show how the stars, if read aright, can tell us the 

influence for good or for evil that weigh upon a man and inevitable 

determine his destiny at the critical moments of his life. what is 

written is written, and it is impossible to strive against fate." 

"nay," object the rajput, "that is a teaching of helpless to which 

i cannot subscribe—the pitiful excuse of the coward who fold his hand 

in the hour of danger, or of the self-indulgent weakling who yield to 

seductive temptation because his heart incline to seize the pleasure of 

the moment even when his conscience counsel otherwise. i hold that man 

is the master of his own fate. most assured have i been the master of 

mine," he add with a proud smile, his finger close significant on 

the handle of a dagger at his belt. 

"be it so," answer the astrologer. "but as allah know everything that 

is to happen, so must it happen." 

"which do not forbid the exercise of my own free will," argue the[pg 36] 

rajput. "the supreme being, the preside power of creation, call him 

allah if you will, understanding my heart as he understand all things, 

know beforehand what choice of action i shall make at the moment of an 

emergency. but that still leaves me responsible for the deed which i 

elect to do. such is my understanding of destiny. it give 

fore-knowledge to god, but leaves free will to man." 

"from all of which i do not dissent," rejoin the astrologer. "it is 

only the ignorant or the base that make kismet the excuse for 

helpless or for wrongdoing. but as the stars under which a man is 

born influence that man's acts, then do the reading of the stars guide 

us as to what the future has in store." 

"i know little about your stars," reply the rajput. "but let us have 

the story," he added, crossing his hand on his knee in an attitude of 

expectancy. the astrologer, salute his audience generally with a bow 

of acquiescence, thus began: 

"by your courtesy let me first explain, as necessary to the 

understanding of the tale which is to follow, that i am from persia, 

from the city of teheran, where for many generation my ancestor were 

profound student of astrology, some of them famous men because of their 

skilful divinations, with reputation that reach even to stamboul. for 

thither in my early boyhood to the court of the sultan of the osmanli 

was my father summoned, and him i never[pg 37] beheld again. it was from my 

age grandfather that i learned my first lesson in astrology—about the 

twelve houses, the ruling star of each day, the coming and the go of 

the planets, their conjunction and oppositions, and the influence they 

exercise on men's lives. i learned with avidity, and was an apt pupil, 

for at fifteen i had begun the practice of my profession, casting 

horoscope and reading the nocturnal heaven with constant care, 

understanding also the flight of bird and the cries of wild beast of 

the jungle. 

"yet at that time was my mind assail with grievous doubts. i often 

caught myself wonder whether the stars did really rule the fates of 

men. and with this inward questioning a restless spirit grew upon me. i 

long to see more of the world—to enlarge the sphere of my 

observations. just then i chance to hear some gossip in the bazaar 

about a great expedition that was get ready at kabul to descend upon 

hindustan. the hunger of adventure seize me, and was not to be denied. 

despite the tear and implore of my family, i set forth on foot for 

afghanistan, a stripling; in my hand the staff i use in my divinations, 

in the bag slung at my side a single change of raiment. money i had 

none, but my ability to read the stars i knew well would earn me a 

livelihood wherever i might wander. 

"with my adventure during the next two years this story has no concern. 

it is enough to say that, after many vicissitudes of fortune, i found 

myself install as astrologer in the court of a moslem[pg 38] prince, 

sovereign over an extensive region in kashmir. 

"my lord was a man of noble heart and of high mental gifts. he rule 

over his people not by fear of the sword, but by absolute justice, which 

he himself personally administered, every day holding audience so that 

grievances, even those of the most poor, might be heard and wrong 

redressed. and his royal duty were share by his wife, who, although 

she might sit behind the screen of the women's quarters, none the less 

share in the counsel of state, and contribute words of wisdom in the 

direction of affairs. 

"never in my experience have i encounter such mutual love, trust, and 

devotion as subsist between this pair. for no other woman in the world 

had mirza shah thought or regard or desire—i call him mirza shah, but 

that was not his real name. for reason that will presently appear, i 

refrain from disclose the identity of place and person connected 

with my story. 

"well, it was my privilege from the outset to be on relations of close 

intimacy with my master. he use to come through the palace garden to 

the shrub-embowered tower which i occupied, and from the roof of which i 

nightly contemplate the heavens. for long hour he would abide with me, 

learning something of the stars while enjoy the cool of the night air 

after the heat and fatigues of the day. and many times of an afternoon 

the sultana, veiled, would come with her lord, and together they would[pg 39] 

seek to gain from me knowledge of the heavenly body and of divination. 

some things i told to them, but other i withheld, which is just and 

right, for skill in astrology is hereditary, descend from father to 

son, and new mind are unprepared for such teachings, so that too much 

knowledge convey to outsider may become a source of disturbance to 

themselves and perchance of danger and hurt to their fellow men. thus, 

following the rule laid down for me by my grandfather, always, even 

when close pressed with questions, did i exercise a discreet reserve. 

"gradually the friendship accord to me by my lord and his lady wax 

stronger, and i found myself being admitted to some of their innermost 

thoughts. thus did i come to learn the passionate longing of the wife to 

become a mother: for six years had she waited, but no child had blessed 

her love for her husband. as for mirza shah, just so soon as the subject 

was mention i could see the cloud of melancholy rest on his brow. and 

when, as time went on, sad seem to settle upon him continuously, i 

knew full well that this disappointment in his wedded life had at last 

taken complete possession of his mind, to the exclusion of all other 

matters. 

"and from the sultana's manner i could see the trepidation that fill 

her heart—the dread that her childless might in the end rob her of 

her husband's love. it was not given to me to look upon her face—to get 

more than a glimpse of her eyes as they shot an occasional glance at me 

through the part folds[pg 40] of her veil. but in these glance i had read 

the prayer of entreaty that i should use all the spell of my art in 

her favour, so as to obtain for her from god the gift of a son. 

"well, after a time an unexpected thing happened. mirza shah was absent 

from his home—gone on a full week's journey, engaged in the settle of 

some dispute on the confines of his territory. to me there came one 

afternoon the sultana, attend by one of her women—the most trust 

one, i knew, for both were from the same country, near to amritsar, 

where the famous rug are woven. so much i had learned, and this further 

i also knew, that by birth the sultana was a hindu, although on being 

wed to her lord as a little girl, she had of course embrace the true 

faith of islam, in so far as it matter for a woman to have any religion 

at all. 

"it was the female attendant who spoke to me, her mistress listen in 

silence. but the question came so readily that it was clear the lesson 

had been well rehearse by the twain. 

"'astrologer,' she began, 'can you swear on the koran that the stars 

speak truth?' 

"'that i can swear,' i replied, with due dignity and respect for myself 

and my profession. 

"'can the stars bring about the wish of man or of woman?' 

"'nay, that i do not declare. they rule the lives of men and women only 

in so far as their movements forecast the future. if we can read the 

stars aright, we may gain foreknowledge of event destined to[pg 41] happen. 

for what is written in the scroll of fate cannot be changed. from kismet 

there is no escape." 

"'then tell me this, o astrologer, from your stars: is my noble lady 

here ever go to have a child, a son?' 

"'that question i cannot answer. unless i have the horoscope of her 

highness, cast by skilled hand at the time of her birth, i cannot tell 

which planet rule her destiny.' 

"'alas, we knew not these things among my people down in amritsar,' i 

heard my lady murmur. 

"'bah!' exclaim the serving woman contemptuously. she had flung open 

her veil, unashamed as are women of her station that i, not her brother 

or her husband, should gaze upon her face. it was a pleasant enough face 

of a woman of five-and-twenty years of age; yet, methought, as i look 

into it now, that there was unseemly bold in her eye and even 

something of wanton abandon in her manner. 

"'bah! if your stars cannot get us what we wish, what good are they? 

better pray at a hindu shrine to krishna, god of love revels, than waste 

time in consulting a moslem astrologer. that is what i have said all 

along, dear lady'; and with undoubted great affection the woman fold 

to her breast her now sob mistress. 

"i turn away, as was proper, and busy myself with a chart of the 

heaven over which i had been pore when my visitor had arrived. on 

again raise my eyes, i found that i was alone. 

"this incident i had well nigh forgotten, and near a year had elapsed. 

for some month i had not seen[pg 42] the sultana; she remain in the strict 

seclusion of the harem. her highness was unwell, most people said. but i 

knew the truth; mirza shah himself had told it to me, his face beam 

with pride and pleasure. at last his dearest hope were to be realized; 

the sultana was about to become a mother. 

