brexit has arrived. but boris johnson’s reign is just beginning. 
by richard seymour 
jan. 31, 2020 

london — the moment has arrived. britain is out of the europe union. prime minister boris johnson and his "people’s government" — it scarcely call itself conservative at this point — has fulfill the promise on which it was elect in december and "got brexit done." 

there are difficulty ahead. mr. johnson has promise impossible and contradictory things on brexit: maximum regulatory freedom where it suit his government, maximum frictionless trade where it suit the britain economy. the europe union is unlikely to give him what he wants in the month of negotiation to come. 

but by fulfill his pledge, mr. johnson has won enormous good will from nationalist voter across england and wales. outside the europe union, he will also have more scope to change the britain government’s role in the economy. this give him a unique opportunity do what his predecessor could not: build a lasting popular base for the conservative party. mr. johnson can now take advantage of his big majority to overhaul britain capitalism, incentive long-term conservative voter while permanent annexe chunk of the labour party’s historic base. 

already, the dimensions of mr. johnson’s plan are becoming clear. he has no intention of running the country as any conservative leader since margaret thatch would have: he is not out to roll back the state. instead, he is out to secure the support of working-class voter who hand over to the tory dozen of seat formerly held by labour. his premiership, set free by brexit, could reshape britain’s electoral map for decades. 

during the election, mr. johnson campaign as an almost single-issue nationalist, the phrase "get brexit done" fall robot from his lip between every other stammer. beyond that, much of what he said was conventional tory: he promise harsh restriction on immigration, meaning an end to free movement from the europe union and the expansion of the "hostile environment" for migrants. domestic repression, the manifesto promised, would also tighten, with a big penal system and a greater emphasis on "counter-extremism," which, as home secretary priti patel has indicated, will target parts of the left. mr. johnson has also hint at constitutional reforms, which would strengthen the executive and weaken judicial challenges. he promise an attack on liberal norm and legality in the name of national invigoration. 

tellingly, he distance himself from the last government. he would end austerity, raise spend on the national health service, guarantee pensions, raise the minimum wage and borrow £100 billion to invest in infrastructure. many of these promise were gross exaggerated, but they serve to underline the point that a johnson administration would be different. and since the election, the government has act to carry out its commitments, passing legislation to guarantee n.h.s. spend increase and propose moderate improvement to workers’ and renters’ rights. it has also promise that most of the infrastructure spend will be invest in england’s deprived northern regions — and this week back up the promise by nationalize the north’s major rail service. 

if this sound like an incursion into labour territory, it is. many of the policy are directly taken from labour’s plans. the push for a large state resonate with a politics ambiguous popular memory of the postwar era — a certain nostalgia for the era of big, dynamic industry own by the britain government inflect both a version of the left-wing politics of the labour party leader, jeremy corbyn, and a version of brexit sentiment. mr. johnson know that many of the vote contribute to a conservative majority were "lent" by voter who want brexit done. a more interventionist state is a way to shore up a lasting, broad coalition. 

this pragmatic raid on enemy turf was first conceive under mr. johnson’s predecessor, theresa may. more thoughtful tory knew they had to change. the britain state and economy had become dysfunctional: gape regional inequalities, a housing market inaccessible to younger workers, weak labor productivity, sluggish investment and very little to export. mrs. may’s adviser understood that the conservative had to break with the formula of austerity and financial somehow. 

but while she use the rhetoric of working-class uplift, she was unable to back it up with policy. her chancellor, philip hammond, a traditional ally of the banks, was determined to keep austerity going. if nothing else, he could see no other way to create a fiscal surplus big enough to soften the impact of brexit. mr. johnson, by contrast, is just enough of an opportunist to see that deliver brexit, in however self-injuring and punitive a form, give him both the politics power and the regulatory latitude to do things differently. 

there is a risk, though, of succumb to mr. johnson’s own mythmaking. as much as he needs working-class conservatives, they have always existed. and the core tory voter remains the affluent middle class. what’s more, when it come to public spending, he’s limited in what he can do by his commitment to freezing most taxes. in an economy that is already weak and likely to be weak after brexit, he has little room for serious investment. 

and mr. johnson will face conflict demand from within his own party. the chancellor, sajid javid, has demand 5 percent cut from most government departments, making plain that the spend spigot are not about to freely flow. and the prime minister is surround by ally who, far from wanting a more interventionist state, want to cut tax and slash regulation in the interests of a more global competitive economy. 

during the election, mr. johnson was able to glide over the glaring contradiction in what he said with a bustle con man’s charm, but in office he has to navigate them. with a big majority, he can no long play the outsider. however, the lesson of nationalist leader global is that, in this jittery era, they don’t have to deliver boom success to keep power. from viktor orban in hungary to narendra modi in india, these leader have expand their base by deliver a personalized, charismatic form of rule in which they are militant defend of the nation against all comer — be they foreigners, "traitors," liberals, or leftists. 

mr. johnson is not a nationalist by conviction. he is the epitome of the "reckless opportunists" that, as the sociologist aeron davis says, run britain. his vote record in parliament show him to be slightly more liberal than his party. but his performance over the last few month — during which he agitate against parliament, accused opponent of "collaboration" with europe, and saber-rattled against the court and media — show him to be adept at use the far right’s template. whenever the contradiction in his government threaten to unravel, he is likely to return to these tactics. 

indeed, brexit fit in with that method perfectly. after today, mr. johnson will be able to continual remind voter that he was able to overcome the hostility of the liberal elite and accomplish his goal. and as negotiation proceed, he can gin up hostility against his supposed enemy whenever he doesn’t get his way. 

whenever any politician claim to speak for "the people," someone always pay the price. migrant are first on the list for mr. johnson. but they will not be the last. 
