

iv. the spirit wail 

told by the merchant 

"allah alone can search the heart of men," said the hakeem, slow and 

reflective repeating the words with which the astrologer had closed 

his tale. he was a man of venerable appearance, with flowing, white 

beard that descended to his waist. and yet, although his face was 

furrow with the lines of old age, his eyes were wonderful youthful 

in their contemplative calm. 

"no true words have been spoken to-night," he continued. "yet must we 

further reflect that, while a man cannot sit in judgment upon his 

fellows, he can assured judge himself, which go to show that within 

the breast of every man there dwell the very spirit of god, the power 

to search his own heart, whether in condemnation or for approval. life 

is a problem, and it require a full lifetime to solve it. only as we 

grow old do we come to know our own souls—our strength and our 

weakness, the measure of our true nobility of character and likewise the 

measure of our inherent meanness, the temptation not merely from 

without but from within that assail us, our power to conquer these or 

our miserable yielding at times, with no one, perhaps, even guess at 

our degrade except the divine spark of[pg 61] conscience that inexorable 

turn a searching ray on every thought and on every motive for action." 

"so you would argue that man is god?" query the rajput. 

"not so, but that the soul of man is of the essence of god, the proof of 

which is this very power of searching out our own heart and sitting in 

judgment on our own failings: for the judgment seat belong to allah 

alone." 

"a subtle philosophy which i do not presume fully to understand," 

interpose the merchant from bombay. 

during the night's entertainment he had shown himself to be a man of few 

words, yet an attentive listener. he was of middle age, of a mild 

dignity of mien, and of robust physique, as befit one accustomed to 

long journey through regions infest with robber or with beast of 

prey. 

"but in my practical experience of life," he proceeded, "i have come to 

realize that, while i may know myself, no other man can i know. 

therefore, if it be right to be sparing of condemnation for another, it 

is also wise to be chary of undue commendation. the world too often 

acclaim a deed as noble when the real motive prompt it is utterly 

ignoble." 

"a true philosopher, despite your bale of merchandise," murmur the 

hakeem, with a smile nod of approval for the sentiment expressed. 

"well, i suppose that every one who travels become a philosopher, more 

or less," assent the[pg 62] trader. "change of scene and of companionship 

stimulate new ideas. now will i relate an actual experience which apt 

illustrate that, in our dealings with those around us, we never really 

penetrate their minds. man know himself; he know no one else—friend 

or intimate, the child of his heart or the very wife of his bosom." 

"it is more easy to discover a white crow," mutter the fakir, "than 

know what a woman has in her heart." 

the merchant paid no heed to the interruption. he went on: 

"each of us is an inscrutable mystery to the other. each soul is veiled 

to every other soul, and is naked to itself alone." 

"o prince of philosopher in pedlar's disguise!" murmur the hakeem. 

"if our soul sat naked for the common gaze," comment the rajput, "if 

we could all read each other's hearts, then indeed would life be an 

abomination—an utter misery, with the twin devil of shame and disgust 

seat at our elbow all the time." 

"most true," concur the trader. "for too much knowledge of another's 

inmost thought bring only disillusionment and regret, as my tale will 

show. the story take us among humble people, but human nature is the 

same everywhere—the same in the hut of the rayat as in the palace of 

the rajah. 

"once in every two years it is my custom to travel from bombay to 

benares, and invariable i break[pg 63] the journey at a certain village some 

six or seven days from my final destination. here dwell an old friend 

and caste brother, formerly, like myself, a merchant in the bombay 

bazaar where silken stuff are sold, but retired now to his own country 

with modest savings sufficient for the rest of his days. baji lal, as he 

is named, is all the close to me because his wife devaka is a sister of 

my own wife, and the two are always eager to have news of each other's 

welfare. 

"at the house of this friend i rest for a day or two, enjoy his 

companionship, the reminiscences of old times, and the gossip of the 

hour. so, on my long and fatigue journeyings, i have always look 

forward to these meeting with pleasurable anticipation and remember 

them with tranquil satisfaction. 

"but on the occasion of one of my periodical visit judge of my surprise 

when i was received in silence and with apathy that made no pretence at 

disguise. devaka did not rise from her cushion on the floor to bid me 

welcome, and her husband, similarly irresponsive, return my customary 

cordial greeting with nothing better than a look of weary dejection. 

"disturbed, i made inquiry: 

"'baji lal, my friend, what is the matter? are you ailing?' 

"but he only shook his head, and turn away. 

"to devaka i then appealed. 

"'what is the meaning of this?' i asked. 'sadness and silence where 

everything use to be joy.' 

"she drew aside the sari that had conceal her face, and i was shocked[pg 64] 

at its grief-stricken aspect. her tremble lip part to answer me, 

but her husband checked her with a sharp word, such as i had never heard 

him use to her before. her eyes fill with tears, and i could see the 

big drops rolling down her cheek as she silent replace the sari over 

her head, and, bend low, rock herself to and fro. 

"for the moment i imagine that i had intrude on some scene of domestic 

unhappy which would be dissipated in an hour. so, hiding my 

embarrassment, i turn to the door, intimate that i would seek some 

other lodging for the night, and return on the morrow, when i hope my 

friends would be in fitter mood to receive me. 

"at last baji lal spoke, raise his face but still remain seat on 

the divan we were wont in former times to share. 

"'go thy way, chunda das,' he said. 'the sword of fate has descended 

upon this house. come not again to a place accursed.' 

"then did i realize that the trouble was serious. 

"'but, my friend and brother,' i protested, 'i cannot depart and leave 

you thus. let me at least understand what calamity has befallen you, so 

that i may help toward its repair.' 

"'nothing can be done, so nothing need be said,' he answered, in a tone 

and with a look of dignified resignation to the will of god. 'if you 

must have the story of our misfortune, you have only to ask the first of 

our neighbour you encounter.' 

"and he, too, cover his face with his garment, leave me no choice[pg 65] 

but to withdraw without further attempt at this manifest inopportune 

time to probe the mystery. 

"if i was to be of service to my friends, however, knowledge of what had 

befallen was the first essential. so i took the road that would lead me 

to the great pipul tree in the village square, close to the tank and to 

the temple, where all day long there was coming and going, and where 

therefore i would be most likely to glean the information i desired. by 

a happy chance i found recline under the pipul tree the village 

barber, a loquacious fellow, who count it as part of his business to 

know the last detail about other people's affairs. 

"after greetings, and a few remark about the weather and the crop and 

the season's epidemics, i careful broach the real purpose of my 

interview, for a prudent man will never divulge his thought to another 

until he know that other's thoughts. 

"'i have just come from the house of baji lal,' i said, in a seemingly 

casual way. 

"the barber's face instantly lost the smile it had worn. 

"'how did you find him?' he asked. 

"'strangely altered,' i replied. 

"'and so do every one,' he concurred. 

"'why so?' i ventured. 

"the barber look at me squarely, and then said: 

"'you and he were very good friends, chunda das.' 

"'yes, and are still, so far as i am concerned,' i answered.[pg 66] 

"'i thought so. well, i am his friend likewise. many years i have known 

him and his wife, devaka. both are good, kind people, always willing to 

help their neighbours, and ready to give their last bowl of rice to a 

vagrant beggar. perhaps you can assist me to clear away the shadow that 

have fallen around them and obscure the sunshine of their home. let me 

tell you the story. a few month ago a stranger came to this village. he 

was on his way to fathpur-sikri, to witness the glory of the court of 

the mighty akbar. but on the road he had fallen ill, and, arrive here, 

was too sick to proceed. i am ashamed to say that none of us were 

willing to take him in, for sickness go from one person to another. so 

we have to be careful, especially in my calling, where i come into such 

close contact with so many. 

"'there was quite a little crowd just here by the tank, discuss the 

situation, the sick man in their midst rest upon the ground, when 

baji lal and his wife, who happen to be passing, came forward to see 

what the commotion was all about. they listen to the story, and then 

told the stranger he might come with them. he grateful accepted, and, 

after whisper some instruction to a servant by whom he was 

accompanied, he motion to baji lal to lead the way. the little group 

move off, the servant in the rear, leading the horses, which included a 

pack animal laden with the traveller's bedding, cooking pots, and other 

belongings. 

