
v. the blue diamond 

told by the fakir 

"you have certainly improve on the moral of my story," said the 

astrologer, address the merchant, silent now after the telling of his 

tale. "if it is for god alone to pronounce the censure on mankind, then 

assured it is for god also to award the praise. as the story of sheikh 

ahme and his jewelled harp well shows, deed may be done openly by the 

hand, but the motive for their do lie secret in the heart. and the 

heart is the innermost temple where none but the high priest, the 

individual soul, hold communion with his god, the supreme deity of the 

universe." 

"so that a man's life is an unsolvable riddle to all but himself," 

concur the hakeem. 

"and not to be solve even by himself," remark the afghanistan with a 

laugh, half of bitterness, half of bravado. "we may know in our secret 

heart the motive that prompt to a deed, but we cannot tell the 

consequence of that deed as affecting even ourselves who wrought it. 

take this very story of the sheikh; when recover his precious harp he 

was but digging his own grave. so with all of us; we imagine we are 

march brave to accomplish some preconceived plan, when all the time 

we are merely[pg 102] grope with blind eyes along the path of destiny, 

avoid the mud holes, it may be, but failing to see the tiger, 

crouch for his spring, a few pace further along." 

"shabash!" cry the fakir, in a shrill tone of approval that drew all 

eyes to the lean and naked and ash-besprinkled figure seat at the foot 

of the veranda steps. "shabash! shabash!" he cried, again and yet again. 

"and your story?" ask the rajput, with a nod of inquiry and 

encouragement. 

"is one that show how a man may keep on running all his life yet never 

reach the goal he has in sight," reply the ascetic. and with the 

sturdy independence of his calling he beat a peremptory tattoo with 

finger-tips on wooden begging-bowl to command attention to his tale. 

"behold in me a man who possess nothing in this world excepting a 

begging-bowl and a loin cloth. yet was i at one time the owner of lands 

and of cattle, of a home bountiful store for comfort and for 

sustenance, of wives who wore rich jewels, necklet of pearls, armlet 

of gold, and bangle of silver, with maid-servants to minister to their 

needs and children to play around them. all gone! by my own doing, or 

undoing, call it which you will. 

"and know, too, that in those days i also was a soldier"—this with a 

defiant glance first at the rajput chief and then at the afghanistan general. 

"at my side rattle the steel scabbard, and in my belt[pg 103] was the sharp 

poinard, swift messenger of death when it came to hand-to-hand fighting, 

and the horse i rode had its rich trappings of gold and silver. it may 

all seem strange, to hear me tell those things of the long ago and to 

look upon me now"—and the speaker stretch forth his skinny, twist 

finger and attenuate arms, and for a moment rueful contemplate 

them. 

"but i speak the truth," he went on, "for to-night, prompt by the 

story to which i have listen and the thought they have engendered, 

will i unseal my lip after fifty long years of wandering alone, give 

no man my confidence, seek no man's confidence, intent only on the 

attainment of the one desire deep seat in my heart, and which, in my 

eager strive to achieve, seem to be ever more remote from 

accomplishment. to-night will i reveal the story of my life, so that, 

perchance, the lesson it teach will show still more clearly the 

impotence of man to constitute himself the avenge of wrongs. for if 

judgment belong to allah, so do vengeance. and the choice of 

instrument, of time and place, of the very manner of the deed—all this 

belong to god alone, as this night, listen to the story that have 

gone before, have i for the first time come fully to comprehend." 

the fakir pause to gaze around his audience. the look of interest and 

expectancy on each face show the impression his impulsive flow of 

language had made. no interrupt word was spoken, but every eye 

remain fasten on the lean, keen face peering[pg 104] over long slender 

shank and hand-clasped knees. the narrator continued: 

"in those days i had twenty retainer at my call, and these men i 

command when i rode forth to service with a certain nawab, from whom i 

held my lands for the feudal service i thus performed. it was my fate to 

take part in many a fight and in many a foray, and to send many a man to 

his doom. but god had ordain it so; the fault was not mine. 

"well, it befell that a certain city was given over to sack and carnage, 

for the word had gone forth that the only way to break the power of its 

hindu occupant was to demolish their temples, destroy their idols, and 

thereby show the impotence of their false gods to protect them." 

the rajput drew himself up proudly, and a flush of resentment stole over 

his face. but the moslem fanatic, unconscious now of anything but his 

reminiscences of the past, went on unheede and unabashed: 

"it was toward the hour of sunset when a body of our soldiery broke into 

a temple devoted to the worship of siva the destroyer. we had batter 

in the heavy wooden door that protect the inner court, and within the 

threshold a score or more of priest fell to our swords, and a dozen 

dance girl as well, attendant on the idols—self-slain these women, 

for when they saw that there was no quarter for the men they rush on 

us like female panther and flung themselves on our dripping blades." 

the hindu listener were visibly disturbed and af[pg 105]fected by this cold 

recital of bloody deeds. the hand of the rajput clench and unclenched 

themselves nervously, and the merchant gave a deep, guttural groan of 

horror as he flung the end of his robe over his face as if to shut out a 

vision of sacrilege and shame. 

"it was written in the beginning, nay before creation it was written," 

murmur the moslem astrologer, quoting, in courteous sympathy, the 

familiar formula of his faith. "and as your priest themselves say," he 

added, address himself more particularly to the rajput, "'the destiny 

of each man is irrevocable inscribe on his forehead by the hand of 

brahma himself.'" 

the rajput bowed his head in acquiescent silence, and as the fakir 

proceed with his story the trader also regain his composure and 

withdrew the covering from his face. 

"when the shadow of night fell, the temple made a bonfire that 

illuminate the scene of pillage go on all around. the big idol of 

loath aspect had been thrown down, broken to pieces, and despoil of 

their jewel and the heavy plate of gold that encumber them. our 

soldier had swarm out of the building, past a tank to the house of 

some priest beyond. not one single custodian of the temple survived, 

and i stood alone in the outer courtyard, watch in idle fashion the 

tongue of flame licking the beam and rafter and paint-bedaubed wall 

of the wreck edifice. 

"then did my eyes chance to light on a small idol[pg 106] in the passage-way 

between the two courtyard of the temple, set in a deep niche, on which 

account it had escape the notice of the despoilers. it was the familiar 

elephant-headed idol of the hindus, ganapati, as i knew they call him, 

their god of wisdom and the remover of obstacle according to their 

creed. 

"even as i looked, methought that the eyes of the idol twinkle 

knowingly and entreating at me. after a moment i saw that this fancy 

was but due to the play of the flame on jewels, comprehend which, i 

said to myself that the little fat man might perchance be of some 

considerable value. so i pluck him from his resting-place, not without 

difficulty, for the base of the idol was fasten by iron clamp to the 

altar, and only just in time before a surge of fire and smoke swept 

through the vestibule. then, without more ado, i carry forth this 

ganapati, wrap in a cotton cloth i had gather from one of the slain 

priests, and tie it to the saddle-bow of my horse, which had been 

standing tether under a tree close at hand. 

"thus did it come about that, a full month later, i was seat in my 

home, in a secret inner chamber that serve me as a treasury, and to 

which the only access was through the women's quarters. and before me on 

a stool rest the cross-legged figure of the four-armed and 

elephant-headed god, fat, complacent, smiling, to all appearance 

recover from the fatigues of a journey of near a hundred league and 

thorough contented amidst his new surround[pg 107]ings. the idol was of 

bronze, and the eyes, which at times gave it such life-like semblance, 

were cluster of ruby set around with white sapphires. 

"and it follow that, day after day, after the siesta hour, i found 

myself in the company of this accursed idol—for accursed it came to be, 

bring me misfortune and ruin, as my story will unfold. no doubt it 

was by my own do that the wrath of allah was brought down upon my 

head. for had not i, a follower of the prophet, and therefore a despise 

of graven image in every shape or form, come to treat this monstrous 

and misshapen creature, half man, half beast, as a sort of familiar, 

even greeting him on my entry with the words with which i might have 

salute a living unbeliever, 'may your days be peaceful,' spoken in 

goodnature jest, of course, and without one thought at the time of the 

sacrilege of which i was guilty? yea, i would pat the fat little fellow 

on the head, and, when the humour seize me, would show him my hoard of 

gold mohurs, even jingle before him a bag of silver rupees, or ask his 

opinion on the colour and quality of some gem, speak words of 

foolish the while, like a child play with a toy. and when i lay 

back on my cushions, sometimes i fancy that the little jewelled eyes 

in the elephant head of bronze twinkle at me in merry and friendly 

understanding. all which things i have since remember with bitter 

shame. 
