

vi. the tiger of the pathan 

told by the afghanistan general 

"in my case the philosophy of life is of the simplest," remark the 

afghanistan general. "i neither crave the wealth of the prince, nor do i 

inflict upon myself the mortification of the ascetic. for the one rich 

robe and the sceptre, for the other a loin cloth and a begging-bowl; 

but for me the good sword that command respect from my enemies, 

confidence from my friends, and my due share of the good things of 

existence. in this frame of mind i find the full measure of joy in each 

day that passes." 

he smile the smile of the man contented with the world and with 

himself, but there was the light of proud determination in his eyes that 

belie the mere sybarite. 

"then for you the greatest good consist in the happiness you can snatch 

from the passing hour," suggest the magistrate. 

"that is so," concur the soldier, "if to the word happiness you give 

the right interpretation. to me the performance of one's present duty is 

the only real thing that bring contentment. and duty need not always be 

stern and forbidding; to laugh and play and be merry may, at the proper 

time and in the proper circumstances, be a duty both to ourselves[pg 129] and 

to others. when one lives philosophical for the present, he take men 

in all their mood and life in all its phases. the past is count as 

dead and to be forgotten, except for the experience gain to guide the 

do of the things that lie now to one's hand. the future is unseen, 

but is none the less determined by our deeds, words, and thought of the 

passing moment, each one of which, be it remembered, whether deed or 

rash word, or unspoken thought, has consequence that are eternal." 

"so for the man whose mind is thus attuned," again interpose the 

magistrate, "the present become all supreme, shaped by the past, 

shape the future." 

"which means that destiny never degenerate into mere blind and helpless 

fatalism," respond the afghan. "to do the right now suffice to give 

absolute trust in god for the hereafter. that is the key of destiny, and 

each man hold it in his own keeping." 

"a simple religion," smile the rajput. 

"and therefore the best. it is the religion of islam free from all the 

controversy of rival sect and over-learned mullahs. it is the 

religion of my father and the religion of my youth, and in it i abide. 

let me tell you a story of the rough school in which i received my early 

training and where such thought as these first began to sink deep into 

my mind. 

"have you ever heard of shir jumla khan? no? well, that is doubtless 

because he has been dead for a full score of years, and because he held 

his sway in a land remote from these plain of hindustan, up[pg 130] in the 

rugged mountains, where brave tribesmen guard the valley which their 

ancestor tilled, and yield allegiance to no one but their own 

hereditary chieftains. such was my country and my people, for i am proud 

that in my vein runs the blood of the man who for a hundred mile 

around my boyhood home was known as the tiger of the pathans. behold in 

me a grandson of shir jumla khan." 

the narrator fold his arms across his breast, in an attitude of quiet 

dignity. after just a moment's pause he continued: 

"we were all born fighters, the member of my clan, for during hundred 

of years many a swarm host had swept past the gateway of our 

territory, persians, arabs, afghans, moguls, turkmans, horde of 

fight men of every race and tongue, sometimes march south bent on 

conquest, at other times return to their home laden with rich 

spoils, and yet at other times defeat and broken, with enemy 

pressing at their heels. and it was the patrimonial right of our tribe 

to take toll from all alike, from victor and vanquished, from pursuer 

and pursued. 

"sometimes an army would pass through our mountain under safe conduct 

from all the tribes, and the price paid in money, horses, camels, and 

cattle, cloth and other goods, would be divide among the several 

clans. but in this practice there had grown to be more danger for 

ourselves than from foray or assault on passing enemies, because over 

the division of the spoils there would be[pg 131] quarrelling, follow by 

fighting, among the tribes. thus had originate many a blood feud 

enduring through many generations. 

"in the early days of shir jumla khan it had come about that several 

rich caravan had fallen exclusively into his hands. with the money thus 

provided by the bountiful of allah, he had been enable to build for 

himself a citadel that for vastness and security surpass those of all 

his rival among the tribal chiefs. within its wide wall were well and 

water tanks, garden for the grow of fruits and vegetables, 

warehouse for goods, granary store with barley, wheat, and dal, 

stable for a hundred horses, shed for the housing of cattle, sheep, 

and camels, and dwelling place for a goodly multitude of armed men, 

their wives and their children. and all of these things endure until 

this day, for the fortress town amid the mountain built by my 

grandsire, the tiger of the pathans, has ever remain unconquered and 

unconquerable. 

"but as shir jumla khan grew rich in possession and in power—for 

score of fight men from afar were attract to his service—at the 

same time did his position among the tribesmen become one of increase 

isolation. all fear him and envy him, and fear and envy have ever 

been breeder of hate. yet was he a just and a benevolent man, honour 

and beloved by every one within his domain, where his slightest word was 

gladly accept law, not because of the might he wield but because of 

his fair to all men. 

"i was yet a young man when a widely spread plot among the rival[pg 132] 

tribesmen to destroy shir jumla khan's power had come to a head, and had 

result in a determined and prolonged attack upon his citadel. numbers 

had told, our outlying field had been devastated, our flock and herd 

driven away, and crowded within the wall of the fortress were refugee 

from all the surrounding countryside. we had been coop up through the 

summer, we had lost our annual crops, and without the usual 

replenish granary and warehouse were beginning to wear an empty 

look, with but sorry promise for the winter. but, calm and undismayed, 

his proud look and serene smile ever the same, shir jumla khan continue 

to feed the hungry host within his gate and now absolutely dependent 

upon his protection. 

"the coming of winter would mean for us some relief, for the first snow 

would scatter the beleaguer hosts, send them back to their own 

valleys, and give us the chance, in the interval of the season's 

storms, to make a few foray on our own account on neighbouring 

communities, which, taken one at a time, would be pretty well at our 

mercy. but if we reasoned in this wise so did our enemies; for it was 

now toward the close of the month of august and redouble effort were 

being put forth to accomplish the breach of our walls, so that the 

tiger of the pathan might be slain before there was the chance of his 

fang and claw again becoming dangerous. 

"the tribesmen, no doubt by capture and enforce service, had secured[pg 133] 

the help of some engineer versed in the method of siege and assault 

on fortify place as practised in hindustan. at that time i had never 

before seen a sabat, but now from our fortification i beheld the 

gradual extension, day by day, of a broad cover way, with bull-hide 

roof stretch across the trench being dug, and effectually protect 

the labourer below from our gun and musket and catapults. we had made 

several sally with a view to try and stop this work, but these had 

only result in loss on our side out of all proportion to the 

harassment and delay inflict on the besiegers. so we could but 

impotent watch the subtle and inexorable approach of the skilled men 

who would eventually reach our walls, drive mine beneath them, and blow 

us to perdition. 

"our one chance lay in the question of time. if the winter began early 

we should be saved, but if the snow held off till late in the year it 

look as if our doom must be sealed. 

"but quite unexpected a ray of hope came from another quarter. 

dissension had broken out in the ranks of our foes! 

"the first word was brought to us by a deserter from the besiegers' 

camp, who one night had crept up to the gateway of the fort and whine 

for admittance, declare that he had important news to tell and hope 

for a reward. 

"i was with my grandfather when, awaken from his sleep, he listen to 

the man's story. it told of a[pg 134] fierce quarrel the preceding evening 

between two of the leading chieftains. they had been converse alone in 

one of their tents, when sudden those without had heard angry words. 

then it would seem that the owner of the tent had sent for one of the 

slipper which his visitor had left at the doorway, and with this had 

administer five or six stroke over the head, driving his guest forth 

insult and disgraced. every one in the camp was on the alert for 

fight in the morning. 

"with a grim smile shir jumla khan listen to this narrative. but he 

made no comment; he merely issue instruction for the informer to be 

fed and for the present close guarded. 

"but if there had been any lingering doubt as to the truth of the story, 

confirmation came ere the break of the dawn. for we were once again 

disturbed from our rest, this time by the noise of a great tumult in the 

camp of the besiegers, loud shouting follow by the discharge of 

muskets, the sound gradual die away in the distance as if a fight 

and a pursuit had taken place. when day broke such indeed prove to be 

the case; we could descry in the camp a row of tent thrown down and 

dismantled, also dead or wound men being brought in from the country 

beyond, while away on a distant ridge was a considerable body of 

tribesmen retreat toward their homes. 

"at this sight joyful huzza resound through the fortress, and we did 

indeed all feel that allah, by disrupt the forces of the enemy, was 

fight on[pg 135] our side. and as i spread my prayer carpet, and prostrate 

myself toward mecca, the pious thought in my heart was one that had many 

times been inculcate by my noble grandsire himself: 'let the wise man 

reflect that he can in no way succeed without the help of god most 

high.' 

"during the day we took counsel as to the advisable of an attack on 

the somewhat attenuate host without the walls. but from our post of 

observation we could see that every one in the camp was under arms and 

on the alert, no doubt foresee that such an attempt was likely on our 

part. so we conclude to let event develop, and contented ourselves 

with watch the progress of the sabat. here there was no relaxation of 

endeavour, for the protect trench made a considerable advance ere the 

sun once again sank over the western hills. 

"darkness had not long fallen when another bleat voice of a suppliant 

for admittance was heard by the sentry at the gateway. introduce to our 

presence, the newcomer, a goatherd by his appearance, and with the sign 

of travel on his garments, remove his head dress, untwisted the long 

locks of hair bound according to custom around his head, and, produce 

a small packet from the midst of his tresses, flung it on the floor. i 

picked up the missive, and hand it to our chieftain. 

"shir jumla khan untie the packet, and produce therefrom a heavy gold 

signet ring. while he was examine this, the seeming goatherd raise 

his voice: 
