god sol. 

in determine the characteristic of the supreme 

divinity of astral worship, it must be borne in mind that 

its founder taught that he was evolve or engender by 

the father, or first person in the sacred triad, from his 

pure substance, which as we have shown was constitute 

of chaos or the primeval fire into which they supposed all 

things were reduce through the agency of that element 

at the conclusion of 12,000 year cycles. hence, designate 

that mythical being as the only begotten of the 

father, they personify him as god the son, or second 

person in the sacred triad; and recognize the sun as the 

ruling star, very appropriate made him the preside 

genius of that luminary, under the title of god sol. according 

homage to light as his chief attribute, he is refer 

to in the allegory as "the true light, which lighteth 

every man that cometh into the world," john i., 9; and, 

although designate as the only begotten of the father, 

his co-existence with him, under the title of the logo or 

word, is shown in the text which reads, "in the beginning 

was the word, and the word was with god, and the 

word was god," john i., 1. 

personify the principles of good and evil in god 

sol, the ancient astrologer consecrate the six division 

of the 12,000 year cycle, corresponding to the reproductive 

month of spring and summer, to him as lord of 

good, and symbolize him by the constellation of the 

zodiac in which the vernal equinox successive occurred, 

as explain hereafter, they dedicated the six division 

of that cycle, corresponding to the destructive 

month of autumn and winter, to him as lord of evil, 

and as such, symbolize him by the serpent, marked the 

beginning of his reign by the constellation "serpens," 

placed in conjunction with the autumnal equinox. 

personify in him the oppose principles of good and 

evil, he was to the ancients both god and devil, or the 

varied god, who, in relation to the seasons, was describe 

as beautiful in spring, powerful in summer, beneficent in 

autumn and terrible in winter. thus under various 

names, intended to represent god sol in relation to the 

diversify seasons, we find record in the scriptures, or 

solar fables, numerous portrayal of imaginary conflicts, 

in which the evil principle, triumph during autumn 

and winter, is conquer at the vernal equinox by the 

good principle, who, bring back equal days and nights, 

restore the harmony of nature. 

the eternal enmity between the principles of good 

and evil, as manifest in the diversity of the seasons, 

we find portray in the constellation hercules and 

draco, placed in the northern heavens, in which the heel 

of the former, represent one of the most ancient of the 

imaginary incarnation of god sol, to which we will refer 

hereafter, is rest upon the head of the latter, as refer 

to in genesis iii., 15, which make god sol, or the 

lord god, say to the serpent, "i will put enmity between 

thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; 

it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." 

the woman allude to in this text is the virgo of the 

zodiac, as will be made apparent hereafter. 

of all the divinity of the ancient mythology god 

sol was the only one distinguished by the exalted title of 

lord or lord god, for the reason that he was made the 

organize of chaos and governor of heaven and earth. 

hence, have constitute him the lord of light and darkness, 

as well as good and evil, the ancient astrologer in 

compose the solar fable made him say of himself, "i 

form the light and create darkness; i make peace and 

create evil, i the lord do all these things," isaiah xlv., 7. 

"shall there be evil in a city, and the lord hath not 

done it?" amos iii., 6. besides the title of lord or 

lord god, the solar divinity is also designate in the 

allegory as the lord of lords and the king of kings, 

the invincible, the mighty god, etc. 

subject the mythical genius of the sun, in his apparent 

annual revolution round the earth, to the four 

stage of human life from infancy to old age, the ancient 

magi fixed the natal day of the young god sol at the winter 

solstice, the virgo of the zodiac was made his mother, 

and the constellation in conjunction with her, which is 

now known as bootes, but ancient call arcturus, his 

foster father. he is represent as holding in leash two 

hunting dogs and driving ursa major, or the great bear, 

around the north pole, thus showing that the original 

occupation of the celestial foster father of the young god 

sol was that of a bear driver, and that his sons, refer to 

in job xxxviii., 32, are the dogs aster and chara. it 

will be observe that virgo is represent in our illustration 

with a child in her arms, for the reason that she is so 

represent in the ancient zodiacs, and the fact will be 

readily concede that she is the only virgin who could 

give birth to a child and be a virgin still. 

the ancient cosmogony. 

speculate relative to the order in which chaos had 

been organized, the ancient astrologer construct a 

cosmogony, which divide the labor of god the son, or 

second person in the trinity, into six periods of a thousand 

years each; and which, answer to the six division 

of the 12,000 year cycle corresponding to the reproductive 

month of spring and summer, taught that in the first 

period he made the earth; in the second, the firmament; 

in the third, vegetation; in the fourth, the sun and 

moon and "the stars also;" in the fifth, the animals, fishes, 

birds, etc., and in the sixth, man. 

that vegetation was made before the sun was not an 

inconsistent idea to the originate of the ancient cosmogony. 

they imagine that the heat and light, emanate 

from the elementary fire, were sufficient to stimulate its 

growth, after which god the son gather it together and 

made the celestial luminaries. in the solar fable this 

imaginary element is call the fire-ether, or sacred fire of 

the stars. 
