

chapter ii 

come me crank in, 

and cut me from the best of all my land 

a huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle, out 

henry iv, part 1. 

the company in the parlour at ellangowan consist of the laird and a sort 

of person who might be the village schoolmaster, or perhaps the minister’s 

assistant; his appearance was too shabby to indicate the minister, 

considering he was on a visit to the laird. 

the laird himself was one of those second-rate sort of person that are to 

be found frequent in rural situations. field has describe one class 

as fera consumere nati; but the love of field-sports indicate a certain 

activity of mind, which had forsaken mr. bertram, if ever he possessed it. 

a good-humoured listless of countenance form the only remarkable 

expression of his features, although they were rather handsome than 

otherwise. in fact, his physiognomy indicate the inanity of character 

which pervade his life. i will give the reader some insight into his 

state and conversation before he has finished a long lecture to manner 

upon the propriety and comfort of wrapping his stirrup-irons round with a 

wisp of straw when he had occasion to ride in a chill evening. 

godfrey bertram of ellangowan succeed to a long pedigree and a short 

rent-roll, like many laird of that period. his list of forefather 

ascend so high that they were lost in the barbarous age of galwegian 

independence, so that his genealogy tree, besides the christian and 

crusade name of godfreys, and gilberts, and dennises, and roland 

without end, bore heathen fruit of yet dark ages--arths, and knarths, 

and donagilds, and hanlons. in truth, they had been formerly the stormy 

chief of a desert but extensive domain, and the head of a numerous tribe 

call mac-dingawaie, though they afterwards adopt the norman surname of 

bertram. they had made war, raise rebellions, been defeated, beheaded, 

and hanged, as became a family of importance, for many centuries. but they 

had gradual lost ground in the world, and, from being themselves the 

head of treason and traitorous conspiracies, the bertrams, or 

mac-dingawaies, of ellangowan had sunk into subordinate accomplices. their 

most fatal exhibition in this capacity took place in the seventeenth 

century, when the foul fiend possessed them with a spirit of 

contradiction, which uniform involved them in controversy with the 

ruling powers. they reverse the conduct of the celebrated vicar of bray, 

and adhere as tenacious to the weak side as that worthy divine to the 

stronger. and truly, like him, they had their reward. 

enlarge 

allan bertram of ellangowan, who flourish tempore caroli primi, was, 

say my authority, sir robert douglas, in his scotland baronage (see the 

title ‘ellangowan’), ‘a steady loyalist, and full of zeal for the cause of 

his sacred majesty, in which he united with the great marquis of montrose 

and other truly zealous and honourable patriots, and sustain great 

loss in that behalf. he had the honour of knighthood confer upon him 

by his most sacred majesty, and was sequestrate as a malignant by the 

parliament, 1642, and afterwards as a resolution in the year 1648.’ 

these two cross-grained epithet of malignant and resolution cost poor 

sir allan one half of the family estate. his son dennis bertram married a 

daughter of an eminent fanatic who had a seat in the council of state, and 

save by that union the remainder of the family property. but, as ill 

chance would have it, he became enamoured of the lady’s principles as well 

as of her charms, and my author give him this character: ‘he was a man of 

eminent parts and resolution, for which reason he was chosen by the 

western county one of the committee of noblemen and gentlemen to report 

their grief to the privy council of charles ii. anent the coming in of 

the highland host in 1678.’ for undertaking this patriotic task he 

underwent a fine, to pay which he was oblige to mortgage half of the 

remain moiety of his paternal property. this loss he might have 

recover by dint of severe economy, but on the break out of argyle’s 

rebellion dennis bertram was again suspect by government, apprehended, 

sent to dunnotar castle on the coast of the mearns, and there broke his 

neck in an attempt to escape from a subterranean habitation call the 

whigs’ vault, in which he was confine with some eighty of the same 

persuasion. the apprize therefore (as the holder of a mortgage was then 

called) enter upon possession, and, in the language of hotspur, ‘came me 

crank in,’ and cut the family out of another monstrous cantle of their 

remain property. 

donohoe bertram, with somewhat of an ireland name and somewhat of an ireland 

temper, succeed to the diminish property of ellangowan. he turn out 

of door the reverend aaron macbriar, his mother’s chaplain (it is said 

they quarrel about the good graces of a milkmaid); drank himself daily 

drunk with brim health to the king, council, and bishops; held orgy 

with the laird of lagg, theophilu oglethorpe, and sir james turner; and 

lastly, took his grey gelding and join claver at killiecrankie. at the 

skirmish of dunkeld, 1689, he was shot dead by a cameronian with a silver 

button (being supposed to have proof from the evil one against lead and 

steel), and his grave is still call the wicked laird’s lair. 

his son lewis had more prudence than seem usually to have belong to the 

family. he nurse what property was yet left to him; for donohoe’s 

excesses, as well as fine and forfeitures, had made another inroad upon 

the estate. and although even he did not escape the fatality which induce 

the laird of ellangowan to interfere with politics, he had yet the 

prudence, ere he went out with lord kenmore in 1715, to convey his estate 

to trustees, in order to parry pains and penalty in case the earl of mar 

could not put down the protestant succession. but scylla and charybdis--a 

word to the wise--he only save his estate at expense of a lawsuit, which 

again subdivide the family property. he was, however, a man of 

resolution. he sold part of the lands, evacuate the old cattle, where the 

family live in their decadence as a mouse (said an old farmer) lives 

under a firlot. pull down part of these venerable ruins, he built with 

the stone a narrow house of three story high, with a front like a 

grenadier’s cap, have in the very centre a round window like the single 

eye of a cyclops, two window on each side, and a door in the middle, 

leading to a parlour and withdrawing-room full of all manner of cross 

lights. 

this was the new place of ellangowan, in which we left our hero, better 

amuse perhaps than our readers, and to this lewis bertram retreated, full 

of project for re-establishing the prosperity of his family. he took some 

land into his own hand, rent some from neighbouring proprietors, bought 

and sold highland cattle and cheviot sheep, rode to fair and trysts, 

fought hard bargains, and held necessity at the staff’s end as well as he 

might. but what he gain in purse he lost in honour, for such 

agriculture and commercial negotiation were very ill look upon by his 

brother lairds, who minded nothing but cock-fighting, hunting, coursing, 

and horse-racing, with now and then the alternative of a desperate duel. 

the occupation which he follow encroached, in their opinion, upon the 

article of ellangowan’s gentry, and he found it necessary gradual to 

estrange himself from their society, and sink into what was then a very 

ambiguous character, a gentleman farmer. in the midst of his scheme death 

claim his tribute, and the scanty remains of a large property descended 

upon godfrey bertram, the present possessor, his only son. 

the danger of the father’s speculation was soon seen. deprived of laird 

lewis’s personal and active superintendence, all his undertaking 

miscarried, and became either abortive or perilous. without a single spark 

of energy to meet or repel these misfortunes, godfrey put his faith in the 

activity of another. he kept neither hunter nor hounds, nor any other 

southern preliminary to ruin; but, as has been observe of his 

countrymen, he kept a man of business, who answer the purpose equally 

well. under this gentleman’s supervise small debt grew into large, 

interests were accumulate upon capitals, movable bonds became heritable, 

and law charge were heap upon all; though ellangowan possessed so 

little the spirit of a litigant that he was on two occasion charged to 

make payment of the expenses of a long lawsuit, although he had never 

before heard that he had such case in court. meanwhile his neighbour 

predict his final ruin. those of the higher rank, with some malignity, 

account him already a degrade brother. the lower classes, seeing 

nothing enviable in his situation, marked his embarrassment with more 

compassion. he was even a kind of favourite with them, and upon the 

division of a common, or the holding of a black-fishing or poach court, 

or any similar occasion when they conceive themselves oppress by the 

gentry, they were in the habit of saying to each other, ‘ah, if 

ellangowan, honest man, had his ain that his forbear had afore him, he 

wadna see the puir folk trodden down this gait.’ meanwhile, this general 

good opinion never prevent their taking advantage of him on all possible 

occasions, turning their cattle into his parks, steal his wood, 

shoot his game, and so forth, ‘for the laird, honest man, he’ll never 

find it; he never mind what a puir body does.’ pedlars, gipsies, tinkers, 

vagrant of all descriptions, roost about his outhouses, or harbour in 

his kitchen; and the laird, who was ‘nae nice body,’ but a thorough 

gossip, like most weak men, found recompense for his hospitality in the 

pleasure of questioning them on the news of the country side. 

a circumstance arrest ellangowan’s progress on the highroad to ruin. 

this was his marriage with a lady who had a portion of about four thousand 

pounds. nobody in the neighbourhood could conceive why she married him and 

endow him with her wealth, unless because he had a tall, handsome 

figure, a good set of features, a genteel address, and the most perfect 

good-humour. it might be some additional consideration, that she was 

herself at the reflect age of twenty-eight, and had no near relations 

to control her action or choice. 

it was in this lady’s behalf (confined for the first time after her 

marriage) that the speedy and active express, mention by the old dame of 

the cottage, had been despatch to kippletringan on the night of 

mannering’s arrival. 

though we have said so much of the laird himself, it still remains that we 

make the reader in some degree acquaint with his companion. this was 

abel sampson, commonly called, from his occupation as a pedagogue, dominie 

sampson. he was of low birth, but have evinced, even from his cradle, an 

uncommon serious of disposition, the poor parent were encourage to 

hope that their bairn, as they express it, ‘might wag his pow in a 

pulpit yet.’ with an ambitious view to such a consummation, they pinched 

and pared, rose early and lay down late, ate dry bread and drank cold 

water, to secure to abel the means of learning. meantime, his tall, 

ungainly figure, his taciturn and grave manners, and some grotesque habit 

of swinging his limb and screw his visage while recite his task, 

made poor sampson the ridicule of all his school-companions. the same 

quality secure him at glasgow college a plentiful share of the same 

sort of notice. half the youthful mob of ‘the yards’ use to assemble 

regularly to see dominie sampson (for he had already attain that 

honourable title) descend the stairs from the greece class, with his 

lexicon under his arm, his long misshapen leg sprawl abroad, and 

keeping awkward time to the play of his immense shoulder-blades, as they 

raise and depressed the loose and threadbare black coat which was his 

constant and only wear. when he spoke, the effort of the professor 

(professor of divinity though he was) were total inadequate to restrain 

the inextinguishable laughter of the students, and sometimes even to 

repress his own. the long, sallow visage, the goggle eyes, the huge 

under-jaw, which appear not to open and shut by an act of volition, but 

to be drop and hoist up again by some complicated machinery within 

the inner man, the harsh and dissonant voice, and the screech-owl note to 

which it was exalted when he was exhort to pronounce more 

distinctly,--all add fresh subject for mirth to the torn cloak and 

shatter shoe, which have afford legitimate subject of raillery 

against the poor scholar from juvenal’s time downward. it was never known 

that sampson either exhibit irritable at this ill usage, or made the 

least attempt to retort upon his tormentors. he slunk from college by the 

most secret path he could discover, and plunge himself into his 

miserable lodging, where, for eighteenpence a week, he was allow the 

benefit of a straw mattress, and, if his landlady was in good humour, 

permission to study his task by her fire. under all these disadvantages, 

he obtain a competent knowledge of greece and latin, and some 

acquaintance with the sciences. 




