

chapter iv 

you have fed upon my seignories, 

dispark’d my parks, and fell’d my forest woods, 

from mine own window torn my household coat, 

raze out my impress, leave me no sign, 

save men’s opinion and my living blood, 

to show the world i am a gentleman. 

richard ii. 

when the boat which carry the worthy captain on board his vessel had 

accomplished that task, the sail began to ascend, and the ship was got 

under way. she fire three gun as a salute to the house of ellangowan, 

and then shot away rapid before the wind, which blew off shore, under 

all the sail she could crowd. 

‘ay, ay,’ said the laird, who had sought manner for some time, and now 

join him, ‘there they go--there go the free-traders--there go captain 

dirk hatteraick and the yungfrauw hagenslaapen, half manks, half dutchman, 

half devil! run out the boltsprit, up mainsail, top and top-gallant sails, 

royals, and skyscrapers, and away--follow who can! that fellow, mr. 

mannering, is the terror of all the excise and custom-house cruisers; they 

can make nothing of him; he drub them, or he distance them;--and, 

speak of excise, i come to bring you to breakfast; and you shall have 

some tea, that--’ 

manner by this time was aware that one thought link strange on to 

another in the concatenation of worthy mr. bertram’s ideas, 

like orient pearl at random strung; 

and therefore, before the current of his association had drift farther 

from the point he had left, he brought him back by some inquiry about dirk 

hatteraick. 

‘o he’s a--a--gude sort of blackguard fellow eneugh; naebody care to 

trouble him--smuggler, when his gun are in ballast--privateer, or pirate, 

faith, when he get them mounted. he has done more mischief to the revenue 

folk than ony rogue that ever came out of ramsay.’ 

‘but, my good sir, such being his character, i wonder he has any 

protection and encouragement on this coast.’ 

‘why, mr. mannering, people must have brandy and tea, and there’s none in 

the country but what come this way; and then there’s short accounts, and 

maybe a keg or two, or a dozen pounds, left at your stable-door, instead 

of a d--d lang account at christmas from duncan robb, the grocer at 

kippletringan, who has aye a sum to make up, and either wants ready money 

or a short-dated bill. now, hatteraick will take wood, or he’ll take bark, 

or he’ll take barley, or he’ll take just what’s convenient at the time. 

i’ll tell you a gude story about that. there was ance a laird--that’s 

macfie of gudgeonford,--he had a great number of kain hens--that’s hen 

that the tenant pay to the landlord, like a sort of rent in kind. they 

aye feed mine very ill; luckie finniston sent up three that were a shame 

to be seen only last week, and yet she has twelve bow sow of victual; 

indeed her goodman, duncan finniston--that’s him that’s gone--(we must all 

die, mr. mannering, that’s owe true)--and, speak of that, let us live 

in the meanwhile, for here’s breakfast on the table, and the dominie ready 

to say the grace.’ 

the dominie did accordingly pronounce a benediction, that exceed in 

length any speech which manner had yet heard him utter. the tea, which 

of course belong to the noble captain hatteraick’s trade, was pronounced 

excellent. still manner hinted, though with due delicacy, at the risk 

of encourage such desperate characters. ‘were it but in justice to the 

revenue, i should have supposed--’ 

‘ah, the revenue lads’--for mr. bertram never embrace a general or 

abstract idea, and his notion of the revenue was personify in the 

commissioners, surveyors, comptrollers, and riding officer whom he 

happen to know--’the revenue lad can look sharp eneugh out for 

themselves, no ane needs to help them; and they have a’ the soldier to 

assist them besides; and as to justice--you ‘ll be surprise to hear it, 

mr. mannering, but i am not a justice of peace!’ 

manner assume the expect look of surprise, but thought within 

himself that the worshipful bench suffer no great deprivation from 

wanting the assistance of his good-humoured landlord. mr. bertram had now 

hit upon one of the few subject on which he felt sore, and went on with 

some energy. 

‘no, sir, the name of godfrey bertram of ellangowan is not in the last 

commission, though there’s scarce a carle in the country that has a 

plough-gate of land, but what he must ride to quarter-sessions and write 

j.p. after his name. i ken fu’ weel whom i am oblige to--sir thomas 

kittlecourt as good as tell’d me he would sit in my skirt if he had not 

my interest at the last election; and because i chose to go with my own 

blood and third cousin, the laird of balruddery, they keepit me off the 

roll of freeholders; and now there come a new nomination of justices, and 

i am left out! and whereas they pretend it was because i let david 

mac-guffog, the constable, draw the warrants, and manage the business his 

ain gate, as if i had been a nose o’ wax, it’s a main untruth; for i 

grant but seven warrant in my life, and the dominie wrote every one of 

them--and if it had not been that unlucky business of sandy mac-gruthar’s, 

that the constable should have keepit twa or three days up yonder at the 

auld castle, just till they could get convenient to send him to the 

county jail--and that cost me eneugh o’ siller. but i ken what sir thomas 

wants very weel--it was just sic and siclike about the seat in the kirk o’ 

kilmagirdle--was i not entitle to have the front gallery facing the 

minister, rather than mac-crosskie of creochstone, the son of deacon 

mac-crosskie, the dumfries weaver?’ 

manner express his acquiesce in the justice of these various 

complaints. 

‘and then, mr. mannering, there was the story about the road and the 

fauld-dike. i ken sir thomas was behind there, and i said plainly to the 

clerk to the trustee that i saw the cloven foot, let them take that as 

they like. would any gentleman, or set of gentlemen, go and drive a road 

right through the corner of a fauld-dike and take away, as my agent 

observe to them, like twa rood of gude moorland pasture? and there was 

the story about choose the collector of the cess--’ 

‘certainly, sir, it is hard you should meet with any neglect in a country 

where, to judge from the extent of their residence, your ancestor must 

have made a very important figure.’ 

‘very true, mr. mannering; i am a plain man and do not dwell on these 

things, and i must needs say i have little memory for them; but i wish ye 

could have heard my father’s story about the auld fight of the 

mac-dingawaies--that’s the bertram that now is--wi’ the ireland and wi’ the 

highlander that came here in their berl from ilay and cantire; and 

how they went to the holy land--that is, to jerusalem and jericho, wi’ a’ 

their clan at their heels--they had better have gaen to jamaica, like sir 

thomas kittlecourt’s uncle--and how they brought hame relics like those 

that catholic have, and a flag that’s up yonder in the garret. if they 

had been cask of muscavado and puncheon of rum it would have been better 

for the estate at this day; but there’s little comparison between the auld 

keep at kittlecourt and the castle o’ ellangowan; i doubt if the keep’s 

forty feet of front. but ye make no breakfast, mr. mannering; ye’re no 

eat your meat; allow me to recommend some of the kipper. it was john 

hay that catcht it, saturday was three weeks, down at the stream below 

hempsee ford,’ etc. etc. etc. 

the laird, whose indignation had for some time kept him pretty steady to 

one topic, now launch forth into his usual rove style of conversation, 

which gave manner ample time to reflect upon the disadvantage 

attend the situation which an hour before he had thought worthy of so 

much envy. here was a country gentleman, whose most estimable quality 

seem his perfect good-nature, secret fret himself and murmur 

against other for cause which, compare with any real evil in life, must 

weigh like dust in the balance. but such is the equal distribution of 

providence. to those who lie out of the road of great affliction are 

assign petty vexation which answer all the purpose of disturb their 

serenity; and every reader must have observe that neither natural apathy 

nor acquire philosophy can render country gentlemen insensible to the 

grievance which occur at elections, quarter-sessions, and meeting of 

trustees. 

curious to investigate the manners of the country, manner took the 

advantage of a pause in good mr. bertram’s string of story to inquire 

what captain hatteraick so earnest want with the gipsy woman. 

‘o, to bless his ship, i suppose. you must know, mr. mannering, that these 

free-traders, whom the law call smugglers, have no religion, make it 

all up in superstition; and they have as many spell and charm and 

nonsense--’ 

‘vanity and waur!’ said the dominie;’ it is a traffick with the evil 

one. spells, periapts, and charm are of his device--choice arrow out of 

apollyon’s quiver.’ 

‘hold your peace, dominie; ye’re speak for ever’--by the way, they were 

the first words the poor man had utter that morning, excepting that he 

said grace and return thanks--’mr. manner cannot get in a word for 

ye! and so, mr. mannering, talk of astronomy and spell and these 

matters, have ye been so kind as to consider what we were speak about 

last night?’ 

‘i begin to think, mr. bertram, with your worthy friend here, that i have 

been rather jesting with edge-tools; and although neither you nor i, nor 

any sensible man, can put faith in the prediction of astrology, yet, as 

it has sometimes happen that inquiry into futurity, undertaken in 

jest, have in their result produce serious and unpleasant effects both 

upon action and characters, i really wish you would dispense with my 

reply to your question.’ 

it was easy to see that this evasive answer only render the laird’s 

curiosity more uncontrollable. mannering, however, was determined in his 

own mind not to expose the infant to the inconvenience which might have 

arisen from his being supposed the object of evil prediction. he therefore 

deliver the paper into mr. bertram’s hand, and request him to keep it 

for five years with the seal unbroken, until the month of november was 

expired. after that date had intervene he left him at liberty to examine 

the writing, trust that, the first fatal period being then safe 

overpassed, no credit would be paid to its farther contents. this mr. 

bertram was content to promise, and mannering, to ensure his fidelity, 

hint at misfortune which would certainly take place if his injunction 

were neglected. the rest of the day, which mannering, by mr. bertram’s 

invitation, spent at ellangowan, pass over without anything remarkable; 

and on the morning of that which follow the traveller mount his 

palfrey, bade a courteous adieu to his hospitable landlord and to his 

clerical attendant, repeated his good wish for the prosperity of the 

family, and then, turning his horse’s head towards england, disappear 

from the sight of the inmate of ellangowan. he must also disappear from 

that of our readers, for it is to another and later period of his life 

that the present narrative relates. 
