

chapter viii 

so the red indian, by ontario’s side, 

nurse hardy on the brindled panther’s hide, 

as fade his swarthy race, with anguish see 

the white man’s cottage rise beneath the trees; 

he leaves the shelter of his native wood, 

he leaves the murmur of ohio’s flood, 

and forward rush in indignant grief, 

where never foot has trod the fallen leaf, 

he bends his course where twilight reign sublime. 

o’er forest silent since the birth of time. 

scene of infancy. 

in tracing the rise and progress of the scotland maroon war, we must not 

omit to mention that years had roll on, and that little harry bertram, 

one of the hardiest and most lively children that ever made a sword and 

grenadier’s cap of rushes, now approach his fifth revolving birthday. a 

hardihood of disposition, which early develop itself, made him already a 

little wanderer; he was well acquaint with every patch of lea ground and 

dingle around ellangowan, and could tell in his broken language upon what 

baulk grew the bonniest flowers, and what copse had the ripest nuts. he 

repeatedly terrify his attendant by clamber about the ruins of the 

old castle, and had more than once made a stolen excursion as far as the 

gipsy hamlet. 

on these occasion he was generally brought back by meg merrilies, who, 

though she could not be prevail upon to enter the place of ellangowan 

after her nephew had been given up to the press-gang, did not apparently 

extend her resentment to the child. on the contrary, she often contrived 

to waylay him in his walks, sing him a gipsy song, give him a ride upon 

her jackass, and thrust into his pocket a piece of gingerbread or a 

red-cheeked apple. this woman’s ancient attachment to the family, repel 

and checked in every other direction, seem to rejoice in have some 

object on which it could yet repose and expand itself. she prophesy a 

hundred times, ‘that young mr. harry would be the pride o’ the family, and 

there hadna been sic a sprout frae the auld aik since the death of arthur 

mac-dingawaie, that was kill in the battle o’ the bloody bay; as for the 

present stick, it was good for nothing but fire-wood.’ on one occasion, 

when the child was ill, she lay all night below the window, chant a 

rhyme which she believe sovereign as a febrifuge, and could neither be 

prevail upon to enter the house nor to leave the station she had chosen 

till she was informed that the crisis was over. 

the affection of this woman became matter of suspicion, not indeed to the 

laird, who was never hasty in suspect evil, but to his wife, who had 

indifferent health and poor spirits. she was now far advanced in a second 

pregnancy, and, as she could not walk abroad herself, and the woman who 

attend upon harry was young and thoughtless, she pray dominie sampson 

to undertake the task of watch the boy in his rambles, when he should 

not be otherwise accompanied. the dominie love his young charge, and was 

enrapture with his own success in have already brought him so far in 

his learning as to spell words of three syllables. the idea of this early 

prodigy of erudite being carry off by the gipsies, like a second adam 

smith,[footnote: the father of economical philosophy was, when a child, 

actually carry off by gipsies, and remain some hour in their 

possession.] was not to be tolerated; and accordingly, though the charge 

was contrary to all his habit of life, he readily undertook it, and might 

be seen stalk about with a mathematics problem in his head, and his 

eye upon a child of five years old, whose ramble led him into a hundred 

awkward situations. twice was the dominie chase by a cross-grained cow, 

once he fell into the brook crossing at the stepping-stones, and another 

time was bog up to the middle in the slough of lochend, in attempt 

to gather a water-lily for the young laird. it was the opinion of the 

village matron who relieved sampson on the latter occasion, ‘that the 

laird might as weel trust the care o’ his bairn to a potatoe bogle’; but 

the good dominie bore all his disaster with gravity and serene equally 

imperturbable. ‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ was the only ejaculation they ever 

extort from the much-enduring man. 

enlarge 

the laird had by this time determined to make root-and-branch work with 

the maroon of derncleugh. the old servant shook their head at his 

proposal, and even dominie sampson venture upon an indirect remonstrance. 

as, however, it was couch in the oracular phrase, ‘ne movea camerinam,’ 

neither the allusion, nor the language in which it was expressed, were 

calculate for mr. bertram’s edification, and matter proceed against 

the gipsy in form of law. every door in the hamlet was chalk by the 

ground-officer, in token of a formal warning to remove at next term. 

still, however, they show no symptom either of submission or of 

compliance. at length the term-day, the fatal martinmas, arrived, and 

violent measure of eject were resort to. a strong posse of 

peace-officers, sufficient to render all resistance vain, charged the 

inhabitant to depart by noon; and, as they did not obey, the officers, in 

terms of their warrant, proceed to unroof the cottages, and pull down 

the wretched door and windows--a summary and effectual mode of eject 

still practised in some remote parts of scotland when a tenant prove 

refractory. the gipsy for a time beheld the work of destruction in 

sullen silence and inactivity; then set about saddle and load their 

asses, and making preparation for their departure. these were soon 

accomplished, where all had the habit of wandering tartars; and they set 

forth on their journey to seek new settlements, where their patron should 

neither be of the quorum nor custo rotulorum. 

certain qualm of feeling had deter ellangowan from attend in person 

to see his tenant expelled. he left the executive part of the business to 

the officer of the law, under the immediate direction of frank kennedy, a 

supervisor, or riding-officer, belong to the excise, who had of late 

become intimate at the place, and of whom we shall have more to say in the 

next chapter. mr. bertram himself chose that day to make a visit to a 

friend at some distance. but it so happened, notwithstanding his 

precautions, that he could not avoid meeting his late tenant during their 

retreat from his property. 

it was in a hollow way, near the top of a steep ascent, upon the verge of 

the ellangowan estate, that mr. bertram met the gipsy procession. four or 

five men form the advanced guard, wrap in long loose great-coats that 

hid their tall slender figures, as the large slouch hats, drawn over 

their brows, conceal their wild features, dark eyes, and swarthy faces. 

two of them carry long fowling-pieces, one wore a broadsword without a 

sheath, and all had the highland dirk, though they did not wear that 

weapon openly or ostentatiously. behind them follow the train of laden 

asses, and small cart or tumblers, as they were call in that country, 

on which were laid the decrepit and the helpless, the age and infant part 

of the exile community. the women in their red cloak and straw hats, the 

elder children with bare head and bare feet, and almost naked bodies, had 

the immediate care of the little caravan. the road was narrow, running 

between two broken bank of sand, and mr. bertram’s servant rode forward, 

smack his whip with an air of authority, and motion to the driver 

to allow free passage to their betters. his signal was unattended to. he 

then call to the men who lounge idle on before, ‘stand to your beasts’ 

heads, and make room for the laird to pass.’ 

‘he shall have his share of the road,’ answer a male gipsy from under 

his slouch and large-brimmed hat, and without raise his face, ‘and he 

shall have nae mair; the highway is as free to our cuddy as to his 

gelding.’ 

the tone of the man being sulky, and even menacing, mr. bertram thought it 

best to put his dignity in his pocket, and pass by the procession quietly, 

on such space as they chose to leave for his accommodation, which was 

narrow enough. to cover with an appearance of indifference his feeling of 

the want of respect with which he was treated, he address one of the 

men, as he pass him without any show of greeting, salute, or 

recognition--’giles baillie,’ he said, ‘have you heard that your son 

gabriel is well?’ (the question respect the young man who had been 

pressed.) 

‘if i had heard otherwise,’ said the old man, look up with a stern and 

menace countenance, ‘you should have heard of it too.’ and he plod on 

his way, tarry no further question. [footnote: this anecdote is a 

literal fact.] when the laird had pressed on with difficulty among a crowd 

of familiar faces, which had on all former occasion marked his approach 

with the reverence due to that of a superior being, but in which he now 

only read hatred and contempt, and had got clear of the throng, he could 

not help turning his horse, and look back to mark the progress of their 

march. the group would have been an excellent subject for the pencil of 

calotte. the van had already reach a small and stunt thicket, which 

was at the bottom of the hill, and which gradual hid the line of march 

until the last straggle disappeared. 

his sensation were bitter enough. the race, it is true, which he had thus 

summary dismiss from their ancient place of refuge, was idle and 

vicious; but had he endeavour to render them otherwise? they were not 

more irregular character now than they had been while they were admitted 

to consider themselves as a sort of subordinate dependent of his family; 

and ought the mere circumstance of his becoming a magistrate to have made 

at once such a change in his conduct towards them? some means of 

reformation ought at least to have been try before send seven 

family at once upon the wide world, and deprive them of a degree of 

countenance which withheld them at least from atrocious guilt. there was 

also a natural yearning of heart on parting with so many known and 

familiar faces; and to this feeling godfrey bertram was peculiarly 

accessible, from the limited quality of his mind, which sought its 

principal amusement among the petty object around him. as he was about 

to turn his horse’s head to pursue his journey, meg merrilies, who had 

lag behind the troop, unexpected present herself. 

she was standing upon one of those high precipitous bank which, as we 

before noticed, overhung the road, so that she was placed considerably 

higher than ellangowan, even though he was on horseback; and her tall 

figure, relieved against the clear blue sky, seem almost of supernatural 

stature. we have notice that there was in her general attire, or rather 

in her mode of adjust it, somewhat of a foreign costume, artful 

adopt perhaps for the purpose of add to the effect of her spell and 

predictions, or perhaps from some traditional notions respecting the dress 

of her ancestors. on this occasion she had a large piece of red cotton 

cloth roll about her head in the form of a turban, from beneath which 

her dark eyes flash with uncommon lustre. her long and tangle black 

hair fell in elf-locks from the fold of this singular head-gear. her 

attitude was that of a sibyl in frenzy, and she stretch out in her right 

hand a sapling bough which seem just pulled. 

‘i’ll be d--d,’ said the groom, ‘if she has not been cutting the young 

ashes in the dukit park!’ the laird made no answer, but continue to look 

at the figure which was thus perch above his path. 

‘ride your ways,’ said the gipsy, ‘ride your ways, laird of ellangowan; 

ride your ways, godfrey bertram! this day have ye quench seven smoking 

hearths; see if the fire in your ain parlour burn the blyther for that. ye 

have riven the thack off seven cottar houses; look if your ain roof-tree 

stand the faster. ye may stable your stirk in the sheale at 

derncleugh; see that the hare do not couch on the hearthstane at 

ellangowan. ride your ways, godfrey bertram; what do ye glower after our 

folk for? there’s thirty heart there that wad hae want bread ere ye had 

want sunkets, and spent their life-blood ere ye had scratch your 

finger. yes; there’s thirty yonder, from the auld wife of an hundred to 

the babe that was born last week, that ye have turn out o’ their bit o’ 

bields, to sleep with the tod and the blackcock in the muirs! ride your 

ways, ellangowan. our bairn are hinge at our weary backs; look that 

your braw cradle at hame be the fair spread up; not that i am wish 

ill to little harry, or to the babe that’s yet to be born--god forbid--and 

make them kind to the poor, and better folk than their father! and now, 

ride e’en your ways; for these are the last words ye’ll ever hear meg 

merry speak, and this is the last reise that i’ll ever cut in the 

bonny wood of ellangowan.’ 

so saying, she broke the sapling she held in her hand, and flung it into 

the road. margaret of anjou, bestow on her triumphant foe her 

keen-edged malediction, could not have turn from them with a gesture 

more proud contemptuous. the laird was clearing his voice to speak, and 

thrust his hand in his pocket to find a half-crown; the gipsy wait 

neither for his reply nor his donation, but strode down the hill to 

overtake the caravan. 

ellangowan rode pensive home; and it was remarkable that he did not 

mention this interview to any of his family. the groom was not so 

reserved; he told the story at great length to a full audience in the 

kitchen, and conclude by swearing, that ‘if ever the devil spoke by the 

mouth of a woman, he had spoken by that of meg merry that blessed 

day.’ 
