

chapter x 

but see, his face is black and full of blood; 

his eye-balls farther out than when he lived, 

staring full ghastly like a strangle man, 

his hair uprear’d, his nostril stretch d with struggling, 

his hand abroad display’d, as one that grasp’d 

and tugg’d for life, and was by strength subdued 

henry vi, part ii 

the sheriff-depute of the county arrive at ellangowan next morning by 

daybreak. to this provincial magistrate the law of scotland assign 

judicial powers of considerable extent, and the task of inquiring into all 

crime committed within his jurisdiction, the apprehension and commitment 

of suspect persons, and so forth. [footnote: the scotland sheriff 

discharges, on such occasion as that now mentioned, pretty much the same 

duty as a coroner.] 

the gentleman who held the office in the shire of---at the time of this 

catastrophe was well born and well educated; and, though somewhat pedantic 

and professional in his habits, he enjoy general respect as an active 

and intelligent magistrate. his first employment was to examine all 

witness whose evidence could throw light upon this mysterious event, and 

make up the written report, proce verbal, or precognition, as it is 

technical called, which the practice of scotland has substitute for a 

coroner’s inquest. under the sheriff’s minute and skilful inquiry, many 

circumstances appear which seem incompatible with the original opinion 

that kennedy had accidental fallen from the cliffs. we shall brief 

detail some of these. 

the body had been deposit in a neighbouring fisher-hut, but without 

alter the condition in which it was found. this was the first object of 

the sheriff’s examination. though fearful crush and mangle by the 

fall from such a height, the corpse was found to exhibit a deep cut in the 

head, which, in the opinion of a skilful surgeon, must have been inflict 

by a broadsword or cutlass. the experience of this gentleman discover 

other suspicious indications. the face was much blackened, the eyes 

distorted, and the vein of the neck swelled. a coloured handkerchief, 

which the unfortunate man had worn round his neck, did not present the 

usual appearance, but was much loosened, and the knot displace and 

drag extremely tight; the fold were also compressed, as if it had been 

use as a means of grapple the deceased, and drag him perhaps to the 

precipice. 

on the other hand, poor kennedy’s purse was found untouched; and, what 

seem yet more extraordinary, the pistol which he usually carry when 

about to encounter any hazardous adventure were found in his pocket 

loaded. this appear particularly strange, for he was known and dread 

by the contraband trader as a man equally fearless and dexterous in the 

use of his weapons, of which he had given many signal proofs. the sheriff 

inquire whether kennedy was not in the practice of carry any other 

arms? most of mr. bertram’s servant recollect that he generally had a 

couteau de chasse, or short hanger, but none such was found upon the dead 

body; nor could those who had seen him on the morning of the fatal day 

take it upon them to assert whether he then carry that weapon or not. 

the corpse afford no other indicia respecting the fate of kennedy; for, 

though the clothes were much displace and the limb dreadfully fractured, 

the one seem the probable, the other the certain, consequence of such a 

fall. the hand of the deceased were clench fast, and full of turf and 

earth; but this also seem equivocal. 

the magistrate then proceed to the place where the corpse was first 

discovered, and made those who had found it give, upon the spot, a 

particular and detailed account of the manner in which it was lying. a 

large fragment of the rock appear to have accompanied, or followed, the 

fall of the victim from the cliff above. it was of so solid and compact a 

substance that it had fallen without any great diminution by splintering; 

so that the sheriff was enabled, first, to estimate the weight by 

measurement, and then to calculate, from the appearance of the fragment, 

what portion of it had been bed into the cliff from which it had 

descended. this was easily detect by the raw appearance of the stone 

where it had not been expose to the atmosphere. they then ascend the 

cliff, and survey the place from whence the stony fragment had fallen. 

it seem plain, from the appearance of the bed, that the mere weight of 

one man standing upon the project part of the fragment, supposing it in 

its original situation, could not have destroy its balance and 

precipitate it, with himself, from the cliff. at the same time, it 

appear to have lain so loose that the use of a lever, or the combine 

strength of three or four men, might easily have hurl it from its 

position. the short turf about the brink of the precipice was much 

trampled, as if stamp by the heel of men in a mortal struggle, or in 

the act of some violent exertion. trace of the same kind, less visibly 

marked, guide the sagacious investigate to the verge of the copsewood, 

which in that place crept high up the bank towards the top of the 

precipice. 

with patience and perseverance they trace these mark into the thickest 

part of the copse, a route which no person would have voluntary adopted, 

unless for the purpose of concealment. here they found plain vestige of 

violence and struggling, from space to space. small bough were torn down, 

as if grasp by some resist wretch who was drag forcibly along; the 

ground, where in the least degree soft or marshy, show the print of many 

feet; there were vestige also which might be those of human blood. at any 

rate it was certain that several person must have forced their passage 

among the oaks, hazels, and underwood with which they were mingled; and in 

some place appear trace as if a sack full of grain, a dead body, or 

something of that heavy and solid description, had been drag along the 

ground. in one part of the thicket there was a small swamp, the clay of 

which was whitish, being probably mixed with marl. the back of kennedy’s 

coat appear besmear with stain of the same colour. 

at length, about a quarter of a mile from the brink of the fatal 

precipice, the trace conduct them to a small open space of ground, very 

much trampled, and plainly stain with blood, although wither leaves 

had been strew upon the spot, and other means hasty taken to efface 

the marks, which seem obviously to have been derive from a desperate 

affray. on one side of this patch of open ground was found the sufferer’s 

naked hanger, which seem to have been thrown into the thicket; on the 

other, the belt and sheath, which appear to have been hidden with more 

leisurely care and precaution. 

the magistrate cause the footprint which marked this spot to be 

careful measured and examined. some correspond to the foot of the 

unhappy victim; some were larger, some less; indicate that at least four 

or five men had been busy around him. above all, here, and here only, were 

observe the vestige of a child’s foot; and as it could be seen nowhere 

else, and the hard horse-track which traverse the wood of warroch was 

contiguous to the spot, it was natural to think that the boy might have 

escape in that direction during the confusion. but, as he was never heard 

of, the sheriff, who made a careful entry of all these memoranda, did not 

suppress his opinion, that the deceased had met with foul play, and that 

the murderers, whoever they were, had possessed themselves of the person 

of the child harry bertram. 

every exertion was now made to discover the criminals. suspicion hesitate 

between the smuggle and the gipsies. the fate of dirk hatteraick’s 

vessel was certain. two men from the opposite side of warroch bay (so the 

inlet on the southern side of the point of warroch is called) had seen, 

though at a great distance, the lugger drive eastward, after double the 

headland, and, as they judge from her manoeuvres, in a disabled state. 

shortly after, they perceive that she grounded, smoked, and finally took 

fire. she was, as one of them express himself, ‘in a light low’ (bright 

flame) when they observe a king’s ship, with her colours up, heave in 

sight from behind the cape. the gun of the burning vessel discharge 

themselves as the fire reach them; and they saw her at length blow up 

with a great explosion. the sloop of war kept aloof for her own safety; 

and, after hover till the other exploded, stood away southward under a 

press of sail. the sheriff anxious interrogate these men whether any 

boat had left the vessel. they could not say, they had seen none; but 

they might have put off in such a direction as placed the burning vessel, 

and the thick smoke which float landward from it, between their course 

and the witnesses’ observation. 

that the ship destroy was dirk hatteraick’s no one doubted. his lugger 

was well known on the coast, and had been expect just at this time. a 

letter from the commander of the king’s sloop, to whom the sheriff made 

application, put the matter beyond doubt; he sent also an extract from his 

log-book of the transactions of the day, which intimate their being on 

the outlook for a smuggle lugger, dirk hatteraick master, upon the 

information and requisition of francis kennedy, of his majesty’s excise 

service; and that kennedy was to be upon the outlook on the shore, in case 

hatteraick, who was known to be a desperate fellow, and had been 

repeatedly outlawed, should attempt to run his sloop aground. about nine 

o’clock a.m. they discover a sail which answer the description of 

hatteraick’s vessel, chase her, and, after repeated signal to her to 

show colours and bring-to, fire upon her. the chase then show hamburgh 

colours and return the fire; and a running fight was maintain for 

three hours, when, just as the lugger was double the point of warroch, 

they observe that the main-yard was shot in the slings, and that the 

vessel was disabled. it was not in the power of the man-of-war’s men for 

some time to profit by this circumstance, owe to their have kept too 

much in shore for double the headland. after two tacks, they 

accomplished this, and observe the chase on fire and apparently deserted. 

the fire have reach some cask of spirits, which were placed on the 

deck, with other combustibles, probably on purpose, burnt with such fury 

that no boat durst approach the vessel, especially as her shot gun 

were discharge one after another by the heat. the captain had no doubt 

whatever that the crew had set the vessel on fire and escape in their 

boats. after watch the conflagration till the ship blew up, his 

majesty’s sloop, the shark, stood towards the isle of man, with the 

purpose of intercept the retreat of the smugglers, who, though they 

might conceal themselves in the wood for a day or two, would probably 

take the first opportunity of endeavour to make for this asylum. but 

they never saw more of them than is above narrated. 

such was the account given by william pritchard, master and commander of 

his majesty’s sloop of war, shark, who conclude by regret deep that 

he had not had the happiness to fall in with the scoundrel who had had 

the impudence to fire on his majesty’s flag, and with an assurance that, 

should he meet mr. dirk hatteraick in any future cruise, he would not fail 

to bring him into port under his stern, to answer whatever might be 

allege against him. 

