

chapter xii 

reputation! that’s man’s idol 

set up against god, the maker of all laws, 

who hath command us we should not kill, 

and yet we say we must, for reputation! 

what honest man can either fear his own, 

or else will hurt another’s reputation? 

fear to do base unworthy things is valour; 

if they be done to us, to suffer them 

is valour too. 

ben jonson. 

the colonel was walking pensive up and down the parlour when the 

officious landlady reentere to take his commands. have given them in 

the manner he thought would be most acceptable ‘for the good of the 

house,’ he beg to detain her a moment. 

‘i think,’ he said, ‘madam, if i understood the good people right, mr. 

bertram lost his son in his fifth year?’ 

‘o ay, sir, there’s nae doubt o’ that, though there are mony idle clash 

about the way and manner, for it’s an auld story now, and everybody tell 

it, as we were doing, their ain way by the ingleside. but lost the bairn 

was in his fifth year, as your honour says, colonel; and the news being 

rash tell’d to the leddy, then great with child, cost her her life that 

samyn night; and the laird never throve after that day, but was just 

careless of everything, though, when his daughter miss lucy grew up, she 

try to keep order within doors; but what could she do, poor thing? so 

now they’re out of house and hauld.’ 

‘can you recollect, madam, about what time of the year the child was 

lost?’ the landlady, after a pause and some recollection, answered, ‘she 

was positive it was about this season’; and add some local recollection 

that fixed the date in her memory as occur about the beginning of 

november 17--. 

the stranger took two or three turn round the room in silence, but sign 

to mrs. mac-candlish not to leave it. 

‘did i rightly apprehend,’ he said, ‘that the estate of ellangowan is in 

the market?’ 

‘in the market? it will be sell’d the morn to the highest bidder--that’s 

no the morn, lord help me! which is the sabbath, but on monday, the first 

free day; and the furniture and stocking is to be roupit at the same time 

on the ground. it’s the opinion of the haill country that the sale has 

been shameful forced on at this time, when there’s sae little money 

stirring in scotland wi’ this weary america war, that somebody may get 

the land a bargain. deil be in them, that i should say sae!’--the good 

lady’s wrath rising at the supposed injustice. 

‘and where will the sale take place?’ 

‘on the premises, as the advertisement says; that’s at the house of 

ellangowan, your honour, as i understand it.’ 

‘and who exhibit the title-deeds, rent-roll, and plan?’ 

‘a very decent man, sir; the sheriff-substitute of the county, who has 

authority from the court of session. he’s in the town just now, if your 

honour would like to see him; and he can tell you mair about the loss of 

the bairn than ony body, for the sheriff-depute (that’s his principal, 

like) took much pains to come at the truth o’ that matter, as i have 

heard.’ 

‘and this gentleman’s name is--’ 

‘mac-morlan, sir; he’s a man o’ character, and weel spoken o’.’ 

‘send my compliments--colonel mannering’s compliments to him, and i would 

be glad he would do me the pleasure of sup with me, and bring these 

papers with him; and i beg, good madam, you will say nothing of this to 

any one else.’ 

‘me, sir? ne’er a word shall i say. i wish your honour (a courtesy), or 

ony honourable gentleman that’s fought for his country (another courtesy), 

had the land, since the auld family maun quit (a sigh), rather than that 

wily scoundrel glossin, that’s risen on the ruin of the best friend he 

ever had. and now i think on’t, i’ll slip on my hood and pattens, and gang 

to mr. mac-morlan mysell, he’s at hame e’en now; it’s hardly a step.’ 

‘do so, my good landlady, and many thanks; and bid my servant step here 

with my portfolio in the meantime.’ 

in a minute or two colonel manner was quiet seat with his writing 

material before him. we have the privilege of look over his shoulder 

as he writes, and we willing communicate its substance to our readers. 

the letter was address to arthur mervyn, esq., of mervyn hall, 

llanbraithwaite, westmoreland. it contained some account of the writer’s 

previous journey since parting with him, and then proceed as follows:-- 

‘and now, why will you still upbraid me with my melancholy, mervyn? do you 

think, after the lapse of twenty-five years, battles, wounds, 

imprisonment, misfortune of every description, i can be still the same 

lively, unbroken guy manner who climb skiddaw with you, or shot 

grouse upon crossfell? that you, who have remain in the bosom of 

domestic happiness, experience little change, that your step is as light 

and your fancy as full of sunshine, is a blessed effect of health and 

temperament, cooperate with content and a smooth current down the course 

of life. but my career has been one of difficulty and doubt and errors. 

from my infancy i have been the sport of accident, and, though the wind 

has often borne me into harbour, it has seldom been into that which the 

pilot destined. let me recall to you--but the task must be brief--the odd 

and wayward fates of my youth, and the misfortune of my manhood. 

‘the former, you will say, had nothing very appalling. all was not for the 

best; but all was tolerable. my father, the eldest son of an ancient but 

reduce family, left me with little, save the name of the head of the 

house, to the protection of his more fortunate brothers. they were so fond 

of me that they almost quarrel about me. my uncle, the bishop, would 

have had me in orders, and offer me a living; my uncle, the merchant, 

would have put me into a counting-house, and propose to give me a share 

in the thrive concern of manner and marshall, in lombard street. so, 

between these two stools, or rather these two soft, easy, well-stuffed 

chair of divinity and commerce, my unfortunate person slip down, and 

pitch upon a dragoon saddle. again, the bishop wish me to marry the 

niece and heiress of the dean of lincoln; and my uncle, the alderman, 

propose to me the only daughter of old sloethorn, the great 

wine-merchant, rich enough to play at span-counter with moidore and make 

thread-papers of bank-notes; and somehow i slip my neck out of both 

nooses, and married--poor, poor sophia wellwood. 

‘you will say, my military career in india, when i follow my regiment 

there, should have given me some satisfaction; and so it assured has. 

you will remind me also, that if i disappointed the hope of my guardians, 

i did not incur their displeasure; that the bishop, at his death, 

bequeath me his blessing, his manuscript sermons, and a curious 

portfolio contain the head of eminent divine of the church of 

england; and that my uncle, sir paul mannering, left me sole heir and 

executor to his large fortune. yet this availeth me nothing; i told you i 

had that upon my mind which i should carry to my grave with me, a 

perpetual aloe in the draught of existence. i will tell you the cause 

more in detail than i had the heart to do while under your hospitable 

roof. you will often hear it mentioned, and perhaps with different and 

unfounded circumstances. i will therefore speak it out; and then let the 

event itself, and the sentiment of melancholy with which it has impress 

me, never again be subject of discussion between us. 

‘sophia, as you well know, follow me to india. she was as innocent as 

gay; but, unfortunately for us both, as gay as innocent. my own manners 

were partly form by study i had forsaken, and habit of seclusion not 

quite consistent with my situation as commandant of a regiment in a 

country where universal hospitality is offer and expect by every 

settler claim the rank of a gentleman. in a moment of peculiar pressure 

(you know how hard we were sometimes run to obtain white face to 

countenance our line-of-battle), a young man name brown join our 

regiment as a volunteer, and, finding the military duty more to his fancy 

than commerce, in which he had been engaged, remain with us as a cadet. 

let me do my unhappy victim justice: he behave with such gallantry on 

every occasion that offer that the first vacant commission was 

considered as his due. i was absent for some week upon a distant 

expedition; when i return i found this young fellow establish quite as 

the friend of the house, and habitual attendant of my wife and daughter. 

it was an arrangement which displease me in many particulars, though no 

objection could be made to his manners or character. yet i might have been 

reconcile to his familiarity in my family, but for the suggestion of 

another. if you read over--what i never dare open--the play of “othello,” 

you will have some idea of what followed--i mean of my motives; my 

actions, thank god! were less reprehensible. there was another cadet 

ambitious of the vacant situation. he call my attention to what he led 

me to term coquetry between my wife and this young man. sophia was 

virtuous, but proud of her virtue; and, irritate by my jealousy, she was 

so imprudent as to press and encourage an intimacy which she saw i 

disapprove and regard with suspicion. between brown and me there 

exist a sort of internal dislike. he made an effort or two to overcome 

my prejudice; but, prepossessed as i was, i placed them to a wrong motive. 

feeling himself repulsed, and with scorn, he desisted; and as he was 

without family and friends, he was naturally more watchful of the 

deportment of one who had both. 

‘it is odd with what torture i write this letter. i feel inclined, 

nevertheless, to protract the operation, just as if my do so could put 

off the catastrophe which has so long embitter my life. but--it must be 

told, and it shall be told briefly. 
