

chapter xiv 

the bell strike one. we take no note of time 

but from its loss. to give it then a tongue 

is wise in man. as if an angel spoke, 

i feel the solemn sound. 

young. 

the moral which the poet has rather quaint deduce from the necessary 

mode of measure time may be well applied to our feelings respecting that 

portion of it which constitute human life. we observe the aged, the 

infirm, and those engaged in occupation of immediate hazard, tremble as 

it were upon the very brink of non-existence, but we derive no lesson from 

the precarious of their tenure until it has altogether failed. then, 

for a moment at least-- 

our hope and fear start up alarm’d, and o’er life’s narrow verge 

look down--on what? a fathomless abyss, a dark eternity, how surely 

ours! 

the crowd of assemble gaze and idle at ellangowan had follow the 

view of amusement, or what they call business, which brought them 

there, with little regard to the feelings of those who were suffering upon 

that occasion. few, indeed, knew anything of the family. the father, 

betwixt seclusion, misfortune, and imbecility, had drifted, as it were, 

for many years out of the notice of his contemporaries; the daughter had 

never been known to them. but when the general murmur announce that the 

unfortunate mr. bertram had broken his heart in the effort to leave the 

mansion of his forefathers, there pour forth a torrent of sympathy like 

the waters from the rock when stricken by the wand of the prophet. the 

ancient descent and unblemished integrity of the family were respectful 

remembered; above all, the sacred venerate due to misfortune, which in 

scotland seldom demand its tribute in vain, then claim and received it. 

mr. mac-morlan hasty announce that he would suspend all farther 

proceedings in the sale of the estate and other property, and relinquish 

the possession of the premises to the young lady, until she could consult 

with her friends and provide for the burial of her father. 

glossin had cower for a few minutes under the general expression of 

sympathy, till, harden by observing that no appearance of popular 

indignation was direct his way, he had the audacity to require that the 

sale should proceed. 

‘i will take it upon my own authority to adjourn it,’ said the 

sheriff-substitute, ‘and will be responsible for the consequences. i will 

also give due notice when it is again to go forward. it is for the benefit 

of all concerned that the lands should bring the highest price the state 

of the market will admit, and this is surely no time to expect it. i will 

take the responsibility upon myself.’ 

glossin left the room and the house too with secrecy and despatch; and it 

was probably well for him that he did so, since our friend jock jabo was 

already harangue a numerous tribe of bare-legged boys on the propriety 

of pelt him off the estate. 

some of the rooms were hasty put in order for the reception of the young 

lady, and of her father’s dead body. manner now found his farther 

interference would be unnecessary, and might be misconstrued. he observed, 

too, that several family connected with that of ellangowan, and who 

indeed derive their principal claim of gentility from the alliance, were 

now disposed to pay to their tree of genealogy a tribute which the 

adversity of their supposed relative had been inadequate to call forth; 

and that the honour of superintend the funeral rite of the dead 

godfrey bertram (as in the memorable case of homer’s birthplace) was 

likely to be debate by seven gentlemen of rank and fortune, none of whom 

had offer him an asylum while living. he therefore resolved, as his 

presence was altogether useless, to make a short tour of a fortnight, at 

the end of which period the adjourn sale of the estate of ellangowan was 

to proceed. 

but before he departed he solicit an interview with the dominie. the 

poor man appeared, on being informed a gentleman want to speak to him, 

with some expression of surprise in his gaunt features, to which recent 

sorrow had given an expression yet more grisly. he made two or three 

profound reverence to mannering, and then, standing erect, patient 

wait an explanation of his commands. 

‘you are probably at a loss to guess, mr. sampson,’ said mannering, ‘what 

a stranger may have to say to you?’ 

‘unless it were to request that i would undertake to train up some youth 

in polite letters and humane learning; but i cannot--i cannot; i have yet 

a task to perform.’ 

‘no, mr. sampson, my wish are not so ambitious. i have no son, and my 

only daughter, i presume, you would not consider as a fit pupil.’ 

‘of a surety no,’ reply the simple-minded sampson. ‘nathless, it was i 

who did educate miss lucy in all useful learning, albeit it was the 

housekeeper who did teach her those unprofitable exercises of hem and 

shaping.’ 

‘well, sir,’ reply mannering, ‘it is of miss lucy i meant to speak. you 

have, i presume, no recollection of me?’ 

sampson, always sufficient absent in mind, neither remember the 

astrologer of past years, nor even the stranger who had taken his patron’s 

part against glossin, so much had his friend’s sudden death embroil his 

ideas. 

‘well, that do not signify,’ pursue the colonel; ‘i am an old 

acquaintance of the late mr. bertram, able and willing to assist his 

daughter in her present circumstances. besides, i have thought of making 

this purchase, and i should wish things kept in order about the place; 

will you have the goodness to apply this small sum in the usual family 

expenses?’ he put into the dominie’s hand a purse contain some gold. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaim dominie sampson. ‘but if your honour would 

tarry--’ 

‘impossible, sir, impossible,’ said mannering, making his escape from him. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ again exclaim sampson, following to the head of the 

stairs, still holding out the purse. ‘but as touching this coin money--’ 

manner escape downstairs as fast as possible. 

‘pro-di-gi-ous!’ exclaim dominie sampson, yet the third time, now 

standing at the front door. ‘but as touching this specie--’ 

but manner was now on horseback, and out of hearing. the dominie, who 

had never, either in his own right or as trustee for another, been 

possessed of a quarter part of this sum, though it was not above twenty 

guineas, ‘took counsel,’ as he express himself, ‘how he should demean 

himself with respect unto the fine gold’ thus left in his charge. 

fortunately he found a disinterested adviser in mac-morlan, who pointed 

out the most proper means of dispose of it for contribute to miss 

bertram’s convenience, being no doubt the purpose to which it was destined 

by the bestower. 

many of the neighbouring gentry were now sincerely eager in pressing 

offer of hospitality and kindness upon miss bertram. but she felt a 

natural reluctance to enter any family for the first time as an object 

rather of benevolence than hospitality, and determined to wait the opinion 

and advice of her father’s nearest female relation, mrs. margaret bertram 

of singleside, an old unmarried lady, to whom she wrote an account of her 

present distressful situation. 

the funeral of the late mr. bertram was perform with decent privacy, and 

the unfortunate young lady was now to consider herself as but the 

temporary tenant of the house in which she had been born, and where her 

patience and soothe attention had so long ‘rocked the cradle of 

decline age.’ her communication with mr. mac-morlan encourage her to 

hope that she would not be sudden or unkindly deprived of this asylum; 

but fortune had ordered otherwise. 

for two days before the appoint day for the sale of the lands and estate 

of ellangowan, mac-morlan daily expect the appearance of colonel 

mannering, or at least a letter contain powers to act for him. but none 

such arrived. mr. mac-morlan wake early in the morning, walk over to 

the post-office,--there were no letters for him. he endeavour to 

persuade himself that he should see colonel manner to breakfast, and 

ordered his wife to place her best china and prepare herself accordingly. 

but the preparation were in vain. ‘could i have foreseen this,’ he said, 

‘i would have travelled scotland over, but i would have found some one to 

bid against glossin.’ alas! such reflection were all too late. the 

appoint hour arrived; and the party met in the masons’ lodge at 

kippletringan, being the place fixed for the adjourn sale. mac-morlan 

spent as much time in preliminary as decency would permit, and read over 

the articles of sale as slow as if he had been reading his own 

death-warrant. he turn his eye every time the door of the room opened, 

with hope which grew faint and fainter. he listen to every noise in 

the street of the village, and endeavour to distinguish in it the sound 

of hoof or wheels. it was all in vain. a bright idea then occurred, that 

colonel manner might have employ some other person in the 

transaction; he would not have waste a moment’s thought upon the want of 

confidence in himself which such a manoeuvre would have evinced. but this 

hope also was groundless. after a solemn pause, mr. glossin offer the 

upset price for the lands and barony of ellangowan. no reply was made, and 

no competitor appeared; so, after a lapse of the usual interval by the 

running of a sand-glass, upon the intended purchaser enter the proper 

sureties, mr. mac-morlan was obliged, in technical terms, to ‘find and 

declare the sale lawful completed, and to prefer the said gilbert 

glossin as the purchaser of the said lands and estate.’ the honest writer 

refuse to partake of a splendid entertainment with which gilbert glossin, 

esquire, now of ellangowan, treat the rest of the company, and return 

home in huge bitter of spirit, which he vent in complaint against 

the fickle and caprice of these indian nabobs, who never knew what 

they would be at for ten days together. fortune generous determined to 

take the blame upon herself, and cut off even this vent of mac-morlan’s 

resentment. 

an express arrive about six o’clock at night, ‘very particularly drunk,’ 

the maid-servant said, with a packet from colonel mannering, dated four 

days back, at a town about a hundred miles’ distance from kippletringan, 

contain full powers to mr. mac-morlan, or any one whom he might employ, 

to make the intended purchase, and state that some family business of 

consequence call the colonel himself to westmoreland, where a letter 

would find him, address to the care of arthur mervyn, esq., of mervyn 

hall. 

mac-morlan, in the transport of his wrath, flung the power of attorney at 

the head of the innocent maidservant, and was only forcibly withheld from 

horse-whipping the rascally messenger by whose sloth and drunken the 

disappointment had taken place. 
