

chapter xvi 

our polly is a sad slut, nor heed what we have taught her, 

i wonder any man alive will ever rear a daughter, 

for when she’s drest with care and cost, all tempting, fine, 

and gay, 

as men should serve a cucumber, she fling herself away. 

beggar’s opera. 

after the death of mr. bertram, manner had set out upon a short tour, 

propose to return to the neighbourhood of ellangowan before the sale of 

that property should take place. he went, accordingly, to edinburgh and 

elsewhere, and it was in his return towards the south-western district of 

scotland, in which our scene lies, that, at a post-town about a hundred 

mile from kippletringan, to which he had request his friend, mr. 

mervyn, to address his letters, he received one from that gentleman which 

contained rather unplease intelligence. we have assume already the 

privilege of acting a secreti to this gentleman, and therefore shall 

present the reader with an extract from this epistle. 

‘i beg your pardon, my dearest friend, for the pain i have given you in 

force you to open wound so fester as those your letter refer to. 

i have always heard, though erroneous perhaps, that the attention of 

mr. brown were intended for miss mannering. but, however that were, it 

could not be supposed that in your situation his bold should escape 

notice and chastisement. wise men say that we resign to civil society our 

natural rights of self-defence only on condition that the ordinance of 

law should protect us. where the price cannot be paid, the resignation 

become void. for instance, no one suppose that i am not entitle to 

defend my purse and person against a highwayman, as much as if i were a 

wild indian, who own neither law nor magistracy. the question of 

resistance or submission must be determined by my means and situation. but 

if, armed and equal in force, i submit to injustice and violence from any 

man, high or low, i presume it will hardly be attribute to religious or 

moral feeling in me, or in any one but a quaker. an aggression on my 

honour seem to me much the same. the insult, however trifling in itself, 

is one of much deep consequence to all view in life than any wrong 

which can be inflict by a depredator on the highway, and to redress the 

injure party is much less in the power of public jurisprudence, or rather 

it is entire beyond its reach. if any man choose to rob arthur mervyn 

of the contents of his purse, supposing the said arthur has not means of 

defence, or the skill and courage to use them, the assizes at lancaster or 

carlisle will do him justice by tuck up the robber; yet who will say i 

am bound to wait for this justice, and submit to being plunder in the 

first instance, if i have myself the means and spirit to protect my own 

property? but if an affront is offer to me, submission under which is to 

tarnish my character for ever with men of honour, and for which the twelve 

judge of england, with the chancellor to boot, can afford me no redress, 

by what rule of law or reason am i to be deter from protect what 

ought to be, and is, so infinite dear to every man of honour than his 

whole fortune? of the religious view of the matter i shall say nothing, 

until i find a reverend divine who shall condemn self-defence in the 

article of life and property. if its propriety in that case be generally 

admitted, i suppose little distinction can be drawn between defence of 

person and goods and protection of reputation. that the latter is liable 

to be assail by person of a different rank in life, untainted perhaps 

in morals, and fair in character, cannot affect my legal right of 

self-defence. i may be sorry that circumstances have engaged me in 

personal strife with such an individual; but i should feel the same sorrow 

for a generous enemy who fell under my sword in a national quarrel. i 

shall leave the question with the casuists, however; only observing, that 

what i have written will not avail either the professed duellist or him 

who is the aggressor in a dispute of honour. i only presume to exculpate 

him who is drag into the field by such an offence as, submit to in 

patience, would forfeit for ever his rank and estimation in society. 

‘i am sorry you have thought of settle in scotland, and yet glad that 

you will still be at no immeasurable distance, and that the latitude is 

all in our favour. to move to westmoreland from devonshire might make an 

east-indian shudder; but to come to us from galloway or dumfries-shire is 

a step, though a short one, near the sun. besides, if, as i suspect, the 

estate in view be connected with the old haunt castle in which you 

play the astrologer in your northern tour some twenty years since, i 

have heard you too often describe the scene with comic unction to hope you 

will be deter from making the purchase. i trust, however, the 

hospitable gossip laird has not run himself upon the shallows, and that 

his chaplain, whom you so often made us laugh at, is still in rerum 

natura. 

‘and here, dear mannering, i wish i could stop, for i have incredible pain 

in telling the rest of my story; although i am sure i can warn you against 

any intentional impropriety on the part of my temporary ward, julia 

mannering. but i must still earn my college nickname of downright 

dunstable. in one word, then, here is the matter. 

‘your daughter has much of the romantic turn of your disposition, with a 

little of that love of admiration which all pretty women share less or 

more. she will besides, apparently, be your heiress; a trifling 

circumstance to those who view julia with my eyes, but a prevailing bait 

to the specious, artful, and worthless. you know how i have jest with 

her about her soft melancholy, and lonely walk at morning before any one 

is up, and in the moonlight when all should be gone to bed, or set down to 

cards, which is the same thing. the incident which follow may not be 

beyond the bounds of a joke, but i had rather the jest upon it came from 

you than me. 

‘two or three times during the last fortnight i heard, at a late hour in 

the night or very early in the morning, a flageolet play the little hindu 

tune to which your daughter is so partial. i thought for some time that 

some tuneful domestic, whose taste for music was laid under constraint 

during the day, chose that silent hour to imitate the strain which he had 

caught up by the ear during his attendance in the drawing-room. but last 

night i sat late in my study, which is immediately under miss mannering’s 

apartment, and to my surprise i not only heard the flageolet distinctly, 

but satisfy myself that it came from the lake under the window. curious 

to know who serenade us at that unusual hour, i stole soft to the 

window of my apartment. but there were other watch than me. you may 

remember, miss manner prefer that apartment on account of a balcony 

which open from her window upon the lake. well, sir, i heard the sash of 

her window thrown up, the shutter opened, and her own voice in 

conversation with some person who answer from below. this is not “much 

ado about nothing”; i could not be mistaken in her voice, and such tones, 

so soft, so insinuating; and, to say the truth, the accent from below 

were in passion’s tenderest cadence too,--but of the sense i can say 

nothing. i raise the sash of my own window that i might hear something 

more than the mere murmur of this spain rendezvous; but, though i use 

every precaution, the noise alarm the speakers; down slid the young 

lady’s casement, and the shutter were barred in an instant. the dash of a 

pair of oar in the water announce the retreat of the male person of the 

dialogue. indeed, i saw his boat, which he row with great swift and 

dexterity, fly across the lake like a twelve-oared barge. next morning i 

examine some of my domestics, as if by accident, and i found the 

gamekeeper, when making his rounds, had twice seen that boat beneath the 

house, with a single person, and had heard the flageolet. i did not care 

to press any farther questions, for fear of implicate julia in the 

opinion of those of whom they might be asked. next morning, at breakfast, 

i drop a casual hint about the serenade of the evening before, and i 

promise you miss manner look red and pale alternately. i immediately 

gave the circumstance such a turn as might lead her to suppose that my 

observation was merely casual. i have since cause a watch-light to be 

burnt in my library, and have left the shutter open, to deter the 

approach of our nocturnal guest; and i have state the severity of 

approach winter, and the raw of the fogs, as an objection to 

solitary walks. miss manner acquiesce with a passive which is no 

part of her character, and which, to tell you the plain truth, is a 

feature about the business which i like least of all. julia has too much 

of her own dear papa’s disposition to be curb in any of her humours, 

were there not some little lurk consciousness that it may be as prudent 

to avoid debate. 

‘now my story is told, and you will judge what you ought to do. i have not 

mention the matter to my good woman, who, a faithful secretary to her 

sex’s foibles, would certainly remonstrate against your being made 

acquaint with these particulars, and might, instead, take it into her 

head to exercise her own eloquence on miss mannering; a faculty which, 

however powerful when direct against me, its legitimate object, might, i 

fear, do more harm than good in the case supposed. perhaps even you 

yourself will find it most prudent to act without remonstrating, or 

appear to be aware of this little anecdote. julia is very like a 

certain friend of mine; she has a quick and lively imagination, and keen 

feelings, which are apt to exaggerate both the good and evil they find in 

life. she is a charming girl, however, as generous and spirited as she is 

lovely. i paid her the kiss you sent her with all my heart, and she rap 

my ringer for my reward with all hers. pray return as soon as you can. 

meantime rely upon the care of, yours faithfully, ‘arthur mervyn. 

‘p.s.--you will naturally wish to know if i have the least guess 

concerning the person of the serenader. in truth, i have none. there is no 

young gentleman of these parts, who might be in rank or fortune a match 

for miss julia, that i think at all likely to play such a character. but 

on the other side of the lake, nearly opposite to mervyn hall, is a d--d 

cake-house, the resort of walking gentlemen of all descriptions--poets, 

players, painters, musicians--who come to rave, and recite, and madden 

about this picturesque land of ours. it is pay some penalty for its 

beauties, that they are the means of drawing this swarm of coxcomb 

together. but were julia my daughter, it is one of those sort of fellow 

that i should fear on her account. she is generous and romantic, and 

write six sheet a week to a female correspondent; and it’s a sad thing 

to lack a subject in such a case, either for exercise of the feelings or 

of the pen. adieu, once more. were i to treat this matter more seriously 

than i have done, i should do injustice to your feelings; were i 

altogether to overlook it, i should discredit my own.’ 

the consequence of this letter was, that, have first despatch the 

faithless messenger with the necessary powers to mr. mac-morlan for 

purchase the estate of ellangowan, colonel manner turn his horse’s 

head in a more southerly direction, and neither ‘stinted nor staid’ until 

he arrive at the mansion of his friend mr. mervyn, upon the bank of one 

of the lake of westmoreland. 
