

chapter xvii 

heaven first, in its mercy, taught mortal their letters, 

for ladies in limbo, and lovers in fetters, 

or some author, who, place his person before ye, 

ungallant leaves them to write their own story. 

pope, imitated. 

when manner return to england, his first object had been to place his 

daughter in a seminary for female education, of establish character. 

not, however, finding her progress in the accomplishment which he wish 

her to acquire so rapid as his impatience expected, he had withdrawn miss 

manner from the school at the end of the first quarter. so she had only 

time to form an eternal friendship with miss matilda marchmont, a young 

lady about her own age, which was nearly eighteen. to her faithful eye 

were address those formidable quire which issue forth from mervyn hall 

on the wings of the post while miss manner was a guest there. the 

peruse of a few short extract from these may be necessary to render our 

story intelligible. 

first extract 

‘alas! my dearest matilda, what a tale is mine to tell! misfortune from 

the cradle has set her seal upon your unhappy friend. that we should be 

sever for so slight a cause--an ungrammatic phrase in my italy 

exercise, and three false note in one of paisiello’s sonatas! but it is a 

part of my father’s character, of whom it is impossible to say whether i 

love, admire, or fear him the most. his success in life and in war, his 

habit of making every obstacle yield before the energy of his exertions, 

even where they seem insurmountable--all these have given a hasty and 

peremptory cast to his character, which can neither endure contradiction 

nor make allowance for deficiencies. then he is himself so very 

accomplished. do you know, there was a murmur, half confirmed too by some 

mysterious words which drop from my poor mother, that he possess 

other sciences, now lost to the world, which enable the possessor to 

summon up before him the dark and shadowy form of future events! do not 

the very idea of such a power, or even of the high talent and commanding 

intellect which the world may mistake for it,--does it not, dear matilda, 

throw a mysterious grandeur about its possessor? you will call this 

romantic; but consider i was born in the land of talisman and spell, and 

my childhood lull by tale which you can only enjoy through the gauzy 

frippery of a france translation. o, matilda, i wish you could have seen 

the dusky visage of my indian attendants, bend in earnest devotion 

round the magic narrative, that flowed, half poetry, half prose, from the 

lip of the tale-teller! no wonder that europe fiction sound cold and 

meagre, after the wonderful effects which i have seen the romance of the 

east produce upon their hearers.’ 

second extract 

‘you are possessed, my dear matilda, of my bosom-secret, in those 

sentiment with which i regard brown. i will not say his memory; i am 

convinced he lives, and is faithful. his address to me were countenance 

by my deceased parent, imprudent countenance perhaps, considering the 

prejudice of my father in favour of birth and rank. but i, then almost a 

girl, could not be expect surely to be wise than her under whose charge 

nature had placed me. my father, constant engaged in military duty, i 

saw but at rare intervals, and was taught to look up to him with more awe 

than confidence. would to heaven it had been otherwise! it might have been 

better for us all at this day!’ 

third extract 

‘you ask me why i do not make known to my father that brown yet lives, at 

least that he survive the wound he received in that unhappy duel, and had 

written to my mother express his entire convalescence, and his hope of 

speedy escape from captivity. a soldier, that “in the trade of war has 

oft slain men,” feel probably no uneasy at reflect upon the 

supposed catastrophe which almost turn me into stone. and should i show 

him that letter, do it not follow that brown, alive and maintain with 

pertinac the pretension to the affection of your poor friend for 

which my father formerly sought his life, would be a more formidable 

disturb of colonel mannering’s peace of mind than in his supposed grave? 

if he escape from the hand of these marauders, i am convinced he will 

soon be in england, and it will be then time to consider how his existence 

is to be disclose to my father. but if, alas! my earnest and confident 

hope should betray me, what would it avail to tear open a mystery fraught 

with so many painful recollections? my dear mother had such dread of its 

being known, that i think she even suffer my father to suspect that 

brown’s attention were direct towards herself, rather than permit him 

to discover their real object; and o, matilda, whatever respect i owe to 

the memory of a deceased parent, let me do justice to a living one. i 

cannot but condemn the dubious policy which she adopted, as unjust to my 

father, and highly perilous to herself and me. but peace be with her 

ashes! her action were guide by the heart rather than the head; and 

shall her daughter, who inherit all her weakness, be the first to 

withdraw the veil from her defects?’ 

fourth extract ‘mervyn hall. 

‘if india be the land of magic, this, my dearest matilda, is the country 

of romance. the scenery is such as nature bring together in her sublimest 

moods-sounding cataracts--hills which rear their scathe head to the 

sky--lakes that, winding up the shadowy valleys, lead at every turn to yet 

more romantic recesses--rocks which catch the cloud of heaven. all the 

wild of salvator here, and there the fairy scene of claude. i am 

happy too in finding at least one object upon which my father can share my 

enthusiasm. an admirer of nature, both as an artist and a poet, i have 

experienced the utmost pleasure from the observations by which he explain 

the character and the effect of these brilliant specimen of her power. i 

wish he would settle in this enchanting land. but his view lie still 

farther north, and he is at present absent on a tour in scotland, looking, 

i believe, for some purchase of land which may suit him as a residence. he 

is partial, from early recollections, to that country. so, my dearest 

matilda, i must be yet farther remove from you before i am establish in 

a home. and o how delight shall i be when i can say, come, matilda, and 

be the guest of your faithful julia! 

‘i am at present the inmate of mr. and mrs. mervyn, old friends of my 

father. the latter is precisely a good sort of woman, ladylike and 

housewifely; but for accomplishment or fancy--good lack, my dearest 

matilda, your friend might as well seek sympathy from mrs. teach’em;--you 

see i have not forgot school nicknames. mervyn is a different--quite a 

different being from my father, yet he amuse and endure me. he is fat 

and good-natured, gifted with strong shrewd sense and some powers of 

humour; but have been handsome, i suppose, in his youth, has still some 

pretension to be a beau garcon, as well as an enthusiast agriculturist. 

i delight to make him scramble to the tops of eminence and to the foot of 

waterfalls, and am oblige in turn to admire his turnips, his lucerne, and 

his timothy grass. he think me, i fancy, a simple romantic miss, with 

some--the word will be out--beauty and some good-nature; and i hold that 

the gentleman has good taste for the female outside, and do not expect he 

should comprehend my sentiment farther. so he rallies, hands, and hobble 

(for the dear creature has got the gout too), and tell old story of 

high life, of which he has seen a great deal; and i listen, and smile, and 

look as pretty, as pleasant, and as simple as i can, and we do very well. 

‘but, alas! my dearest matilda, how would time pass away, even in this 

paradise of romance, tenant as it is by a pair assort so ill with the 

scene around them, were it not for your fidelity in reply to my 

uninterest details? pray do not fail to write three times a week at 

least; you can be at no loss what to say.’ 

fifth extract 

‘how shall i communicate what i have now to tell! my hand and heart still 

flutter so much, that the task of writing is almost impossible! did i not 

say that he lived? did i not say i would not despair? how could you 

suggest, my dear matilda, that my feelings, considering i had part from 

him so young, rather arose from the warmth of my imagination than of my 

heart? o i was sure that they were genuine, deceitful as the dictate of 

our bosom so frequent are. but to my tale--let it be, my friend, the 

most sacred, as it is the most sincere, pledge of our friendship. 

‘our hour here are early--earlier than my heart, with its load of care, 

can compose itself to rest. i therefore usually take a book for an hour or 

two after retiring to my own room, which i think i have told you open to 

a small balcony, look down upon that beautiful lake of which i 

attempt to give you a slight sketch. mervyn hall, being partly an 

ancient building, and construct with a view to defence, is situated on 

the verge of the lake. a stone drop from the project balcony plunge 

into water deep enough to float a skiff. i had left my window partly 

unbarred, that, before i went to bed, i might, according to my custom, 

look out and see the moonlight shining upon the lake. i was deep engaged 

with that beautiful scene in the “merchant of venice” where two lovers, 

describe the still of a summer night, enhance on each other its 

charms, and was lost in the association of story and of feeling which it 

awakens, when i heard upon the lake the sound of a flageolet. i have told 

you it was brown’s favourite instrument. who could touch it in a night 

which, though still and serene, was too cold, and too late in the year, to 

invite forth any wanderer for mere pleasure? i drew yet near the window, 

and hearken with breathless attention; the sound pause a space, were 

then resumed, pause again, and again reach my ear, ever coming near 

and nearer. at length i distinguished plainly that little hindu air which 

you call my favourite. i have told you by whom it was taught me; the 

instrument, the tones, were his own! was it earthly music, or note 

passing on the wind, to warn me of his death? 

‘it was some time ere i could summon courage to step on the balcony; 

nothing could have embolden me to do so but the strong conviction of my 

mind that he was still alive, and that we should again meet; but that 

conviction did embolden me, and i ventured, though with a throb heart. 

there was a small skiff with a single person. o, matilda, it was himself! 

i knew his appearance after so long an absence, and through the shadow of 

the night, as perfectly as if we had part yesterday, and met again in 

the broad sunshine! he guide his boat under the balcony, and spoke to me; 

i hardly knew what he said, or what i replied. indeed, i could scarcely 

speak for weeping, but they were joyful tears. we were disturbed by the 

bark of a dog at some distance, and parted, but not before he had 

conjure me to prepare to meet him at the same place and hour this 

evening. 

‘but where and to what is all this tending? can i answer this question? i 

cannot. heaven, that save him from death and deliver him from 

captivity, that save my father, too, from shed the blood of one who 

would not have blemish a hair of his head, that heaven must guide me out 

of this labyrinth. enough for me the firm resolution that matilda shall 

not blush for her friend, my father for his daughter, nor my lover for her 

on whom he has fixed his affection.’ 
