

chapter xviii 

talk with a man out of a window!--a proper saying. 

much ado about nothing. 

we must proceed with our extract from miss mannering’s letters, which 

throw light upon natural good sense, principle, and feelings, blemish by 

an imperfect education and the folly of a misjudge mother, who call 

her husband in her heart a tyrant until she fear him as such, and read 

romance until she became so enamoured of the complicated intrigue which 

they contain as to assume the management of a little family novel of her 

own, and constitute her daughter, a girl of sixteen, the principal 

heroine. she delight in petty mystery and intrigue and secrets, and yet 

tremble at the indignation which these paltry manoeuvre excited in her 

husband’s mind. thus she frequent enter upon a scheme merely for 

pleasure, or perhaps for the love of contradiction, plunge deep into it 

than she was aware, endeavour to extricate herself by new arts, or to 

cover her error by dissimulation, became involved in mesh of her own 

weaving, and was forced to carry on, for fear of discovery, machination 

which she had at first resort to in mere wantonness. 

fortunately the young man whom she so imprudent introduce into her 

intimate society, and encourage to look up to her daughter, had a fund of 

principle and honest pride which render him a safe intimate than mrs. 

manner ought to have dare to hope or expect. the obscurity of his 

birth could alone be object to him; in every other respect, 

with prospects bright upon the world he came, pure love of virtue, strong 

desire of fame, men watch the way his lofty mind would take, and all 

foretold the progress he would make. 

but it could not be expect that he should resist the snare which mrs. 

mannering’s imprudence threw in his way, or avoid becoming attach to a 

young lady whose beauty and manners might have justified his passion, even 

in scene where these are more generally met with than in a remote 

fortress in our indian settlements. the scene which follow have been 

partly detailed in mannering’s letter to mr. mervyn; and to expand what is 

there state into farther explanation would be to abuse the patience of 

our readers. 

we shall therefore proceed with our promise extract from miss 

mannering’s letters to her friend. 

sixth extract 

‘i have seen him again, matilda--seen him twice. i have use every 

argument to convince him that this secret intercourse is dangerous to us 

both; i even pressed him to pursue his view of fortune without farther 

regard to me, and to consider my peace of mind as sufficient secure by 

the knowledge that he had not fallen under my father’s sword. he 

answers--but how can i detail all he has to answer? he claim those hope 

as his due which my mother permit him to entertain, and would persuade 

me to the madness of a union without my father’s sanction. but to this, 

matilda, i will not be persuaded. i have resisted, i have subdued, the 

rebellious feelings which arose to aid his plea; yet how to extricate 

myself from this unhappy labyrinth in which fate and folly have entangle 

us both! 

‘i have thought upon it, matilda, till my head is almost giddy; nor can i 

conceive a better plan than to make a full confession to my father. he 

deserve it, for his kindness is unceasing; and i think i have observe in 

his character, since i have studied it more nearly, that his harsh 

feelings are chiefly excited where he suspect deceit or imposition; and 

in that respect, perhaps, his character was formerly misunderstood by one 

who was dear to him. he has, too, a tinge of romance in his disposition; 

and i have seen the narrative of a generous action, a trait of heroism, or 

virtuous self-denial, extract tear from him which refuse to flow at a 

tale of mere distress. but then brown urge that he is personally hostile 

to him. and the obscurity of his birth, that would be indeed a 

stumbling-block. o, matilda, i hope none of your ancestor ever fought at 

poictier or agincourt! if it were not for the venerate which my father 

attach to the memory of old sir mile mannering, i should make out my 

explanation with half the tremor which must now attend it.’ 

seventh extract 

‘i have this instant received your letter--your most welcome letter! 

thanks, my dearest friend, for your sympathy and your counsels; i can only 

repay them with unbounded confidence. 

‘you ask me what brown is by origin, that his descent should be so 

unplease to my father. his story is shortly told. he is of scotland 

extraction, but, being left an orphan, his education was undertaken by a 

family of relations settled in holland. he was bred to commerce, and sent 

very early to one of our settlement in the east, where his guardian had a 

correspondent. but this correspondent was dead when he arrive in india, 

and he had no other resource than to offer himself as a clerk to a 

counting-house. the break out of the war, and the straits to which we 

were at first reduced, threw the army open to all young men who were 

disposed to embrace that mode of life; and brown, whose genius had a 

strong military tendency, was the first to leave what might have been the 

road to wealth, and to choose that of fame. the rest of his history is 

well known to you; but conceive the irritation of my father, who despise 

commerce (though, by the way, the best part of his property was made in 

that honourable profession by my great-uncle), and has a particular 

antipathy to the dutch--think with what ear he would be likely to receive 

proposal for his only child from vanbeest brown, educated for charity by 

the house of vanbeest and vanbruggen! o, matilda, it will never do; nay, 

so childish am i, i hardly can help sympathise with his aristocratic 

feelings. mrs. vanbeest brown! the name has little to recommend it, to be 

sure. what children we are!’ 

eighth extract 

‘it is all over now, matilda! i shall never have courage to tell my 

father; nay, most deep do i fear he has already learned my secret from 

another quarter, which will entire remove the grace of my communication, 

and ruin whatever gleam of hope i had venture to connect with it. 

yesternight brown came as usual, and his flageolet on the lake announce 

his approach. we had agree that he should continue to use this signal. 

these romantic lake attract numerous visitors, who indulge their 

enthusiasm in visiting the scenery at all hours, and we hope that, if 

brown were notice from the house, he might pass for one of those admirer 

of nature, who was give vent to his feelings through the medium of 

music. the sound might also be my apology, should i be observe on the 

balcony. but last night, while i was eager enforce my plan of a full 

confession to my father, which he as earnest deprecated, we heard the 

window of mr. mervyn’s library, which is under my room, open softly. i 

sign to brown to make his retreat, and immediately reentered, with some 

faint hope that our interview had not been observed. 

‘but, alas! matilda, these hope vanish the instant i beheld mr. 

mervyn’s countenance at breakfast the next morning. he look so 

provoking intelligent and confidential, that, had i dared, i could have 

been more angry than ever i was in my life; but i must be on good 

behaviour, and my walk are now limited within his farm precincts, where 

the good gentleman can amble along by my side without inconvenience. i 

have detect him once or twice attempt to sound my thoughts, and watch 

the expression of my countenance. he has talk of the flageolet more than 

once, and has, at different times, made eulogium upon the watchful 

and ferocity of his dogs, and the regularity with which the keeper make 

his rounds with a loaded fowling-piece. he mention even man-traps and 

springguns. i should be loth to affront my father’s old friend in his own 

house; but i do long to show him that i am my father’s daughter, a fact of 

which mr. mervyn will certainly be convinced if ever i trust my voice and 

temper with a reply to these indirect hints. of one thing i am certain--i 

am grateful to him on that account--he has not told mrs. mervyn. lord help 

me, i should have had such lecture about the danger of love and the 

night air on the lake, the risk arise from cold and fortune-hunters, 

the comfort and convenience of sack-whey and closed windows! i cannot help 

trifling, matilda, though my heart is sad enough. what brown will do i 

cannot guess. i presume, however, the fear of detection prevent his 

resume his nocturnal visits. he lodge at an inn on the opposite shore 

of the lake, under the name, he tell me, of dawson; he has a bad choice 

in names, that must be allowed. he has not left the army, i believe, but 

he say nothing of his present views, 

‘to complete my anxiety, my father is return suddenly, and in high 

displeasure. our good hostess, as i learned from a bustle conversation 

between her housekeeper and her, had no expectation of seeing him for a 

week; but i rather suspect his arrival was no surprise to his friend mr. 

mervyn. his manner to me was singularly cold and constrained, sufficient 

so to have damp all the courage with which i once resolve to throw 

myself on his generosity. he lay the blame of his being discompose and 

out of humour to the loss of a purchase in the south-west of scotland on 

which he had set his heart; but i do not suspect his equanimity of being 

so easily thrown off its balance. his first excursion was with mr. 

mervyn’s barge across the lake to the inn i have mentioned. you may 

imagine the agony with which i wait his return! had he recognize brown, 

who can guess the consequence! he returned, however, apparently without 

have made any discovery. i understand that, in consequence of his late 

disappointment, he means now to hire a house in the neighbourhood of this 

same ellangowan, of which i am doom to hear so much; he seem to think 

it probable that the estate for which he wish may soon be again in the 

market. i will not send away this letter until i hear more distinct what 

are his intentions.’ 

‘i have now had an interview with my father, as confidential as, i 

presume, he means to allow me. he request me to-day, after breakfast, to 

walk with him into the library; my knees, matilda, shook under me, and it 

is no exaggeration to say i could scarce follow him into the room. i 

fear i knew not what. from my childhood i had seen all around him 

tremble at his frown. he motion me to seat myself, and i never obey a 

command so readily, for, in truth, i could hardly stand. he himself 

continue to walk up and down the room. you have seen my father, and 

noticed, i recollect, the remarkably expressive cast of his features. his 

eyes are naturally rather light in colour, but agitation or anger give 

them a dark and more fiery glance; he has a custom also of drawing in 

his lip when much moved, which imply a combat between native ardour of 

temper and the habitual power of self-command. this was the first time we 

had been alone since his return from scotland, and, as he betray these 

token of agitation, i had little doubt that he was about to enter upon 

the subject i most dreaded. 


