

chapter xix 

which slope hill around inclose, 

where many a beech and brown oak grow 

beneath whose dark and branch bower 

its tide a far-fam’d river pours, 

by nature beauty taught to please, 

sweet tusculan of rural easel 

warton. 

woodbourne, the habitation which mannering, by mr. mac-morlan’s mediation, 

had hire for a season, was a large comfortable mansion, snug situated 

beneath a hill cover with wood, which shroud the house upon the north 

and east; the front look upon a little lawn border by a grove of old 

trees; beyond were some arable fields, extend down to the river, which 

was seen from the window of the house. a tolerable, though old-fashioned 

garden, a well-stocked dove-cot, and the possession of any quantity of 

ground which the convenience of the family might require, render the 

place in every respect suitable, as the advertisement have it, ‘for the 

accommodation of a genteel family.’ 

here, then, manner resolved, for some time at least, to set up the 

staff of his rest. though an east-indian, he was not partial to an 

ostentatious display of wealth. in fact, he was too proud a man to be a 

vain one. he resolved, therefore, to place himself upon the footing of a 

country gentleman of easy fortune, without assuming, or permit his 

household to assume, any of the faste which then was considered as 

characteristic of a nabob. 

he had still his eye upon the purchase of ellangowan, which mac-morlan 

conceive mr. glossin would be compel to part with, as some of the 

creditor dispute his title to retain so large a part of the 

purchase-money in his own hands, and his power to pay it was much 

questioned. in that case mac-morlan was assured he would readily give up 

his bargain, if tempt with something above the price which he had 

stipulate to pay. it may seem strange that manner was so much attach 

to a spot which he had only seen once, and that for a short time, in early 

life. but the circumstances which pass there had laid a strong hold on 

his imagination. there seem to be a fate which conjoin the remarkable 

passage of his own family history with those of the inhabitant of 

ellangowan, and he felt a mysterious desire to call the terrace his own 

from which he had read in the book of heaven a fortune strange 

accomplished in the person of the infant heir of that family, and 

corresponding so close with one which had been striking fulfill in 

his own. besides, when once this thought had got possession of his 

imagination, he could not, without great reluctance, brook the idea of his 

plan being defeated, and by a fellow like glossin. so pride came to the 

aid of fancy, and both combine to fortify his resolution to buy the 

estate if possible. 

let us do manner justice. a desire to serve the distress had also its 

share in determine him. he had considered the advantage which julia 

might receive from the company of lucy bertram, whose genuine prudence and 

good sense could so surely be rely upon. this idea had become much 

strong since mac-morlan had confide to him, under the solemn seal of 

secrecy, the whole of her conduct towards young hazlewood. to propose to 

her to become an inmate in his family, if distant from the scene of her 

youth and the few whom she call friends, would have been less delicate; 

but at woodbourne she might without difficulty be induce to become the 

visitor of a season, without being depressed into the situation of an 

humble companion. lucy bertram, with some hesitation, accept the 

invitation to reside a few week with miss mannering. she felt too well 

that, however the colonel’s delicacy might disguise the truth, his 

principal motive was a generous desire to afford her his countenance and 

protection, which his high connexions, and higher character, were likely 

to render influential in the neighbourhood. 

about the same time the orphan girl received a letter from mrs. bertram, 

the relation to whom she had written, as cold and comfortless as could 

well be imagined. it inclosed, indeed, a small sum of money, but strong 

recommend economy, and that miss bertram should board herself in some 

quiet family, either at kippletringan or in the neighbourhood, assure 

her that, though her own income was very scanty, she would not see her 

kinswoman want. miss bertram shed some natural tear over this 

cold-hearted epistle; for in her mother’s time this good lady had been a 

guest at ellangowan for nearly three years, and it was only upon 

succeed to a property of about l400 a year that she had taken farewell 

of that hospitable mansion, which otherwise might have had the honour of 

shelter her until the death of its owner. lucy was strong inclined to 

return the paltry donation, which, after some struggle with avarice, 

pride had extort from the old lady. but on consideration she contented 

herself with writing that she accept it as a loan, which, she hope in a 

short time to repay, and consult her relative upon the invitation she 

had received from colonel and miss mannering. this time the answer came in 

course of post, so fearful was mrs. bertram that some frivolous delicacy, 

or nonsense, as she term it, might induce her cousin to reject such a 

promising offer, and thereby at the same time to leave herself still a 

burden upon her relations. lucy, therefore, had no alternative, unless she 

prefer continue a burden upon the worthy mac-morlans, who were too 

liberal to be rich. those kinsfolk who formerly request the favour of 

her company had of late either silently, or with expression of resentment 

that she should have prefer mac-morlan’s invitation to theirs, 

gradual withdrawn their notice. 

the fate of dominie sampson would have been deplorable had it depend 

upon any one except mannering, who was an admirer of originality, for a 

separation from lucy bertram would have certainly broken his heart. 

mac-morlan had given a full account of his proceedings towards the 

daughter of his patron. the answer was a request from manner to know 

whether the dominie still possessed that admirable virtue of taciturn 

by which he was so notably distinguished at ellangowan. mac-morlan reply 

in the affirmative. ‘let mr. sampson know,’ said the colonel’s next 

letter, ‘that i shall want his assistance to catalogue and put in order 

the library of my uncle, the bishop, which i have ordered to be sent down 

by sea. i shall also want him to copy and arrange some papers. fix his 

salary at what you think befitting. let the poor man be properly dressed, 

and accompany his young lady to woodbourne.’ 

honest mac-morlan received this mandate with great joy, but ponder much 

upon execute that part of it which related to newly attire the worthy 

dominie. he look at him with a scrutinise eye, and it was but too 

plain that his present garment were daily wax more deplorable. to give 

him money, and bid him go and furnish himself, would be only give him 

the means of making himself ridiculous; for when such a rare event arrive 

to mr. sampson as the purchase of new garments, the addition which he 

made to his wardrobe by the guidance of his own taste usually brought all 

the boys of the village after him for many days. on the other hand, to 

bring a tailor to measure him, and send home his clothes, as for a 

school-boy, would probably give offence. at length mac-morlan resolve to 

consult miss bertram, and request her interference. she assured him that, 

though she could not pretend to superintend a gentleman’s wardrobe, 

nothing was more easy than to arrange the dominie’s. 

‘at ellangowan,’ she said, ‘whenever my poor father thought any part of 

the dominie’s dress want renewal, a servant was direct to enter his 

room by night, for he sleep as fast as a dormouse, carry off the old 

vestment, and leave the new one; nor could any one observe that the 

dominie exhibit the least consciousness of the change put upon him on 

such occasions.’ 

mac-morlan, in conformity with miss bertram’s advice, procure a skilful 

artist, who, on look at the dominie attentively, undertook to make for 

him two suit of clothes, one black and one raven-grey, and even engaged 

that they should fit him--as well at least (so the tailor qualified his 

enterprise) as a man of such an out-of-the-way build could be fitted by 

merely human needle and shears. when this fashion had accomplished his 

task, and the dress were brought home, mac-morlan, judicious resolve 

to accomplish his purpose by degrees, withdrew that evening an important 

part of his dress, and substitute the new article of raiment in its 

stead. perceive that this pass total without notice, he next 

venture on the waistcoat, and lastly on the coat. when fully 

metamorphosed, and array for the first time in his life in a decent 

dress, they did observe that the dominie seem to have some indistinct 

and embarrass consciousness that a change had taken place on his 

outward man. whenever they observe this dubious expression gather upon 

his countenance, accompany with a glance that fixed now upon the sleeve 

of his coat, now upon the knee of his breeches, where he probably miss 

some antique patch and darning, which, being execute with blue thread 

upon a black ground, had somewhat the effect of embroidery, they always 

took care to turn his attention into some other channel, until his 

garments, ‘by the aid of use, cleave to their mould.’ the only remark he 

was ever known to make on the subject was, that ‘the air of a town like 

kippletringan seem favourable unto wearing apparel, for he thought his 

coat look almost as new as the first day he put it on, which was when he 

went to stand trial for his license as a preacher.’ 

when the dominie first heard the liberal proposal of colonel mannering, he 

turn a jealous and doubtful glance towards miss bertram, as if he 

suspect that the project involved their separation; but when mr. 

mac-morlan hasten to explain that she would be a guest at woodbourne for 

some time, he rub his huge hand together, and burst into a portentous 

sort of chuckle, like that of the afrite in the tale of ‘the caliph 

vathek.’ after this unusual explosion of satisfaction, he remain quite 

passive in all the rest of the transaction. 
