

have you a talisman? 

"a person who find a four-leaved clover, and believe it is a harbinger 

of something good, has adopt the right attitude, for he keeps a keen 

look-out for that particular good and hold out both hand for it. seldom 

is he disappointed, for he has unconscious set go the mental machinery 

which bring his wish within reach. had he not found the clover and 

had gone along life's highway unexpectant of anything good, he would never 

have discover this pleasant happening. and therein lie the true psychology 

of luck, which seem too simple to be true, but then its simplicity 

is really the sign-manual of its verity." 

this quotation from the writings of a well-known author go direct to 

the point about talismans. if you adopt a talisman and put your faith in 

it, you immediately prepare your mind for receiving an abundance of good 

fortune. reject all talisman and argue that there is no such thing as luck, 

and you straightway set go the mental machinery which looks on the 

dark side of things and which miss every slice of luck that come along. 

therefore, we say, with emphasis, take to yourself a talisman, a mascot, a 

charm—call it what you will—and you will never regret it. 

of talismans, there are countless varieties; some are known the world 

over, other are the particular choice of individuals. they range from the[7] 

amulet and scarab of the ancients to the golliwog and crudity of the 

ultra-moderns. your choice may roam between these two extremes, but 

whatever your choice, it must be set with the seal of your faith. 

in order to assist you in pick out a talisman for yourself, we append 

the following account of those example which are favored most:— 

the horse-shoe.—no symbol is a greater favorite than the horse-shoe. 

there are many legend regarding its origin, but the most commonly 

accept concern the well-known visit of his satanic majesty to the shoe-smith. 

as a consequence, the devil evince a wholesome dread of horseshoes, 

and would not go near a house or person possess one. it is more 

likely, however, that the horse-shoe was accept as a symbol of luck because 

it was a commonplace object very nearly the same shape as the metal crescent 

worn by the roman when they want to be fortunate. these crescent 

were always carry with the horn turn up, and, if a horse-shoe is to bring 

good luck, it, too, must be placed with the prong uppermost. the reason 

for the prong being so turn depend on a belief that misfortune always 

travels in circles, but when it reach the tip of a horse-shoe, it is baffled, 

unless all the luck has already run out of the tip through them being turn 

downwards. 

of course, an old, worn shoe is more lucky than a new one, and it is 

a recognize fact that the more nail found in it the lucky will be the 

finder. 

the scarab.—this device is account very lucky or very unlucky, 

according to the disposition of the wearer. the symbol represent the[8] 

scarab beetle with its wings outspread or with them closed. such charm 

are made to-day in large numbers for sale in egypt, but those who trade in 

them usually claim that each particular specimen has been in the family 

since biblical times. as a rule, the device is made in a rough kind of bluish 

porcelain and is carved, in intaglio, with divine figures. the egypt use 

to make up the scarab as a neck pendant or as a little ornament for 

place in the coffin of the dead. its mission was to scare away the evil one. 

no. 2.—an egypt scarab, such as were use as talismen. two form are shown, 

one with the pectoral wings outspread; the other, with wings closed. 

the tet.—this symbol was shaped somewhat like a mallet, and was 

always worn with the head uppermost and the handle hanging down. it 

was made in porcelain or stone, and was often colored gaudily. the egypt 

were the first to find efficacy in this charm, and they wore it suspend 

around the neck to ward off attack from visible and invisible enemies. 

thus, it was a protection against evil in any form; it was also supposed to 

provide the wear with strength and endurance. the tet has been much 

forgotten of late years, but there are adherent who value it above the horseshoe 

and almost any other charm. 

no. 3.—the talisman on the left is the tet; on the right, the arrow-head. 

the arrow-head.—the early briton spent a great deal of their 

time in taking suitable flint and shape them into the form of triangles. 

these were call arrow-heads, and when the two side edge had been 

sharpen they were fixed into sticks and use as weapon or tools. out 

of this use grew the idea that arrow-heads were potent charm in providing 

bodily protection against enemy force or the usual illnesses. accordingly, 

people began to wear them as neck ornament and, for this purpose, decorative 

arrow-heads were made. ever since then, they have been cherish 

for their powers in ward off attacks, and a superstition still exist which 

claim that if one of these arrow-heads is dip in water, the water will be 

more potent than any doctor's medicine. 

the caduceus.—this device, which figures as part of the design of[9] 

some postage stamps, has been considered a bring of good fortune ever since 

the time of the ancient greeks. it consist of two snake entwine a rod, 

surmount by a pine cone. by the side of the cone is a pair of wings. it 

was the symbol of mercury. the rod had the supernatural powers of 

quell dispute and letting people dwell in harmony. the snake possessed 

the property of healing; the pine cone preserve good health; and the wings 

stood for speed and progress. thus people wear the caduceu today in order 

to ensure a life free from quarrel and illness, and to enable them to be 

healthy and "go ahead." 

no. 4.—the caduceu or staff of mercury. 

the eye agate.—as is generally appreciated, the "evil eye" is the 

source of all trouble and misfortunes, and the early eastern races thought 

that, if the "evil eye" could be avoid or frightened away, all would be well. 

searching for a charm to effect their purpose, they alight upon the eye agate, 

and this they believe would give no quarter to the "evil eye." accordingly, 

agate were cut to resemble an eye which would be powerful enough to 

neutralize the effects of the evil one, and these were worn as brooches, ring 

and necklaces. the agate chosen for the purpose consist of thin layer 

of stone of various colors. thus, by cutting the stone oval and removing[10] 

parts of the top layers, it was possible to produce a charm close resemble 

a human eye, both in shape and color. 

such eyes are still sold today, and many people treasure them in the hope 

that they will ward off evil in any form. 

the jade axe-head.—many jeweler still sell little axe-heads carve 

out of jade, for wearing around the neck. the axe-head has been considered 

a symbol of strength and vigor ever since primitive times, and jade has a 

world-wide reputation as a charm against disease and accidents. 

the seal of solomon.—this device is now regard as a symbol 

of the jewish religion, but it can be trace to several other religions, and, 

no doubt, it dates even farther back than the commencement of the jewish 

era. the triangle with the upward point stood for goodness; the triangle 

with the downward point for wickedness; while the two intertwine symbolize 

the triumph of good over bad. those who wear the device contend 

that it preserve them from all that is ill, and, at the same time, it give 

them a share of the world's blessings. 

no. 5.—the seal of solomon, one of the oldest lucky charm in existence. 

the abracadabra.—this charm dates from the second century, 

and was a symbol of the gnostic worship. it often took the form of a little 

piece of parchment, fold into the shape of a cross, but it can, also, be seen 

as a tablet, made of stone or metal, shaped like an invert triangle. on 

the charm, of whatever shape, was inscribe the following: 

a b r a c a d a b r a 

b r a c a d a b r 

r a c a d a b 

a c a d a 

c a d 

a 

[11] 

it will be seen that the word "abracadabra" can be read along the upper 

line and also down and up the two sides. this word is said to conceal the 

name of god and the charm has the powers of ward off danger and 

sickness. 

the four-leaf clover or shamrock.—everyone know that 

a four-leaf clover or shamrock is supposed to be a bring of luck and good 

fortune. as these are not readily found and, moreover, they soon perish, the 

opportunity has been seize by jeweler to produce artificial one in various 

precious and semi-precious metals. to wear either is supposed to avoid 

misfortune. it may be mention that the four-leaf shamrock as a charm 

has prove immensely popular by those who are interested in the ireland sweepstakes. 

black cats.—of course, it is lucky for a black cat to walk into your 

house, but failing an actual cat, a counterfeit one serve the same purpose. 

thus, people who pin their faith to black cat often make stuff ones, or 

draw pictures of them, and look to the creature of their own handiwork to 

serve the role of mascot. 

your own talisman.—so far, the talisman that have received universal 

acceptance have alone been mentioned, but the tendency today is for 

enthusiast to originate a mascot of their very own. it may take any or 

every form, according to the whim or fancy of the individual. maybe you will 

prefer to find your own mascot or talisman in this direction. if you have no 

preferences, why not constitute a device which embrace your lucky number, 

your lucky flower, your lucky color, and so on? it is a suggestion bristle 

with opportunities. 

just to show that people are tend towards the idea of choose a talisman 

of their very own, we will conclude with a story that was recently 

published. 

"there is a precious stone to which the board of director of a firm of 

diamond dealer annual pass a vote of thanks. the stone is a sapphire 

and it has been name shani, meaning 'bringer of luck.' 

"shani was bought by the firm about seventy years ago, and it only 

leaves the safe on new year's day. a special meeting, attend by every 

member of the firm, is then held in the board room. shani is placed in 

the middle of the table and, with hand clasp in prayer, the member 

offer thanks for the good luck the sapphire has brought the firm during the 

preceding year. 

"one of the director said, 'my grandfather once received a tempt offer 

for shani and yielded, but a few hour after the sapphire had been sent 

away he was taken violent ill with fever. the sapphire was brought back 

from a distant part of india, and my grandfather became well at once.'" 

should not we all have a shani? 

[12] 
