

hint on fortunetell 

hundred of dollar are paid each week to professional fortuneteller 

by people in all walk of life, in order that they may gain a peep into 

the future. these people belong to every class of society; they are of all age 

and they consult the medium on almost every matter connected with human 

existence. there is the industrial magnate, the society girl, and the hard-working 

shop assistant, all anxious to peer into the coming months. 

accordingly, the teller of fortune and the writer of horoscope is do 

an excellent business. the dollar and the cent are pour in at a remarkable 

rate, and those who read the future, as a profession, are have the 

time of their lives. 

this state of things is one calculate to make you stop and think for a 

moment. why should not you learn the rudiments of fortunetell yourself? 

why should not you find out how to read the sign of your own 

future and the future of your friends? the subject is interesting; it is not 

a difficult one and all you need to know is set out in this book. 

your course of study may well begin with the chapter on palmistry. 

have master that, turn to the one on handwriting, and follow with 

"what do your bump mean?" these three section will give you a very 

useful start and then you might continue with "how astrology decide your 

destiny" and "your face is your fortune." 

the five chapter name will enable you to read people with a great 

deal of success, and it should not be long before your friends compliment you 

on your accuracy. probably this will spur you to further efforts, and you 

will study the passage on lucky numbers, dreams, tea-cup readings, lucky 

colors, etc. these will add a polish to your preliminary knowledge. 

very soon you will gain a reputation as a seer and it will add not a little to 

your vanity when people come to you and ask you to read their futures. 

in do so, you will be advise to follow a few rules. never jump to hasty 

conclusions. weigh all the fact and strike a balance. if the hand say 

"yes" and the face say "no," the conclusion is that "it may be." when 

disappointing things are noted, be charitable and let the applicant off lightly. 

in case where dire illness are portended, suppress the fact or state them 

in such a way that the applicant has a chance of avoid the trouble, if he 

or she take suitable measures. but, whatever happens, never make a statement 

for which you have not "chapter and verse." 

and this bring me to my last point. hands, faces, head and other 

characteristic give their readings, but none of these reading should be taken 

as absolutely final. the power is within us to fight against our failing and 

to better our good qualities. we may even allow our best one to deteriorate. 

that is why two people born at the same time and in the same town need 

not grow up exactly alike. and it is also why a small percentage of horoscope 

and fortune are bound to miss the mark. 

[13] 

palmistry—what may be learned 

from hand 

"there are more things in heaven and earth...." 

people who can see as far as the end of their nose and then only 

through a fog, declare (with a superior sniff) that palmistry is nothing but 

a trap to catch fools; they call it quackery, or declare perhaps that it is 

merely a fake or blind guesswork. 

now, while we would be the first to deny that palmistry is an exact and 

infallible science, yet we just as strong affirm that it is undoubted a most 

fascinating and interesting recreation; as to its truth, each one must decide 

that question for himself. 

for the few who have a wish to take up this study seriously, there are 

many now who will naturally wish to know just sufficient to be able to 

"tell fortunes." fortuneteller are always popular at some jolly party or 

quiet friendly gathering of an evening. 

in this book they will find all the simple information required; on the 

other hand the student will find a sincere delight in reading and sift 

thorough the numerous books that probe the depths of the subject. 

quite apart from any marking which may be upon the hand, a general 

indication of the habit and temperament of the individual in question can 

readily be gain by a careful examination of the texture or quality of 

the skin. 

it were as well to note here that the impression gain must never be 

taken by themselves, but only in conjunction with other confirm signs. 

especially is this so when judge the character of a friend or acquaintance. 

texture of skin.—the skin may, of course, be smooth or rough. 

to judge this you should turn the hand in question back upwards; now get 

the feel of the skin by actual touch; a smooth, fine-textured skin denote 

a refined nature, and vice versa. this is a very strong indication indeed, 

insomuch that should there be other tendency point to coarse of 

nature, this texture of the hand would have a refine effect upon the whole. 

elasticity of the hand.—this is best test by actual grip (as 

in shake hands). all hand naturally present some feeling of elasticity; 

this is a matter of comparison, but it is very easy to tell the quick, virile 

grip of an elastic hand to the dead fish feeling which a flabby hand give 

us when we grasp it. 

a flexible hand denote an active and energetic person, one who 

will be readily adaptable to new conditions. he will always rise to the 

occasion, and manful withstand the buffet of ill-fortune. this type is 

always trustworthy and a good friend. 

[14] 

no. 6.—beware of these hands.—a show a weak, flatten thumb; b a curve little 

finger and c a coarse, short thumb. each has other defect as well. 

[15] 

a flabby hand—one that do not respond to your grip or respond 

but sluggishly—is the hand of an idle man, untrustworthy and inconsistent, 

a man of weak and negative character; but be sure to search well for other 

confirm sign of this weakness. 

the shape of the hand 

a fairly accurate guide to character is certainly contained in the shape 

of the hand. hand may be roughly divide into two classes—broad and 

long. a person have a long hand you may judge to have great capacity 

for mental effort and matter of detail. 

the broad-handed person you may expect to be a strong man physically; 

his culture will be bodily rather than mental. he could with advantage 

improve his culture by reading, and by enjoy the best music. 

the shape of the finger 

when an individual is found with square finger-tips, he should make 

a good marriage partner; he will be practical—a man of method and 

reason. he is punctual, but should cultivate imagination. 

pointed finger tip will be found on the hand of the musician, 

the painter, and, in fact, anyone who is of artistic temperament. 

person with these finger should curb their imagination with reason, 

and cultivate the power of do things, not only dream them, though 

dream is well enough in its way. 

taper finger indicate people of extremes. "ice and fire" are these 

people—impulsive and generous to a fault. they should guard against 

undue and morbid sensitiveness, and should cultivate a sane philosophical 

outlook upon life. they are capable of the highest, but are frequent their 

own worst enemies. 

spatulate fingers.—these are the sportsmen of the world. they 

are not worried much by the opinion of others, while they love a busy, 

healthy life; a sound mind in a sound body. 

general shape and formation of the hand 

if the hand are knot with the joint swollen, powers of analysis, 

calculation and reflection are shown; philosopher have this type of hand. 

smooth finger and hand indicate the artistic temperament. these 

people are frequent inspired, and have curious intuition concerning coming 

events. musicians, spiritualists, and martyr are of this type, together 

with many folk who are square peg in round holes; maybe do work 

which is uncongenial to them. 

[16] 

the thumb has also in it certain very marked indication of character. 

the three bone (or phalanges) in the thumb each have their interpretation. 

beginning at the top these should be judge by length as follows:— 

1. will. (the push type of man.) 

2. reasoning power. (the think or philosopher.) 

3. love. 

thus a long first or top phalange indicate great will power; or if it is 

not a certain indication, it points to a definite likelihood of the will being 

strong. 

the mount 

take your subject's hand and examine it closely; a strong magnify 

glass should form part of the equipment of every wise palmist. it will be 

seen that there are certain portion of the hand which are raise above 

the surface. these are known as "mounts." as will be notice in the 

accompany picture, we call these mount by astrology names, a method 

adopt from the very earliest times. they are eight in number, named: 

jupiter, mercury, venus, saturn, apollo, luna and mars (of which there 

are two). 

