

your handwriting reveal 

your character 

your handwriting is you; disguise it as you will, it still reveal your character. 

as a matter of fact, it is a sheer impossible for an ordinary person 

to alter his or her writing completely. the natural hand and the purposely-changed 

hand will bear several resemblances, however hard the individual 

may try to make them dissimilar. this is due to the fact that the same 

character lie behind both efforts. not only is your handwriting you, but 

the handwriting of your friend is "him or her." this being so, you will 

find it a simple matter to arrive at his or her quality by analyze a few 

lines of the person's handwriting. to become sufficient expert for this, 

you will not need more than half-an-hour's study. 

first of all we must attend to the direction of the lines of writing, as, 

should these be level, a normal and calm state of mind is shown, generally 

reliable, and not subject to change. 

when the lines slope toward the right, much energy is indicated; when 

the lines slope downward, a lack of energy is shown, usually from depression 

which may result from ill health. 

if the writing slope upward with excess, it show recklessness; if downwards, 

with a very slope inclination, it show mental depression verge 

almost on loss of reason. 

if the signature slope upwards, then we may expect to find personal 

ambition, but if downwards, some physical weakness. if instead of the 

whole line ascend only words here and there will ascend, this indicate 

"hope," but if scattered words ascend and descend in the same line, we may 

read a lack of tenacity in emotions. 

secondly.—the lines form the letters may appear:— 

(a) practically upright; or 

(b) slope slightly to the right. 

(c) slope very much to the right as if each letter were fall 

over the rest. 

(d) slope to the left, and lastly, 

(e) "back-hand writing." 

between a and b might be call normal. 

a show pluck and self-possession, and, if pointed, mathematics. 

b tenderness, but should the writing be pointed, a quick, acute mind, 

with no sympathy with sentiment. 

c show indolence; if with pointed letters, mental power, but should 

the letters be rounded, mental and physical indolence. 

[33] 

d show a love of ease, while 

e looks peculiar and indicate self-consciousness, and, as a rule, hidden 

sentimentality. 

thirdly.—the writing small and pointed, we get curiosity; if medium 

in size, and gradual increase towards the end of the line, it show an 

outspoken nature; should the writing diminish towards the end of the line 

we read tact. 

if it is fine and threadlike in appearance, it show a sensitive mind, diplomacy. 

large writing show promptness, but if the stroke are very fine, we see 

appreciation of other people's work—a connoisseur. 

small, clear writing show love of the abstruse, and if the lines are very 

delicate, a feeling for the mystic. if the writing is extremely small, it show 

petty of nature, fussy over unimportant details. 

letters of different size show unreliable of nature, exaggerate trifle 

and ignore more important things. 

light and fine writing means delicacy of feeling, but if carry to excess 

it show fastidiousness. 

fourthly.—the connection of the letters with each other must be 

judged. if the connect stroke is long, it show some facility in talk 

and expression, the power of use words well, not talkativeness. 

letters ingenious connected show constructiveness, but should they be 

separate, we get perception and intuition. 

any eccentricity indicate that the person's career has not been ordinary. 

marked originality, especially of capitals, show unusual taste. tremulous 

tendency result neither from illness nor old age—irritability. highly 

restrained, small—refractory disposition, difficult to live with. regular and 

well-placed lines, follow by those careless and irregular—a mind quick 

to embark on an enterprise, but lacking perseverance. back-handed less 

susceptible than inclined—the head ruling the heart. 

generally the body of the letter or specimen give the present character, 

the signature the past. 

crotchets.—egotism, self-satisfaction (a return upon self.) 

harpoon (hooks).—tenacity, united perhaps with weak will. 

dashes.—perfectly straight—persistence. 

undulating.—art, levity. 

undulating, beginning or finish with a crotchet or ungraceful flourish.—lack 

of taste, slight vulgarity. 

light.—writer attach little idea to things expressed. 

ending thickly.—resolution, desire idea to carry weight. 

curve ascendingly.—versatility; slight inconsistency; speak without 

thought. 

[34] 

tremulous.—timidity, hesitation. 

placed at end of line or paragraph.—lack of self-assertion. 

ending abruptly, thick and hard.—distrust, reserve. 

sharp elongated.—impulsive nature; prudence taught by experience. 

use instead of "full stops."—cultivated caution. 

capital letters.—large and well-formed.—pride. 

print-like in shape.—dignity. 

thin strokes.—boasting. 

exaggerate in height.—love of ceremonial. 

the angle very pointed.—acuteness, penetrative, leadership. 

large and badly-formed.—egomania. 

large upper hall.—self-assertion. 

large bases.—self-confidence. 

the capital letter of christian name large than that of surname.—love 

of home. 

the capital letter of surname larger.—love of position. 

small capitals.—lack of self-assertion. 

capital letters made like small ones.—said to show poetic feeling, love of 

nature. 

print-like in form.—originality. 

eccentric in any way.—pose or whim. 

widely spaced.—love of open air. 

curve far below the line, and almost encircle the word.—protective 

love of animals. 

letters incorrect used.—small detail made over-important. 

tendency to replace by print.—sense of form, artistic and poetic. 

special letters.—a.m.n.h., g.o., r.u.w.—normal width.—well-poised 

mind. 

too wide.—self-contentment, satisfaction. 

nearly touching.—timidity, want of knowledge of the world. 

first leg slightly raised.—aristocratic tastes. 

second leg exaggerated.—pose, affectation. 

unconnected, ending with crotchet rentrant.—egotistical, selfish. 

the letters begun and end with a small crotchet rentrant.—avarice, 

meanness. 

letters and words connected.—power of assimilate ideas, but lack of 

originality; logic. 

letters disconnected even with their parts.—creative power, want of logic. 

equally connected or disconnected.—balanced intuition and deduction. 

[35] 

last letter increase in size.—lack of power of concealment. decreasing.—finesse. 

handwriting do not invariable show sex, as the quality indicate are 

common to both men and women. 

the writing develop as the soul develops, and imitation come before 

originality. 

quality shown in handwriting alphabetical 

arrange 

ability.—small writing, angular, clear, decided capitals. 

accuracy.—neat, well-placed lines and words, punctuation correct. 

affection.—softly slope writing, rounded, fairly thick. 

amiability.—rounded letters, often unfinished, medium capitals. 

ambition.—large first stroke of capital "m's" ascend lines of writing. 

imposing signature. 

analytical.—small-pointed, clear writing, letters divided, decided 

capitals. 

argument.—words connected, give logic, and occasional extra long 

connect strokes, small writing. (see a.2.) 

authority.—large capitals, especially the letter "i" and first letter of 

surname, level crossing to t's. 

boastful.—large writing, exaggerate capital, flying cross bar to t's. 

(see a.1.) 

bold.—large well-formed capitals, clear rounded, but not pointed writing. 

broad-minded.—well-spaced words, clear capitals, o's and a's wide 

and rounded. 

candour.—o's and a's open at the top. 

caprice.—eccentric letters, irregular writing, no punctuation. 

care.—see accuracy. 

carelessness.—ill-formed letters, open o's, no punctuation. 

caution.—dashes use instead of full stops. 

ceremonious.—capitals important, all large above the line, some add 

flourishes. 

changeable.—letters different formed, eccentric capitals, variability 

of line. 
