

what do your bump mean? 

just feel the shape of your own head, and then ask a friend to let you do 

the same thing to him or her. most likely you will be very surprise at the 

difference between the two. you may have bump in certain place while 

your friend has them in total different parts. 

the science of phrenology, which is the reading of bumps, has discover 

that bump in certain place point to certain characteristics; if you have them, 

you must have the characteristics, and, if you have not them, you cannot have 

those qualities. in fact, the reading of character through the medium of 

bump is a very definite science, and it is a science that can be easily learned 

and applied by almost anyone. of course, there is much to learn, but there 

is no need to know a great deal if you merely want to assess a person's 

character in general terms. 

a chart is supply on p. 47, and on it is marked out just enough to 

enable you to read a head with ease. only certain area are map out; the 

rest of the head may be the location of bumps, but it do not present the 

bump which are likely to interest us just now. 

the area are as follows:— 

1.—lying at the top of the head, in the center and coming a little way 

towards the forehead. if this area is well developed, it show that the individual 

has a benevolent nature. he is generous and kind; he will work 

for the good of other and not think only of himself. 

if the area is over-developed, the individual will be inclined to favor other 

at the expense of his own safety; if it is under-developed, he will be cruel 

and selfish. 

2.—situated above but a little behind the eye; usually the place is just 

cover by hair. when this area is well developed, it show that the individual 

possess plenty of happiness and a store of wit and mirth. he is a 

pleasant person, smile on adversity and is excellent company. 

if the area is over-developed, the individual is one who can never be 

taken seriously, who poke fun at everything; if it is under-developed, he is the 

type of person who is never known to smile. 

3.—in the middle of the head, where it curve down towards the back of 

the neck. in case where this area is well developed, the person is one who 

has strength of mind; he is firm in his actions; he cannot be persuade against 

his own judgment; and he likes his own way. 

if this area is over-developed, the person is obstinate and stubborn; if it 

is under-developed, he is easily led, apt to waver and has not a mind of his 

own. 

[47] 

no. 16.—chart of phrenology. 

1—benevolence, generosity, kindness. 

2—happiness, wit, mirth. 

3—firmness, strength of mind. 

4—self-esteem, dignity, pride. 

5—conscientiousness, sense of duty. 

6—love. 

7—courage. 

8—desire for marriage. 

9—love of children. 

[48] 

4.—in the middle of the head, lower down at the back than no. 3. when 

this area is found in a well-developed condition, the possessor is a person 

who has dignity, self-esteem and proper pride. he is one who lives an 

upright life because he put a high price on these qualities. 

if this area is over-developed, the individual is over-confident, he think 

too much of himself and is haughty; if it lack development, he is too humble 

and suffer from an inferior complex. 

5.—lying beside nos. 3 and 4. to find this area well develop is a sure 

sign that the possessor is a conscientious individual; it show that he has a 

high sense of duty, and his life will center around action that are base on 

what he think is right. 

if this area is over-developed, the possessor will never progress far because 

he will be always stopping and wonder whether what he propose to 

do is right; if under-developed, the possessor is one who do not care 

whether what he do is wrong or right, so long as it bring him pleasure 

and gain. 

6.—at the base of the skull, at the back, where it join the backbone. if 

this area is well developed, it show that the individual has the power of loving 

somebody of the opposite sex in a proper manner. he or she will fall 

in love when a suitable occasion arise and will make an excellent partner. 

if this area is over-developed, the individual will be too passionate, will fall 

in love with little or slight provocation, and will give himself or herself a 

great deal of unhappiness; if under-developed, he or she will be too cold to 

be move by the thought of love. 

7.—a slight distance away from the back of the ear. when this area is 

well developed, the individual may be count on to be courageous inclined. 

he will not know the meaning of fear, and will not hold back because 

trouble may be brewing. 

if this area is over-developed, we have a quarrelsome person and if under-developed, 

one who is afraid of his skin. 

8.—beside no. 7, but more in the center of the back of the head. whenever 

this area is properly developed, it show that the possessor would make 

an admirable husband or wife. he or she would be devoted, loyal and 

attentive. 

if the area is over-developed, the possessor has a jealous disposition; if 

under-developed, he or she is fickle and apt to flirt with others. 

9.—beside no. 8, in the center of the back of the head, low down. should 

this area be well developed, it show that the possessor has a proper love and 

regard for children and that he think no person has experienced the fullest 

joy of life who has not become a parent. 

if this area is over-developed, the possessor think so much of children 

that he spoils them; if it is under-developed, he is of the type that "cannot 

stand them at any price." 

[49] 
