

what are your hobbies? 

according to your zodiac sign you have a disposition for certain hobbies. 

you may not necessarily have these hobby but your inclination lie towards 

them. 

capricorn born.—gardening. nature study. ramble in the 

countryside. making things of almost any kind. chemistry. physics. 

aquarian born.—aviation, range from actual flying to making 

aeroplane models. gliding. construct all kind of articles. painting 

pictures. drawing. needlework. 

pisces born.—traveling, especially by sea. photography. construct 

and use wireless apparatus. making electrical apparatus. theater-going 

and amateur theatricals. arts and craft (girls). 

aries born.—traveling, touring. anything connected with motor 

cars. sight-seeing. making things. reading. arts and craft (girls). 

taurus born.—constructive hobbies, from wireless to the building 

of houses. walking. golf. swimming. collect antiques. 

gemini born.—likely to be interested in inventions. good at solve 

puzzles. football. tennis. nature rambling. girl have a bent for 

household duties, such as cooking, needlework, etc. 

cancer born.—interested in the wonders of the world. anxious to 

see things and people. music. reading. collect antiques. almost any 

outdoor game. girl are fond of needlework of the fine kinds. 

leo born.—hobbies allied to the daily work. intellectual reading, 

especially anything bearing on historical matters. go about. golf. 

swimming. making things of an artistic nature. 

virgo born.—indoor games. making and repair household articles. 

good at manual activities, from play the piano to construct toys. prefer 

to be amuse indoors than out in the open. 

libra born.—doing things to keep the home ship-shape. football. 

cricket. photography. reading. wireless. needlework and knitting (girls). 

scorpio born.—scientific recreation of all kinds. keeping pets. 

nature rambling. girl take a keen interest in household duties. card 

playing. seeing people. dabble in mysterious matters, such as thought-reading, 

table-rapping, seances, etc. 

sagittarian born.—hobbies of an intellectual character. walking. 

outdoor sports. boxing. nature study. keeping pets. reading. 

[60] 

what is your lucky number? 

once more from the rising sun of the east further marvelous theory 

have reach us through the path of the ages. to many of our prosaic 

western minds, maybe not unnaturally, these idea will at first sight appear 

almost ridiculous. however, do not condemn numerical mystery unheard, 

for no manual of fortunetell would be complete should it not include 

a talk on this most arrest subject. 

student of numbers, as do astrologer and student of palmistry, declare 

that there is no such thing as luck or chance in the world. they also state 

that we are strong but not inevitable influence by certain powerful law 

of nature. 

number science is certainly unknown to the great majority of us, but 

there are some superstition which are base on evil numbers; these superstition 

we treat with great respect. very few of us really care to sit down 

thirteen at table, while i have known a man go sad and smokeless rather 

than be the third to light his cigarette off one match! 

fortunetell by numbers is allied to astrology very close indeed. let 

us now take each day of the week individually and see what information 

we can get from it. you will find that very useful as a check upon your 

other form of fortunetelling. 

on what day were you born? 

if, as i suggested, we take the days of the week we shall find that they 

in turn are influence by the order in which they are found, or by the 

number which is theirs. for instance, sunday being the first day, is 

influence by no. 1, and friday, being the sixth day take no. 6 as its ruling 

number. 

according to the ancients each number has its corresponding planet; here is 

a little table showing the planet represent and ruling over each number. 

no. 0. 

represent by space. 

no. 1. 

represent by the sun. 

no. 2. 

represent by the moon 

no. 3. 

represent by mars. 

no. 4. 

represent by mercury. 

no. 5. 

represent by jupiter. 

no. 6. 

represent by venus. 

no. 7. 

represent by saturn. 

no. 8. 

represent by uranus. 

no. 9. 

represent by neptune. 

taking each day of the week in order, we find the following characteristics. 

table of days in week 

no. 1 (sunday).—you will see by your table that this day take the sun 

for its ruler—sun-day. it is a fortunate day; person born on a sunday have 

a brave and honest influence on them. they will be optimistic, but not[61] 

foolish so, while at the same time they have great pride in the reputation 

of themselves and their families. if they have any fault it is, maybe, that this 

pride is felt, a little too strongly; they may be inclined to take themselves 

rather too seriously. however, i repeat, this is an excellent day. 

no. 2 (monday).—this day is the moon-day. the lesson for monday 

men to learn is steadiness. they are too easily influence and are blown 

hither and thither upon life's winds. they adapt themselves well to change 

of place, circumstances, scene, and frequent follow the sea. they have 

plenty of imagination in their natures, and should cultivate common sense. 

no. 3 (tuesday).—the day of mars (french—mardi). frequent the 

engineer of the world. an ambitious go-ahead day is tuesday. these 

tuesday folk are the explorers, the men who emigrate, and the earnest 

patriot of life. soldiers, worker at the furnace among other workers, are 

found among those born on tuesday. their womenfolk are inclined to be 

rather shrewish and domineering. they are not naturally good managers, 

and should cultivate this quality because they are always rare workers. 

no. 4 (wednesday).—the table tell us that these are the mercurians. 

the men are quick at calculating figures, and always capable and thoughtful 

workers. mercury, as its name implies, give quickness, with business trade 

capacity. the women appear not to be so favorable influenced, they 

must guard against grumbling and gossip; then they may do well enough. 

no. 5 (thursday).—under the planet of jupiter, these thursday people 

have many good qualities. they are liberal and good natured, but have one 

vice—the outcome of their virtue. they are inclined to be too liberal with 

themselves, which is extravagance. given an idea they can turn it to good 

account, but do not, as a rule, originate ideas. statesmen are here found; 

let these jupiterian beware of a love of display and what is commonly 

known as side. then they are very excellent people indeed. 

no. 6 (friday).—look at the table—see venus is the planet of friday. 

this account for many things. here we see the typical venus type. gay, 

light-hearted, with no thought of the morrow, they flit happily through life 

like a gilded butterfly upon the wing. if they lack taste they over-dress. 

their good quality are their charming personalities, pleasing manners, and 

a quick command of music and art. they should beware of being only 

butterflies, and should cultivate strength of character. they should also 

obtain by hook or by crook a liking for hard work; it will serve them in 

good stead. 

no. 7 (saturday).—saturday, as its name tell us, has sad saturn for its 

planet. here we have the exact opposite to the person mention who were 

born on a friday. saturday people miss half the joy of living by their cold 

and calculating natures. careful with money, they are patient workers, 

they must beware of being miserly, and should certainly cultivate their 

missing sense of humor. the good quality in these people are their 

sincerely earnest outlook and their capacity for an almost endless grind of[62] 

hard work. their womenfolk frequent make old maid and should practice 

sweet temper and a kindly feeling towards the rest of the household. 

your own number 

but there is much more in the science of numbers than that which can 

be glean from the days of the week. there is your own personal number, 

the number which influence you and your action more than any other. 

if you know your number, think how you can use it for good and avoid 

other for ill! the finding of your number is a simple matter when you 

have master the elements of numerology, which is the science of numbers. 

let us explain how your own number is found. first, write down your 

birth-date, the day of the month, the month itself and the year. thus, three 

item are required. take first the day of the month. if it consist of one 

figure, leave it. if it consist of two, add them together, and, if the answer 

come to two figures, add them together. all this may appear a little involved, 

but it is not, as one or two example will show. 

suppose you were born on the 9th of the month, then 9 is the number 

you want. 

but, suppose it was the 16th, then six and one make seven. therefore 

7 is the require number. 

again, if you were born on the 29th, then nine and two make eleven, but 

as eleven consist of two figures, you must add them together, and they 

make 2. 

so much for the day of the month, now for the month itself. january 

stand for one, february for 2, and so on, to december for 12. the numbers 

of the month from january to september can stand as they are, but october 

november and december, being 10, 11 and 12, must be add up, as already 

described. thus october is one, november is two and december three. 

thirdly, the number of the year must be considered. say you were born 

in 1910. these figures add up to eleven, and eleven, being double figures, 

add up to 2. therefore 1910 is equivalent to 2. 

work out your figures here. 

you have now obtain three separate figures, add them together and if 

they come to a one-figure number, that is the number which you require. 

on the other hand, if it is a double-figured amount, add the two figures 

as before, until you arrive at a single-figured amount. then that is the 

number you require. 

so as to make the whole thing perfectly clear, we will take a complete 

example and work it out, exactly as you must work out your own birth-date. 

example.—12th september, 1913. 

12 = 1 + 2 = 3 

september is the 9th month = 9 

1913 = 1 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 = 5 

3 + 9 + 5 = 17 = 1 + 7 = 8 

[63] 

therefore, the personal number of anyone born on 12th september, 1913, 

is 8. eight should guide and influence all his or her actions. we are not 

go to pretend that benefit will accrue on every occasion that the personal 

number is observed, but we are go to say that we have noted some 

marvelous pieces of good fortune when it has. 

when you have found your personal number, there are several ways in 

which you can use it. suppose your number is the one just found, eight; 

then you can conclude that the eighth day of any month will be a propitious 

one for you. but that is not the only one. the 17th is equally good, 

because one plus seven give eight. moreover, the 26th is in a similar 

position. two and six make eight. 

yet another way to use your personal number arise when you want to 

know whether some important step should be taken on a definite day. what 

is the particular day? add up its numerology values, exactly as you did 

with your birthday, and if it resolve itself into the same number as your 

personal number, you may go ahead with cheerfulness. put forth your 

best effort, and, on the day, you will have ample chance of success. 

the number of your name 

numerology permit of still another step. take your own name and see 

what number it is equal to. you will be able to do this in the following 

way: a stand for one, b for two, c for three, and so on. when you reach 

i, which is 9, commence again and give j the value of one, then continue. 

to make all this clear, we will set out the value of the complete alphabet: 

1 = a j s 

2 = b k t 

3 = c l u 

4 = d m v 

5 = e n w 

6 = f o x 

7 = g p y 

8 = h q z 

9 = i r — 

thus, suppose your name is joan shirley, the letters resolve themselves 

into the following numbers:— 

j o a n s h i r l e y 

1 + 6 + 1 + 5 + 1 + 8 + 9 + 9 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 55 

55 = 5 + 5 = 10 = 1 + 0 = 1 

from all that we have said, it will be clear that the birthdate may be use 

for finding the personal number, or the letters of the name may be used. on 

rare occasions, the two ways will provide the same number. when this is 

the case, great faith should be placed in that number. but, when the two 

ways give different numbers, what? do one disprove the other? no. you[64] 

simply have two numbers favorable to you. the birthdate number is the 

more definite and reliable because your very existence is base on it. 

a word at the end. married ladies must use their maiden name for 

finding the name number. 


