

section i 
the alphabet of the heaven 
chapter i 
the planets, their nature and type 


the luminary and planet are known to astronomer under the following name and symbols:— 
the sun ☉, moon ☽, neptune ♆, uranus ♅, saturn ♄, jupiter ♃, mars ♂, venus ♀, and mercury ☿. 
neptune revolve around the sun in its distant orbit once in about 165 years. uranus complete its orbit 
revolution in 84 years, jupiter in 12 years, mars in about 15 months, venus in 11 months, and mercury in 18 
weeks. if you imagine these body to be revolving in a plane around the sun and yourself to be standing within 
the sun, the motions of these body will appear almost uniform and always in one direction. were the orbit of 
the planet circular and the sun holding the centre of the circle, their motions would be constant, that is to say, 
always in the same direction and at the same rate. but the orbit are elliptical, and the sun hold a position in 
one of the foci of each ellipse. consequently the planet are at times further from the sun than at others, and [pg 18] 

they are then said to be in their aphelion, the opposite point of the orbit where they are nearest to the sun being 
call the perihelion. when at aphelion the planet move slower, and when at perihelion they move quick 
than at the mean distance. astronomer employ an imaginary circular orbit for the planets, in which they move 
at an uniform rate of velocity, which is call the mean motion. this is subject to an equation depend on the 
position of the planet in its orbit, and it determine the diﬀerence between the imaginary planet and the true 
planet. the equation itself depend on the eccentricity of the orbit, that is to say, its relation to a circle drawn 
around the same focal centre. the earth follow the same law as all other body of the same system. 
but if we imagine the earth to be stationary in space and the centre around which the planet revolve, their 
motions present several irregularities. mercury and venus will then appear to revolve around the sun while the 
sun revolve around the earth, sometimes being between the earth and the sun, which is call an inferior 
conjunction, sometimes on the further side of the sun away from the earth, as at their superior conjunction; and 
again, at other times to the right or left of the sun, in east or west elongation. the other planets, have orbit 
greater than that of the earth, will appear to revolve around it at constant vary distance and velocities. at 
certain points in their orbit they will appear to remain stationary in the same part of the zodiac. the annexe 
illustration will assist the lay reader perhaps. the body m is mercury when at inferior conjunction with the sun, [pg 19] 

as seen from the earth. the letter v is the planet venus at superior conjunction with the sun. the points w and 
e are the points of greatest elongation west and east, and the letter s show the points in the orbit at which 
those body appear to be stationary when view from the earth, at g. as seen from the earth, venus would 
appear to be direct and mercury retrograde. 




astrology we regard the earth as the passive subject of planetary inﬂuence, and we have therefore to 
regard it as the centre of the ﬁeld of activity. if we were making a horoscope for an inhabitant of the planet mars, 
we should make mars the centre of the system. the planets’ position are therefore taken as from the centre of 
the earth (geocentric), and not as from the centre of the sun (heliocentric). an astrology ephemeri of the [pg 20] 

planets’ motions is employ for this purpose (see sect. ii., chap, i.), and there are 480,000 of these sold to 
astrologer or student of astrology every year, from which fact it is possible to draw one’s own conclusion as 
to the state of astrology in the west. these ﬁgures, of course, do not include the million of almanac reader 
nor the oriental students, who prepare their own ephemerides. 
knowing the simple nature of the several planet we are able to arrive at an estimate of their eﬀects when 
acting in combination. 
neptune acts upon the mind of man to produce a highly-strung nervous temperament, often allied to either 
insanity or genius; neurosis, aphasia, &c. it produce complication in business and an involved state of aﬀairs 
generally. dispose to fraud, double-dealing, and irresponsible actions. in the body it produce waste of tissue 
and a consumptive habit. 
uranus give an eccentric mind, waywardness, originality, inventiveness. acting on the aﬀairs of business, it 
produce sudden and unexpected developments, irregularities, rapid rise and fall, instability, unexpected turn 
of good and bad fortune. in the body it has relation to the nervous system, and its disease are those of 
paralysis, lesion, and nervous derangement. 
saturn produce a thoughtful, sober, ponder mind; steadfastness, patience, and endurance; disposition to 
routine and habit, method. in ﬁnancial aﬀairs it give steady result commensurate with labour, success that is 
slow but sure, durance, hardships, privations. in the body it is related to the osseous system, and its eﬀects are [pg 21] 

brought about by obstructions, chills, and inhibition of function. 
jupiter give joviality, optimism, bountifulness, generosity, a rich and fruitful mind. it render the subject 
fortunate in his aﬀairs, give success and frequent opulence. with this planet strong in the horoscope a 
person never “goes under.” in the body it has relation to the arterial process, and its disease are those which 
arise from surfeit, congestion, and plethora. 
mars confer a sense of freedom, much ambition and executive ability, frankness, truthfulness, and scorn of 
consequence. it render the mind forceful and militant, stimulate to new project and enterprises, and in the 
body of man has relation to the muscular system. its disease are those which arise from inﬂammatory action in 
the tissues. 
venus confer poesy, good taste, ﬁne feeling, artistic powers, gentleness, docility, dalliance, and love of 
pleasure. it render the aﬀairs pleasant and prosperous, give proﬁt from both artistic and rustic pursuits. next 
to jupiter it is the most beneﬁc of the planet in its action on mankind. in the body it has relation to the venous 
system, and its disease are those which arise from impurity of the blood, scorbutic and zymotic diseases, 
eczema, smallpox, measles, &c. 
mercury render its subject active, versatile, apt and business-like, disposed to much commerce, whether of 
the mind or the market, and eager in the pursuit of knowledge; alert, and well-informed. its inﬂuence on aﬀairs of 
life is variable, for it always translate the nature of that planet to which at birth it is in nearest aspect (sect. i., 
chap. iv.). in the body it is related to the sensorium, the centre of sensation, and reﬂexly control the nerves of [pg 22] 

action. 
the moon give graceful of manner and suave of speech, soft and adaptable of nature, 
variableness, love of change, romance, and adventure; disposed to exploration and voyaging. in the body it 
correspond to the glandular system, and its disease are those incidental to the lymphatic gland and vascular 
tissue. 
the sun render its subject magnanimous, noble, proud, despise all mean and sordid actions; loyal, truthful, 
and fearless. it produce honours and the favour of dignitaries, and render the subject fortunate in the control 
of his affairs. in the body it control the vital principle. 
the type of person produce by the various planet are very distinct, the chief features of each being as 
follows:— 
neptune—thin, nervous-looking people, blue eyes, soft, silky hair, thin and usually long faces, frequent 
wearing a strained or startle look. uranus—tall, wiry, and energetic ﬁgures, alert, muscular, spasmodic, and 
with some touch of eccentricity. saturn—dark and lean people, small, deep-set eyes, heavy brows, long noses, 
thin lips, and sallow complexions. jupiter—full bodied, robust men, large and expressive blue or brown eyes, 
arch brows, high foreheads, oval faces, and rich brown hair. mars—strong, muscular, and athletic bodies, 
ruddy complexion, grey eyes, prominent brows, slope forehead, and usually some mark or scar in the face. 
sun—fresh, clear complexion, blue or grey eyes, round head, broad shoulders, strong jaws, upright and 
digniﬁed carriage. venus—elegant, well-groomed, and often dainty-looking people, with blue or soft brown [pg 23] 

eyes, brown hair, ﬁne teeth and ﬁnger-nails, small feet and short ﬂeshy hands. mercury—thin, tall, and active 
bodies, alert appearance, small and usually dark eyes; wide, thin lips, long arms and slender hands. frequent 
great talker and quick walkers. moon—rather short and ﬂeshy people, with pale face, soft limpid eyes, sad 
brown or medium coloured hair, ﬁne teeth, broad chest, and a tendency to a squat fulness of body. the 
forehead is usually high and broad. 
look at the people as they pass you in the street. bring them if possible under one or other of these types. 
consider what has been said of the planets’ natures, and you have a ready key to something of their character 
and destiny. 





