chapter v 
financial prospects 


look to the planet which are in the 2nd house, and the aspect to them. if any planet be therein, and well 
aspect by others, the ﬁnancial condition will be competent. if a beneﬁc (jupiter or venus) be therein, and free 
from evil aspects, the same eﬀect will accrue. but if the beneﬁc in the 2nd should have good aspect from other 
planets, then there will be considerable wealth. 
any planet in the 2nd house, badly aspected, will produce diﬃculty in acquire money, and if it be a maleﬁc 
planet which occupy the 2nd house under these conditions, there will be times of stress and even poverty. 
continual hardship and poverty is shown by maleﬁc planet in the 2nd house, in evil aspect to the moon or sun; 
while at the same time the planet in the 2nd house will be severe afflict by others. 
saturn in the midheaven aﬄicting the sun or moon is an indication of reversal of fortune, and such person 
usually attain considerable position in the world and are then deplete of everything. 
jupiter or venus in the 10th house, and near the meridian, are sign of good fortune and success in life, and [pg 65] 

the same result are due to their rising at birth. 
in a general manner the aspect to the moon in a male horoscope or the sun in a female horoscope should be 
consulted, and the planet in good aspect thereto will show the means of good fortune, while those in evil 
aspect will indicate the source of loss and hurt, according to the house the aﬄicting or assist planet 
occupy. thus jupiter in good aspect to the moon from the 11th house show gain by friends, advisers, and co- 
operative measures, because the 11th house rule these relationship and jupiter is the index of increase. 
similarly, uranus in the 7th house would show gain by the marriage partner if in good aspect to the moon, or 
loss thereby if in evil aspect. 
mars in the 2nd house show good earn capacity, because mars is an ambitious and industrious planet i(.e., 
it produce such eﬀects in the person), and the 2nd house is the domain of ﬁnance. but at the same time it 
show extravagance and inability to save money, for mars is impulsive and lacking thrift. 
the 6th house well occupy show faithful and advantageous servant and employés, such as will augment 
the fortune and do good work for the subject. 
neptune in the 2nd show complication and an involved state of ﬁnance, and frequent it show loss by fraud 
and imposition; though in good aspect to other planet it show gain by such nefarious means. uranus indicate 
many ups and downs of fortune, sudden and unexpected rise and falls. 
thus each planet is judge according to its nature and the aspect it throw to the moon or sun, while the [pg 66] 

planet in the 2nd house are judge by their own nature and the aspect which they receive. 
inheritance is shown by a beneﬁc planet in the 5th or 11th house in good aspect to saturn; but indirect 
inheritance can be the result of saturn in good aspect to jupiter from any part of the figure. 
legacy are shown by good planets, or planet well aspected, in the 8th house; or by jupiter in good aspect to 
uranus from any part of the heavens. 
gain by marriage is shown by beneﬁc planet in the 8th house, because the 8th is 2nd from the 7th, and the 7th 
house rule over the partner. 
the potential of each horoscope is capable of being increase by due attention to the source of gain, as shown 
by the position and aspect of the planet in various parts of the heavens; but chieﬂy by associate oneself 
with person whose horoscope are in harmony with one’s own. thus it happen that individual are lift to 
position and aﬄuence through their association with person whose horoscope are in sympathy with theirs. 
(see chap. xi. of this section.) 
the sun and moon being in good aspect to one another will prevent disaster, or will always provide a means of 
restoration of fortunes, because it is an index of general good fortune and continual support. such person as 
have this aspect in their horoscope need never fear misfortune, for if they should fall into disaster in one 
place, they will always turn up in another with a complete adjust of their position. but when the sun and 
moon are in evil aspect, and particularly when the maleﬁc planet are in elevation in the heavens, continual 
misfortune dogs the footsteps, and though there be spell of good fortune, they are brief and attend with [pg 67] 

troubles. 
the beneﬁc planets, jupiter, venus, and sun, being well elevated in the heavens, that is to say, in the 10th or 
11th houses, it is a sign of preponderate good fortune. but when the maleﬁcs are in elevation the reverse 
result happen. 

the line of least resistance. 
it is a law in nature that the line of least resistance is that of greatest progress. the lightning ﬂash do not 
come straight to earth, but zigzag by the line of least resistance. the great river do not come by a direct course 
to the ocean, but by many turn and backward reaches, because they follow the path of least resistance. when 
one come to take account of the years of human life that are spent in the vain endeavour to achieve the 
impossible, the lesson of nature are worth reciting. but what is impossible to one man is facile to another, and 
the greatest economy of eﬀort is therefore to be secure by proper regard to suitability of occupation and 
direction of effort. 
the principles of astrology enable us to determine the line of action which at all times will be the most fruitful of 
results, and in the matter of money-making the matter is decided in the following manner: that planet which has 
a trine or sextile aspect of the moon, and is at the same time elevated above the maleﬁc planets, especially if it 
be itself assist by the good aspect of other planets, receive ﬁrst consideration. the house it is in will 
indicate the source of beneﬁt, but the sign it is in will show the means through which it will come. thus if uranus [pg 68] 

should be in the midheaven, in trine aspect to the moon, and itself receiving a good aspect from either the sun, 
jupiter, or venus, it will indicate gain through government bodies, authorities, and person of high rank. if 
uranus should be in the sign cancer, it would point to matter associate with the ocean, marine aﬀairs, or 
those in which water is the element in chief employ; as in marine engineering, shipping, dock building, &c. but if 
uranus had been in the 11th house, and in the sign scorpio, then the source of gain would be by means of 
companies, syndicates, and association of a collective nature, and the sign scorpio would show it to be 
connected with naval defence (because scorpio is a martial and watery sign) or the utilise of waste 
materials, inﬂammable oils, &c., or by system of drainage, which represent the excretory system of a town. by 
look chieﬂy to the nature of the planet concerned, and that of the sign it occupies, a good artist will readily 
describe the particular line which is to be pursued. 
but here, as in every other matter upon which judgment is made, attention must be paid to the character and 
disposition of the subject, his aptitude and qualiﬁcations, for it is obviously of little use recommend literature 
or the law to one whose sole capabilities lie in unintellectual directions. natural aptitude, supplement by the 
necessary training, are the first considerations, for without these success in any direction is but ill assured. 




[pg 69] 
chapter vi 
the position in life 


this is to be judge from the position of the majority of the planets, but principally from the midheaven, the 
planet therein and its aspects. thus, if you ﬁnd the majority of the planet rising, that is to say, in the 10th, 
11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd house the subject will be a candidate for responsibility, ambitious of honours and 
position, and generally independent. if these or the majority of them be well aspect he will become a man of 
position, employ others; or, if a woman, will hold an important position in her sphere of life, and be esteem 
in the social world. 
if the degree on the midheaven receive good aspect from the major planets, the position will be honourable 
and secure. 
venus or jupiter, or the sun well aspected, in the midheaven, denote a superior position, honours, and 
distinction. the same will result if these be rising. 
when the majority of the planet are above the horizon, even though they be not rising, the subject will have 
responsibility thrust upon him, even though he should not desire them. if the majority of these planet be well [pg 70] 

aspected, he will acquit himself creditable and attain to honours. 
it is always fortunate for the position that there should be planet exactly on the cusp of either the 2nd, 3rd, 
6th, 8th, or 12th houses, for then there will be every opportunity of secure fame and advancement in life. 
but when any of the maleﬁc planet are found exactly on or nearest to the meridian, whether above or below 
the horizon, there will be loss of position, reversal, a sinister fame, or disgrace. 
the 10th house represent the fame and honour of a person, and the 4th house represent the end of life and 
that which militate against the fame and honour. therefore when there are good planet in these places, the 
subject will meet with rewards and honours commensurate with his eﬀorts; but when evil planet occupy the 
meridian, he will at best sustain his position in life with great difficulty. 
it is futile for any one to suppose that the position of a beneﬁc planet in the meridian of the horoscope will bring 
him to fame and elevate him in the world irrespective of his own endeavours. the planet operate on human 
aﬀairs in terms of human thought and action, and that by ﬁxed laws; never adventitiously. that “the gods help 
those who help themselves” to the extent that natural law permit, is a truth which astrology fully provide for. 
fitness and fortune are as cause and effect to one another in respect of planetary action in human life. 
many planet in cardinal sign will dispose a man to seek fame, and when the midheaven of the horoscope is 
well aspect or there be fortunate planet therein, he will attain it. cardinal sign on the angle of the [pg 71] 

horoscope (the meridian and horizon), produce fame outlast death. the same if either of the luminary be 
exactly on the equinoxes. 
venus in the midheaven give social elevation and lift a person above the sphere of birth. good planet in the 
11th show patronage. 
but when the luminary are heavy aﬄicted there will be an inconstant fortune and many reverses, so that 
position gain will be lost again. 
most of the planet under the horizon show success and position in the latter part of life, while if they be 
between the 4th and 7th cusps, there will be advantage after marriage, or by means of partnerships. 
in judge of the means by which the position will be sustained, respect must be had to the position of those 
planet which are in good aspect to the midheaven, or to beneﬁc planet in the midheaven, and if none be so 
situated, then those which hold beneﬁc aspect to either the sun or moon at birth must be taken, and judgment 
made according to the nature of the planet and the sign it occupies. preference should always be given to that 
planet which has the strongest aspect for good. thus if two planet were in trine, that which is in elevation 
should be preferred, especially if it be strengthen by the good aspect of other planets. 




[pg 72] 
chapter vii 
the choice of occupation 


the enormous waste of force and time entail by the experimental trip upon which most young men embark at 
the outset of their career in life, might be greatly reduce by a proper knowledge of individual aptitude in relation 
to circumstances. the average boy cannot readily make up his mind as to what occupation he will follow, 
because he do not know either enough of his own powers or of the world in which he is call upon to use 
them. parent are in the same diﬃculty. they must needs wait to see how a boy will shape out. they study his 
inclination to the best of their ability, but without coming to a deﬁnite conclusion any soon than the boy 
himself. given a fair education, such as may ﬁt him for almost anything, but which specialise him for nothing in 
particular, he is put to some desk or bench and there left to his own resources. by a fortunate chance, he may 
ﬁnd himself suit to his post. more frequent he is several years in ﬁnding out that he has miss his vocation, 
that his inclination and his work are not in accord, that he has misapply his energy for some time, and that 
he has made a false start. fortunately circumstance at birth he may have been equip by higher education [pg 73] 

for some distinctive profession, to which he gain access after the payment of large fee or premiums. the man 
has a strong dramatic faculty and the stage claim him after all. here is both waste of time and money. 
astrology, as a reliable key to character and inclination, deserve some recognition on the grounds of social 
economy. 
the inclination of the subject are judge from the position of the majority of the planets, for if they should be 
found in the aerial signs, gemini, libra, or aquarius, the inclination will be towards mental occupations, 
especially science and literature. in ﬁery sign there is a predisposition to a more robust and active life, such as 
is aﬀorded by military service, travelling, prospecting, exploring, &c. in earthy sign the aptitude lie in the 
direction of agriculture, experimental science, surveying, dealing in real estate, broking, &c. in watery sign 
there is special inclination to pursuit connected with the water, such as sailors, watermen, and others; but 
frequent to other occupation in which ﬂuids are predominant, such as publicans, wine and spirit merchants, 
chemists, and oil merchants. 
each sign has its special tendency, and the exact occupation can often be decided thereby, when regard is had 
to the planet in closest aspect to the sun or moon and the sign it occupies. thus aries denote soldier and 
pioneer of movements; taurus show dealer in real estate, house agent and brokers; gemini, literary men 
and writer of all sorts; cancer, sailor and publicans; leo, actor and artists; virgo, clothes dealer and seller 
of confectionery and bread; libra, valuers, assayers, money-changers, and pawnbrokers; scorpio, naval sailors, [pg 74] 

chemists, dealer in oils and spirits; sagittarius, explorers, divines, lawyers; capricornus, politics agent and 
minister of the state; aquarius, electricians, company promoters, syndics, and scientiﬁc researchers; pisces, 
dealer in ﬁsh and sea produce, warders, and those connected with place of conﬁnement, such as prison and 
hospitals. 
taking, therefore, the dominant planet and the sign that hold the majority of the planets, the line along which 
the subject will make the most progress in the world and acquit himself most successfully, may be readily 
determined. 
no person will make a good soldier who has not mars as a dominant planet, nor will he succeed with the public 
if the moon be not elevated and well aspected, nor become a successful artist, musician, or poet if venus be not 
conspicuous in the horoscope. 
generally the inclination is derive from a consideration of the dominant planet, and the degree of success 
attendant upon the occupation is judge from the aspect which that planet throw to the sun or moon, and there 
can be no great advantage from following an inclination which do not promise some measure of success, as 
is the case when the dominant planet is in evil aspect to the luminaries. thus it happen that some men follow 
unproﬁtable callings, their judgment being dominate by an inclination adverse to their natural welfare. yet 
never was good work done in the world without a strong inclination and considerable enthusiasm, and heaven 
make its own slaves, its martyrs, and its scapegoats. and always, the following of an inclination means the [pg 75] 

sacriﬁce of some of the beneﬁts of life. “take what thou wilt, but pay the price!” is the divine mandate, 
according to emerson. 
but unquestionably, the science which enable a man to choose the line of least resistance, which prevent a 
youth of intellectual tendency from waste the best years of his life in drudgery at the desk or bench, is worth 
a little study. “hitch your waggon to a star,” is good advice if only we hitch it to the right one. 





