

[pg 94] 

section iv 
the stars in their course 
chapter i 
the time-measure 


the planets, in their motions after birth, come into certain relations with the planet in the horoscope of birth, 
and also form aspect among themselves owe to the diversity of their motions in the zodiac. in astrology 
science there are two separate means of calculating the time of events, but both method consist of bring 
the body of one planet to the body or aspect of another, which process is call “directing,” and the arc 
describe by the moving body is call an “arc of direction.” 
the ﬁrst of these method is the discovery of claudiu ptolemy, the famous mathematician and geographer, 
the author of the syntaxis, as set forth in his work the tetrabiblos, or four books on the inﬂuence of the stars. 
this method had the support and conﬁrmation of the great kepler. it has respect to the rising, setting, and [pg 95] 

meridian passage of the planet after birth, whereby they are brought to the place or aspect of the planet in 
the radix (the root), which is the horoscope of birth. 
the limit and nature of this work do not permit of a thorough exposition of this method, which entail some little 
knowledge of spherical trigonometry, but the reader who desire to perfect himself therein is refer to the 
author’s work, entitle “prognostic astronomy.” a facile application of the method is here given, by which any 
one may, by the aid of the table of houses, make certain of the more important calculation by rule of thumb, 
and predict thence the times of remarkable events. 
the principle involved is this: the number of degree which pass over the meridian between the moment of 
birth and the rising or culminate of a planet, will equal the number of years which must elapse from birth until 
the influence of that planet become dominant. 
thus, if jupiter at birth is coming to the meridian, that is to say, if it be in the 10th, 11th, or 12th house, count 
the number of degree between the meridian and jupiter, and in so many years from the time of birth there will 
be an access of good fortune. similarly, if saturn or other of the maleﬁc planet be coming to the meridian, the 
number of degree between it and the midheaven will indicate the age at which trouble will abound. 
also, when the planet have pass the meridian, the measure is made in the same way, by bring the 
midheaven to the place of the planet, count the degree between the planet and midheaven for the number 
of years at which it will operate. 
but the same and other planet may be direct to the horizon, by taking the table of house for the latitude of [pg 96] 

the birthplace (sect. i., chap. iii.) and ﬁnding therein under the column marked “ascen.” (ascendant) the 
longitude held by any of the planets. observe then what degree is on the midheaven in the column marked 10 
(10th house), and count the number of degree between this midheaven and the midheaven at birth. the result 
will give the age at which the effects of such planet will be experienced. 
thus, for a person born in or near liverpool or in the same latitude, suppose the midheaven at birth to be in 
scorpio 0, and saturn to be in the 2nd house in aquarius 8 degrees. i wish to bring saturn to the horizon. in the 
table of house i ﬁnd that aquarius 8 is on the ascendant when sagittarius 9 is on the midheaven, and i 
therefore count from scorpio 0 to sagittarius 9. this give the age of 39 years, and as saturn is in the 2nd 
house at birth, i say that at 39 years of age the subject would experience ﬁnancial disaster, and because 
saturn come then to the ascendant, i also say there would be serious illness and depression of spirits. 
when planet are setting at birth they are brought to the opposition of the ascendant in a similar manner, only 
the opposite point of the zodiac must be found in the table under the ascendant. thus, if mars were in the 7th 
house at birth in the 11th degree of cancer, i ﬁnd the opposite point (capricornus 11) under the column of the 
ascendant, and i note that scorpio 19 is then on the midheaven, so that from scorpio 0 to scorpio 19 give 19 
years, at which age the subject would have a serious illness due to inﬂammatory action in the stomach and [pg 97] 

probably produce by overwork and worry, as indicate by the sign cancer and the planet mars, or if there be 
indication of an accident, then an accident by scalding with hot water or acid would be predicted. 
planet are brought to the opposition of the midheaven by count the degree which intervene between the 
longitude on the lower meridian at birth and that held by the planet. 
in all such directions the conjunction of beneﬁc planet are advantageous when direct to the midheaven or 
ascendant, and the conjunction of the maleﬁcs are indicate of periods of bad fortune. the opposition are 
uniform evil, whether the planet involved in the direction be a benefic or malefic. (sect. i., chap. iv.) 
these are the directions of the planet to the two signiﬁcators, the midheaven and ascendant. the midheaven 
appertain to honours and credit, while the ascendant has relation to the personal and bodily welfare and the 
general fortunes. 
to direct the midheaven or ascendant to the other aspect of the planets, such as the sextile, trine, semisquare 
or square, it is only necessary to note the degree in which these aspect fall and bring them to the midheaven 
or ascendant as if the body of the planet were itself there, and in the manner already indicated. 
the sun is direct after birth by its motion in the zodiac, which can be found in the ephemeri for the year of 
birth, and the aspect it form to the planet in the horoscope and in the daily progress should be tabulated. in 
most ephemeride they are already calculated, so that the labour is considerably lightened. each day after birth [pg 98] 

will represent one year of life, the mean motion of the sun being about 1 degree per day. all that is necessary, 
therefore, is to count the number of days from birth to the date when the sun form an aspect, and that will give 
the age at which the planet aspect will produce its effects. 
as the sun go through the zodiac the other body make progress along with it, in which course they form 
aspect to the midheaven, ascendant, the sun and moon in the horoscope of birth. these are call 
“secondary” directions, and in connection with the sun’s aspect after birth, constitute the system in use 
among the arabia astrologers. 
minor periods of good and bad fortune, subsidiary to the above periodic inﬂuences, are taken from the moon’s 
progress after birth, in which one day equal one year of life, and two hour equal one month. these directions 
of the moon aﬀord a monthly prognosis of the course of events, and are useful in the conduct of minor aﬀairs in 
life. when they are contrary to the general trend and import of the periodic directions made to the midheaven, 
ascendant and sun, they act indiﬀerently, and frequent produce only passing beneﬁts or annoyances; but 
when they are in agreement with the primary directions cite above, then they accentuate and deﬁne the 
nature and time of events. as if the primary be good and the lunar directions evil, then there will be a 
predominance of good fortune with some current disturbances; but both being good there will be abundant 
success and satisfaction; while if the primary be evil and the lunar directions good, the latter will serve only to [pg 99] 

moderate the effects for the time being of the primary evil indications. 
an intelligent apercu of the principles of direct will greatly enhance the value of any prognostication made 
from the horoscope of birth, as it will enable the student to select those periods in the life when the eﬀects due 
to any planet are most likely to eventuate. thus, if saturn be in the 2nd house at birth, it may be said that there 
would follow some periods of great ﬁnancial stress, and the rising of saturn by direction after birth would show 
the time when one, at all events, of such periods would be experienced. 
and here is the great fact upon which astrologer the world over are prepared to stand or fall. if the planet 
have no eﬀect in the lives of men, their directions to the angle of the horoscope can have no eﬀect; but never 
was it found that a man had evil fortune at the period when the planet jupiter was direct to the midheaven or 
ascendant, or anything but bad fortune when saturn was similarly directed. the fact is there, and we cannot get 
away from it. the only question is as to how far we can intelligent carry our investigate beyond that point, 
and intelligible convey our discovery to the world by their application to the aﬀairs of daily life. the reader may 
judge for himself from a peruse of these pages. 
the directions being calculate and tabulate in order of their occurrence, the time and general nature of the 
inﬂuences operate in successive periods of the life will stand revealed. the particular nature of the event 
indicate by the several directions may be known from (a) the house in which the direct planet is situated; (b) [pg 100] 

the sign it occupies; and (c) the aspect it forms, considered in relation to the nature of the planet. for example: 
if uranus at birth were in the 9th house and the sign gemini, its direction to the midheaven would be the index 
of litigation in connection with writings, publications, or means of transit; because the 9th house, among other 
things, has relation to litigation and legal aﬀairs, and gemini (the 3rd house sign) to communications, writings, 
&c., while uranus denote sudden and unexpected events, ruptures, alienations, and complexities. 
so if saturn were in the 6th house in the sign aquarius, its direction to the opposition of the ascendant would 
indicate chill to the blood, anemia, &c., constitute a serious illness with probability of low fever; because the 
6th house rule sickness, and aquarius rule the blood, while saturn is the cause of chills, paucity, and 
impediments. 
thus the time and nature of event may be known with great certainty. 




[pg 101] 
chapter ii 
the effects of transit 


among the number of important indicator to which astrologer refer in making a forecast of concurrent events, 
there are the transit of the planet over the place of the signiﬁcators at birth, the position of eclipses, and 
those of the lunations. 
the ﬁrst of these chronocrator depend upon the revolution of the planet in their orbits. each planet has a 
period in which it complete its revolution in the heavens, in the course of which it pass the place of the sun, 
moon, midheaven, and ascendant of the horoscope. this passage over the radical signiﬁcators is technical 
term its “transit,” and it will be found that such transit aﬀord a very precise and reliable source of 
prognostication, for the time of a planet’s transit is known in advance of its occurrence (see sect. ii., chap. iv.), 
and the eﬀects of such transit are in exact terms of the nature of the planet concerned. it is only necessary to 
add that the midheaven and the sun have relation to the position and honour of the subject, while the moon 
and ascendant have relation to the personal health and general fortunes. the sun and midheaven also signify [pg 102] 

the father, and the moon has general signiﬁcation of the mother. venus signiﬁes domestic and love aﬀairs, the 
aﬀections and sentiments; while mercury signiﬁes the mental disposition. so uranus in transit over the place of 
venus will give a love aﬀair, a romantic attachment. mars over the place of venus will engender passionate 
love. saturn over venus will give disappointment or bereavement; and neptune thereover will bring 
entanglement and complications, with danger of being led astray. saturn over mercury will produce melancholy 
and many error of judgment. mars over the same planet will excite the mind and dispose to impulse and 
unreasoning anger, quarrel and disputation. uranus over mercury will render the mind wayward and 
headstrong, disposed to erratic course and egotist methods. neptune passing the place of mercury produce 
deceits, treacheries, and apprehension of impending evil, a sense of espionage and ambush. it involve the 
mind in tortuous and complicated schemes, and dispose to secrecy and wariness. 
the transit of the major planet are of chief signiﬁcance, and their eﬀects are render more weighty and 
lasting when at the time of transit they are retrograde in the zodiac; while their stationary position on the 
place of the significator have almost the same power as primary directions. 

of eclipses. 
an eclipse of the sun or moon fall on the place of any signiﬁcator in the horoscope of birth is of a sinister 
import, and cannot be too seriously considered. fall on the ascendant or the moon they aﬀect the health and [pg 103] 

general fortune very seriously, and only a series of subsequent good directions can avail to restore the subject 
to his normal condition. on the midheaven or the sun, the honour and fortune may both be aﬀected, and in the 
same serious degree. the eclipse fall on the place of the other planet will produce eﬀects in accord with 
the nature of those planet and the house they occupy. to have any appreciable eﬀect, the eclipse must be 
within two degree of any of the radical positions, or of their opposition aspects. 

of lunations. 
the lunate recur in the same part of the ecliptic every nineteen years. considered in relation to the current 
indication they aﬀord the means of a monthly forecast of events. thus, if the lunate for the month falls on the 
place of jupiter in the horoscope of birth, it will produce good eﬀects in that department of life which is govern 
by the house in which jupiter is situated; as if in the 11th, through friends; in the 4th, through property or rental; 
in the 6th, through servant and health; in the 8th, through a financial colleague, &c. 
the eﬀects of lunate are subsidiary to the current lunar directions, and these in turn are subsidiary to the 
transits, and the transit to the primary directions. by this it is not meant that they are inoperative, nor that they 
fail to indicate the event of the month, but their power and degree of inﬂuence is subject to the greater 
inﬂuence of superior causes. and as a general observation it may be aﬃrmed that the less frequent any 
celestial position occur in a horoscope, the greater is its inﬂuence. this fact give to primary directions their [pg 104] 

great inﬂuence in the life, for they can only occur once in a lifetime; and for the same reason eclipse have a 
major signiﬁcance, for the same eclipse only recur after an interval of 649 years. the transit of neptune, of 
uranus, of saturn and jupiter and mars follow in their order of frequency. neptune has a revolution of about 165 
years, uranus 84 years, saturn 30 years, jupiter 12 years, and mars 1¼ years. 
major eﬀects must not therefore be refer to inferior causes, and minor eﬀects must not be refer to 
superior causes. in universal or even national cataclysms, individual fortune are submerged. 




[pg 105] 
chapter iii 
how to summarise a horoscope 


before leave the exposition of this subject, it may be of advantage to the reader if i give some idea of the 
method to be pursue in the complete handle of a horoscope. 
first, then, erect the ﬁgure of birth, taking care to use the ephemeri of the year of birth, and also the correct 
table of house for the latitude of the place of birth. 
next proceed to attempt a description of the chief personal trait of the subject, following in succession with a 
well-considered judgment on the constitution, hereditary tendencies, the health and pathological 
predispositions, the mental trait and disposition, considering these latter in relation to the state of health 
indicated. then pass to a consideration of the environe conditions of life; the ﬁnancial condition and outlook; 
the position in life; the occupation; prospects and conditions of marriage; of progeny. judge next concerning 
voyages and journeys. finish with a statement regarding the predominance of friends or enemies, and select 
dates by solar positions, as already instructed. in case where it is not object to, an approximation may be [pg 106] 

made to the time and nature of death. 
throughout the whole of this judgment, the periods when these predict eﬀects will come into force should be 
made by reference to the rising, setting, and meridian passage of the planets, the solar aspects, and transits. 
care should be taken to weigh just and impartial the evidence set before you in the ﬁgure of the heaven for 
birth. major importance should be given to those planet which are in angles, and those which are in elevation, 
for the near a planet may be to the midheaven, the greater is its inﬂuence for good or ill, according to its 
nature and aspect. 
read what you see, not what you imagine should be the destiny of an individual. if you are in complete 
ignorance of his person, position, and environment, so much the better. if you follow careful the various rule 
which are contained in this book, you may at ﬁrst make some error of judgment, but as you become familiar 
with the task, even these error will become few and far between, and in the end the language of the horoscope 
will become so intelligible and clear that it will interpret itself, and the whole trend and potentiality for good or ill 
of any birth-ﬁgure will force itself upon you in just the same way as when a man walk into your presence with 
his character clearly stamp upon his face, so that you have only to look and know. 
have become proﬁcient in the judgment of birth-ﬁgures, you will do well to proceed to a close study of the 
mathematics of astrology, making yourself proﬁcient in the various method of directing, so that you may at any [pg 107] 

time refine upon your general prognostics, and make prediction which are clear, sharp, and to the point. 
undoubted there is a modicum of intuitive perception at work in the judgment of any horoscope, which will 
enable you to seize upon the small detail and exact point of any matter, and this perhaps constitute the 
whole diﬀerence between the rule of thumb worker and the inspiration reasoning of the intuitive worker. the 
one exhaust the books and the other embellish them. it is so with science in every department. the books 
will take you up to a certain point of proﬁciency, and a strict regard for the formulæ will keep you within the 
bounds of safety. but if you are ever to make a discovery or become a recognise exponent of any science, you 
must be naturally gifted with what is call the “scientiﬁc imagination,” another name for intuition. but at no point 
do true intuition part company with exact reasoning. there is no lesion. the one is an extension of the other. 
it is the higher reason, which argue from the known to the unknown. and the astrologer is in this respect as the 
poet, “born, not made.” but a moment’s reﬂection will suﬃce to convince you that the more facile you may 
become with the book-learning and technique of astrology, the more you will leave the intuition free to act. 
when a lad is struggle with his multiplication tables, his appreciation of the binomial theorem or the diﬀerential 
calculus cannot be said to amount to much. and, in the same way, a person who is stuﬃng down the alphabet 
of astrology cannot be expect to intuit anything concerning the potential of the sun’s direction to the 
quadrature of saturn. 





