the project gutenberg ebook of astrology, by sepharial 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most 
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restriction 
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of 
the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you'll have 
to check the law of the country where you are located before use this ebook. 


title: astrology 
how to make and read your own horoscope 

author: sepharial 

release date: september 25, 2014 [ebook #46963] 

language: english 

character set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook astrology *** 




produce by charlene taylor, peter vachuska, donovan, 
rein ruf, and the online distribute proofread team 
at http://www.pgdp.net 
astrology: 
how to make and read 
your own horoscope 


by 
sepharial 
editor of “moore’s” and “old moore’s” almanac author of “the 
manual of astrology,” “prognostic astronomy,” “the birthday 
book of destiny,” “the crystal and the seer,” etc. 



illustrate 

advanced thought pub. co. 


216 west austin ave. 
chicago, ill. 



copyright, 1920 
chicago, ill. 



[pg 5] 

preface to the revise and enlarge edition 

since the publication of this small manual of practical astrology, two edition of which have been exhausted, the 
attention given to the subject has so far extend as to create an increase demand for a concise work of this 
nature, design for the initial use of student and oﬀered at a price that is within the means of all. it is believe 
that the revision and enlargement of the present work will render it even more popular than hitherto with 
beginners. 
the practical use of astrology are daily more and more recognize and appreciated, and although some of the 
higher and later development of astrology in its relation to every-day problem have necessarily been withheld 
from these pages, yet it is to be hope that so much as is here present of an abstruse and recondite science 
will enable the student to pursue the subject with increase assurance and satisfaction, in which case doubtless 
he will readily discover for himself, and without any special point on my part, that astrology is primarily and 
finally a practical and useful study. 
there are, of course, many aspect of this fascinating subject which ﬁnd no place in this small work, which 
deal solely with genethliacal astrology, or the doctrine of nativities. yet if it be true, as i think to be the case, 
that “the proper study for mankind is man,” then undoubted we are right in select this phase of astrology 
science as that to which the student should first devote himself. 
when we have thorough arrive at an understanding of the complex nature of human character and the 
primary cause of variety in expression, when we have seen for ourselves how the many-coloured dome of life [pg 6] 

overarch us of this sublunary world with its kaleidoscopic interplay of forces, we shall be to some extent better 
equip not only to deal with character as we ﬁnd it, but also to direct the forces of the human mind along 
channel which lead to the preservation of our social economy, and that not by any restrictive measure or 
harmful suppression of natural passion and powers, but by conversion of them into form that are conservative 
and useful. 
to apply oneself to the specialize of inherent faculty, to ﬁnd the line of least resistance, and to discover the 
measure of one’s own soul in the universe and the limit to which ambition can safe aspire, these are things 
necessary to be known and things that astrology make clear to the mind in the very earliest stage of our 
study. 
and apart from the scientiﬁc verity to which the science of planetary inﬂuence direct us, there are other not 
less important and fascinating truth of a purely philosophical nature to which it inevitable impel the mind and 
which cannot fail to exercise a tremendous inﬂuence in the shape of our thought in regard to the purpose of 
life. it place the thoughtful student in an entire new position with regard to many of the deep problem of 
existence, and it is certainly the fact that to those who newly come to its study, astrology is a revelation, an 
enlightenment, and a conviction from which there is no possible or desirable escape. 
sepharial. 
[pg 7] 

astrology 

[pg 9] 

introduction 

from the earliest age of the world’s history the subject of astrology has excited the interest of, and exercise a 
great inﬂuence over, the mind of a certain order of thinking men. the science has never been universal in its 
acceptance, though it is safe to say that, with its countless adherent in the east and the ever-increasing 
number of its advocate in the west, there is no faith which has a more universal application than the belief in 
the inﬂuence of the heavenly body over the destiny of human beings. it is not possible within the limit of a 
small handbook such as this to adequate consider the philosophical paradox which make of freewill in man a 
“necessity in play”; but it is obvious that the concept is not altogether unscientiﬁc, seeing that it is customary to 
speak of the “free path of vibration” in chemical atom while at the same time it is known that these atom have 
their restricted characteristics, mode of motion, &c., and are all subject to the general law control the 
body of which they form integral parts. let it suﬃce that if we can trace an actual connected between the 
disposition of the heavenly body at the moment of a birth and the known life and character of the individual [pg 10] 

then born, and an exact correspondence between the course of event in that life with the change occur in 
the heaven subsequent to the moment of birth, we shall do well to accept the fact for what it is worth, and 
arrange our philosophical notions accordingly. 
as far back as the year b.c. 2154, we ﬁnd mention of the great importance attach to the celestial phenomena 
in the mind of china rulers. it is record in the historical classic of china that at that time the astrologer hi 
and ho neglect their duty so that when, on the 10th of october, there was a great eclipse of the sun at 
peking between seven and nine o’clock in the morning, the people were wholly unprepared for it, and “ran about 
here and there in the utmost consternation.” for this oﬀence hi and ho were deprived of their oﬃces, their 
estate were conﬁscated and they were driven from the kingdom. among the hindu we have the classical 
writer garga, parashara, and mihira, together with their legion of commentators. the assyrian record are full 
of astrology allusion regarding the inﬂuence of planetary conjunction and stellar positions. the greece 
mythology is nothing but a vast system of cosmographic astrology, and there is no other history in it than what 
you may read in the constellation of the heaven and the corresponding evolution of the human race. aristotle 
made it a part of his philosophy. hipparchus, hippocrates, thales, galenius, and other subscribe an 
intelligent belief in its principles. to claudiu ptolemy, however, we are indebted for the ﬁrst concise and 
scientiﬁc statement of its principles and practice, so far as europe is concerned. he wrote the tetrabiblos, or [pg 11] 

four books, and laid the foundations of a true astrology science. julius firmicu conﬁrmed ptolemy and 
enlarge upon his observations. the subsequent discovery of the planet uranus and neptune by herschel and 
adams, widen the ﬁeld of research and gave to later astrologer the clue to much that hitherto had been 
imperfect understood. not that these discovery overturn the whole system of astrology, as some have 
imagine and foolish stated, or that they negative the conclusion drawn from the observe eﬀects of the 
seven ancient known body of the solar system, but it became possible after a lapse of time to ﬁll in the blank 
space and to account for certain event which had not been trace to the action of any of the already known 
planets. the discovery of argon did not destroy our conclusion regarding the nature and characteristic of 
oxygen or hydrogen or nitrogen, nor give an entire new meaning to the word “atmosphere.” if even so many 
as seven new planet should be discovered, there would yet not be a single paragraph of this book which would 
need revising. what is known regarding planetary action in human life is known with great certainty, and the 
eﬀects of one planet can never be confounded with those of another. incomplete as it must needs be, it is yet a 
veritable science both as to its principles and practice. it claim for itself a place among the science for the sole 
reason that it is capable of mathematics demonstration, and deal only with the observe position and motions 
of the heavenly bodies; and the man who hold to the principia of newton, the solidarity of the solar system, the 
interaction of the planetary body and their consequent electrostatic eﬀects upon the earth, cannot, while [pg 12] 

subject to the air he breathes, deny the foundation principles of astrology. the application of these principles to 
the fact of everyday life is solely a matter of prolonged research and tabulate upon an elaborate scale which 
has been go on for thousand of years in all parts of the world, so that all the reader has to do is to make his 
own horoscope and put the science to the test of true or false. the present writer is in a position to know that 
the study of astrology at the present day is no less sincere than widely spread, but few care to let their study 
be known, for, as prof. f. max müller recently said, “so great is the ignorance which confound a science 
require the highest education, with that of the ordinary gipsy fortune-teller.” that to which the great kepler was 
compel “by his unfailing experience of the course of event in harmony with the change taking place in the 
heavens,” to subscribe “an unwill belief,” the science which was practised and advocate by tycho brahe 
under all assault of fortune and adverse opinion, the art that arrest the attention of the young newton and 
set him ponder upon the problem of force and matter, which fascinate the mind of such men as francis 
bacon, archbishop usher, haley, sir george witchell, flamstead, and a host of others, is to-day the favourite 
theme of thousand of intelligent mind and bid fair to become a subject of popular inquiry. 
it is believe that the present work will be of considerable assistance to those who seriously contemplate an 
initial study of the science of horoscopy, and although it by no means exhaust what is known on the subject, 
yet it will be found accurate and reliable as far as it goes, and will enable any one of ordinary intelligence to test [pg 13] 

the claim of astrology for himself. this is as much as can be expect in the limit of a small handbook. the 
literature of the subject is considerable, and the present writer only take credit to himself so far as his own wide 
experience and practice have enable him to present the subject in a simple and brief manner. 





[pg 15] 

contents 

section i 
the alphabet of the heaven 
chap. page 
i. the planets, their nature and type 17 
ii. the sign of the zodiac 24 
iii. the celestial house 29 
iv. the astronomical aspect 31 

section ii 
the construction of a horoscope 
i. the ephemeri and its use 34 
ii. to erect a figure of the heaven 36 
iii. the table of house 39 
iv. planetary transit 43 
v. table of eclipse 47 

section iii 
how to read the horoscope 
i. the planet in the house 51 
ii. the constitution 54 
iii. health and sickness 56 
iv. how to read character and disposition 59 
v. financial prospects 64 
vi. the position in life 69 
vii. the choice of occupation 72 
viii. marriage circumstances 76 
ix. indication of progeny 81 
x. voyages and journey 84 
xi. of friends and enemy 87 
xii. the end of life 91 

section iv 
the stars in their course 
i. the time-measure 94 
ii. the effects of transit 101 
iii. how to summarise a horoscope 105 
how to become a successful 
iv. 108 
astrologer 
v. a popular illustration 114 
vi. planetary periods, etc. 127 
vii. revolutions, eclipses, ingresses, etc. 137 




[pg 17] 
