[pg 108] 
chapter iv 
how to become a successful astrologer 


i take it that nobody nowadays can aﬀord to fritter away time in the study of subject which are not likely to 
become a source of beneﬁt to himself and others. if there be such people among my readers, which i consider 
unlikely, i may dismiss them oﬀhand with the remark that they will never become successful astrologers, for the 
ﬁrst word of practical astrology is utility. if the science had not its practical application to the aﬀairs of everyday 
life, if its principles contained no word of assurance and hope for the myriad toil of this world, no word of 
admonition for the self-indulgent parasite of modern social life, if, in short, it did not make for the betterment of 
human life and thought, it would never have attract the attention of aristotle, cicero, galen, claudiu 
ptolemy, thales, and other of the old world, and such men as bacon, cardan, archbishop usher, naibod, 
mercator, ashmole, kenelm digby, sir christopher heydon, dryden, dr. john butler, sir george wharton, 
vincent wing, george witchel, tycho brahe, kepler, and flamstead of more recent biography. indeed, in 
whatever age or country we may elect to make our inquiry concerning astrology, there are to be found a host [pg 109] 

of intelligent and even illustrious advocate in every department of life and learning. suﬃce it to say that the 
modern student of this most ancient of all science is at all times in very good company. 
let it ﬁrst be understood that there is an object to be attain in the study of astrology, and that the pursuit of it 
in the gratiﬁcation of an idle curiosity alone will inevitable entail the waste of time which invariable attach to 
idle of all descriptions, and we may then proﬁtably consider whether or not the subject is worth the labour 
which it will demand from the man who has something to do in the world and little enough time in which to do it. 
these are stressful times, and we have to be economical in our eﬀorts. we have strength enough to carry us 
through, but neither strength enough to thresh the wind nor time enough to fish in puddles. 
what, then, do astrology offer to the patient worker, the man who would become a successful astrologer? 
first and foremost it will enable him to gain an insight into individual motive and character which no other 
science can possibly aﬀord. it will enable him to know himself, his own strength and weakness, and so ﬁt him to 
deal harmonious and just with others. it will enhance his opportunity to the extent that he is able to foresee 
and make use of all beneﬁc inﬂuences operate through his own environment. it will give him timely warning of 
his approach to the quicksand and pitfall which occur in his passage through life. he will discern his special [pg 110] 

physical weaknesses, and the times of his predisposition to sickness, the nature thereof, and the precaution 
which are necessary. he will know whom to cultivate and whom to avoid, and in select a partner in business 
or a wife for his home, he will be guide by a foreknowledge of evil to be avoid and of good things to be 
gained. he will choose his path in life with the conﬁdence that it is for him the line of least resistance and 
therefore that of greatest progress. he will not become obsess by ambition beyond his power to achieve. he 
will learn the power of adaptation to environment, and thereby eﬀect his work in the world with the least possible 
friction and waste of force. he will know when to make provision against sickness, accident, and death. he will 
not invest capital where interest is not to be gained. he will see the end from the beginning. it may not make 
him a brilliant success in the world, but it will assured save him from being a failure. he will ﬁnd cause for 
inexplicable things, and his mind will rest content in the knowledge hat while he is working out the highest 
potentiality of his own horoscope, the major problem and intricacy of life are not of his making or needful of 
his solving. and ﬁnally, when his time come to “shuﬄe oﬀ this mortal coil,” he will be prepared, and will know 
that it is the will of heaven, express and determined from the moment of his birth. rightly employed, 
astrology cannot fail to improve the man who make of it a serious study, ﬁtting him to be of greater use to 
other and of higher service to the race at large. 
but to become a successful astrologer he must study patient for several years, test each statement that is [pg 111] 

made in the books by reference to his own and several other horoscopes. he must be able to erect a ﬁgure of 
the heaven with mathematics accuracy for any given time and place, work out directions by the use of the 
sphere or trigonometry tables, and have a competent knowledge of the motions and periods of the various 
planetary bodies. when thus satisﬁed in his own mind that astrology is a dependable science, and that he is 
capable of demonstrate it under test conditions, he must be generous in the use of it. here and there he will 
ﬁnd one who is oppose to the belief that the stars have any inﬂuence in human aﬀairs. let him not waste logic 
with such a man, but go straight to the task of convincing him by an appeal to facts. 
for preference, select a period when the directional inﬂuences are such as seem likely to hit the sceptic with 
considerable force, deﬁne the event, make a careful calculation of the time of its fulﬁlment, and put them on 
paper, which, being yet unread by the man of common-sense, should be placed under cover, sealed, and 
endorse to be open only after a certain date. 
now a man who has been hammer rather severe and in quite an unexpected manner, is usually open to 
conviction of truth when he ﬁnds that the nature and date of his disaster have been accurate foretold. being a 
man of “common-sense” and not of intuition, he will probably think that the astrologer might even have save 
him from the consequence of his own lack of foresight. so indeed might the astrologer have done had he 
taken the management of aﬀairs from the beginning; but to step in half-way to arrest cause which are already 
in operation and charged with inevitable effects, is require too much of any man short of a prime minister! [pg 112] 

there are certain things which even the most astute deductive reason cannot foresee, and these are the 
points that should be utilise by the astrologer who seek to convince other of the truth of his science. a man 
cannot reason from his doorstep to a street accident. if he could he would avoid it. all men are not subject to 
accidents, however. but almost all are subject to bereavements, losses, sicknesses, and change of fortune. 
those are the points which the astrologer intent on proselytising, usually make use of. but event need not be 
in futurity to carry conviction. if it can be shown that by mathematics calculation the event of the past can be 
recite with precision and exactness, it is evident to the meanest intellect that nothing hinder from an extension 
of such calculation into the future. and once convinced of the reliability of such claim to foreknowledge, the 
practical man of the world is not slow to avail himself of its uses. 
but astrology is not exhaust in the study of individual horoscopes, for there are other department of this 
extensive science. the inﬂuence of the planet upon the weather, as embody in astro-meteorology; the rise 
and fall of empires, politics changes, the outbreak of wars, of revolutions, of epidemics, as deﬁned by state 
astrology so much in repute among the oriental rulers; the occurrence of tidal waves, earthquakes, and other 
seismic phenomena, all form a part of the complete equipment of the practical astrologer. 
it would be superﬂuous to recite here the numerous and striking accurate forecast which have been madeby [pg 113] 

modern exponent of the science, but it is only right to say that they reﬂect considerable credit upon their 
authors, for the above-mentioned department of astrology learning are by no means in the same eﬃcient 
state as genethliacal astrology, to an outline of which this work is devoted. ancient it was otherwise, and even 
in the east at this day they hold some secret of traditional knowledge, concerning which they are unduly 
mysterious and of which we have only the evidence afford by more exact prediction upon certain points. 
prejudice and ignorance are the twin giant which bar the path of the world’s progress to-day, even as they 
have ever done. step by step they have been beaten back, baﬄed by the light of reason, harass by the 
arrow of truth. the world is redeem its ancient heritage. all that is now require to establish the paramount 
truth of astrology as a science is an impartial and thorough investigation, preferable at the hand of scientiﬁc 
men, of its method and principles. not that the truth is to be ratiﬁed at the hand of modern scientists, seeing 
that their own teaching constitute a mere shift orthodoxy, liable at any moment to undergo a fundamental 
change in theory by the discovery of a single new fact—but that to such men rightly belong the duty of 
disprove the claim of astrology to be considered as a science, for it is a fact to be regret that certain 
member of their body have written against the subject in a spirit of prejudice and without adduce any data in 
support of their contention, which ill become any man of scientiﬁc pretension and is above all things 
detriment to the cause of truth. 




[pg 114] 
chapter v 
a popular illustration 


in order to summarise and illustrate the principles which have been enunciate in the course of this work, i shall 
avail myself of the horoscope of mr. joseph chamberlain, who was born on the 8th of july, 1836, at highbury, 
the time of birth being state to have been at about 2.30 in the morning. calculation have since enable us to 
ﬁx the exact time of birth as at 2 h. 36 m. a.m. i subjoin the horoscope ﬁgure for that time, the calculation of 
which is as follows:— 

h. m. s. 
midheaven in r.a. at 
7th july, 1836… 7 1 58 
noon 
add time elapse since … … … 14 36 0 
equation for 14h. 33m. at 10 secs. 2 25 
midheaven in right ascension at birth … 21 40 23 


the constitution. 
born under the sign gemini, with mercury rising in the sign cancer, the sun near the conjunction with jupiter 
and in close sextile to the moon, there is little doubt that the late colonial secretary is by nature gifted with an [pg 115] 
[pg 116] 
excellent constitution. the sextile of the luminary is a powerful co-ordinator, and whenever sickness 
supervene there will be a speedy recovery. the semisquare aspect of mars, while dispose to gouty aﬀections 
of the hand and feet, will contribute vital energy and power to throw oﬀ diseases, while at the same time 
predispose to accident and wound to the right shoulder or clavicle. 




the rising sign give nervous energy and enormous capacity for work, which is due to high nervous tension 
support by a sound vitality. the only hereditary predisposition is that indicate by mars, which induce to 
fevers, and gouty affection due to acidity. 

the health. 
the moon is strong in the sign taurus, but not particularly well placed in the 12th house. it has, moreover, the 
square aspect of neptune and venus from ﬁxed signs. these indication point to functional disorder of the 
heart, throat and excretory system. on the other hand, there are the good aspect of the sun, jupiter and 
uranus to counteract these adverse tendencies, and it is certain that strong recuperative powers together with a 
normally good co-ordination of function would induce a speedy recovery from any illness to which he may be 
liable. considerable immune from sickness of all sort may therefore be predicated. 

character and disposition. 
the majority of the planet being in cardinal signs, with three planet (including the moon) in fixed signs, [pg 117] 

indicate a character that is energetic, ambitious, active, sharp, ingenious, lively, and persevering; capable of 
cutting out a line in life for himself and making headway against obstacles; disposed to ride roughshod over the 
weakness and prejudice of those who oppose him; gifted with a pioneer spirit, incisive manner, and 
disposed at times to eﬀect his end regardless of the feelings and opinion of others. at the same time there is 
suﬃcient patience, method, caution, and watchful to make this extreme deﬁnition of purpose very eﬀective. 
laborious, ﬁrm (at times obstinate), systematic, and self-reliant, he is capable of wait for opportunities. but 
finally he carry his purpose with a tour de force. 
that which he lack is adaptability, suavity, and ability to enter into the feelings of others. he is too ambitious to 
be self-centred, but yet too intent to be sympathetic. 
the rising of mercury in trine aspect to saturn and uranus give considerable mental capacity, a wide grasp of 
facts, a well-informed, apt and business-like mind; some originality, constructiveness, and power of marshal 
fact and ﬁgures; patience, caution, and secrecy. there is not much imagination, and the sympathies are not 
wide. his method and action are govern by literal fact and mathematics certainty. he is an omnivorous 
devour of the accessible. he take the small ﬁsh by the handful and make a meal of them; but he leaves the 
ponderous whale for those of greater imagination and more leisurely habit. 
the quadrature of mars to uranus will induce momentary outburst of temper and some irritable of nature, but 
the character i am delineate is not such as can easily be play upon, for it is remarkably lacking in emotional [pg 118] 

susceptibility. nevertheless, the inspiration faculty is by no means absent, and the presence of neptune in the 
9th house in trine to the rising mercury, is an index of considerable inventive genius, extreme range of mental 
perception, and telescopic discernment of future events. venus in the 3rd house show some artistic taste and 
fancies, considerable appreciation of art and culture, a fond for ﬂowers, bright lights, &c. but dominant 
above all are the two angular inﬂuences of uranus and mercury, which render the mind mathematics and 
precise, commercial, apt, business-like, energetic, and eminently magnetic. 

finance. 
the position of the sun in conjunction with jupiter in the sign cancer, in sextile to the moon, is the index of a 
high fortune and means exceed a competence. it is here worthy of note that cancer, which in this horoscope 
hold the sun, jupiter, and mercury, is the ruling sign of south africa, with which colony mr. chamberlain’s 
fortune have been for a long time so intimate associated. it is also worthy of note that both cecil rhodes and 
barney barnato were born on the same day of the year, the 5th of july, with the sun in the 14th degree of 
cancer. in the former case the sun was conjoin with moon and venus, in sextile to uranus and trine to 
neptune, while in the latter case the sun was in trine to jupiter. in regard to mr. chamberlain’s horoscope, it 
will be observe that jupiter, which hold such eﬀective power for increase in the 2nd house, is also the ruler of 
the 7th, and it is to be remember that all partnerships, commercial or social, which he has contract have so [pg 119] 

far prove highly satisfactory from a merely monetary point of view. further, the moon is aﬀected with the good 
aspect of the sun in the 2nd house, which is a further indication that on a purely ﬁnancial basis mr. 
chamberlain is a man worth go into partnership with. 







