

chapter v. 

of the influence of the seven planet 

the planet saturn is the most remote of the seven planetary orb 

recognise by the ancient writer on astrology. he is of a pale ash 

colour, slow in motion, only finish his course through the twelve 

sign of the zodiac in 29 years and about 157 days. his greatest north 

latitude from the ecliptic is 2 degree 48 minutes; his south latitude 

is 2 degree 49 minutes. 

those born with this planet well-dignified 

[4] are studious, grave, 

economical, prudent, patient and in all their action sober and 

somewhat austere. they are not much given to the love of women, but 

they are person of much depth of feeling, and, when they do love, they 

are very constant. they are given to the study of occult matters, 

[5] 

and are of a melancholic, suspicious and jealous temperament. in person 

when well-dignified saturn give a rather tall stature and long 

limbs. the hair is dark, the eyebrow much marked and generally meeting 

between the eyes, which are dark brown, deep set and close together. 

the nose is long and generally somewhat bent over the lip and the 

under jaw slightly protrudes. the complexion is sallow, the ear large 

and the hand and feet are generally long, but not fleshy. 

those born under the potent aspect of saturn are generally slow of 

speech and their voice are harsh; when saturn rise in a horoscope 

devoid of dignities, the native is envious, covetous, malicious, 

subtle, untruthful and of a discontented disposition. in person 

frequent deformed, with long and irregular features, the eyes and 

hair dark and the skin yellow and harsh. 

in man's body this planet rule the spleen, the right ear, the lip and 

the teeth. in illness he give ague, palsy, rupture (especially should 

he rule in the sign of scorpio), jaundice, toothache and all affection 

of the sight, of the ear, of the teeth and jaws and of the legs. 

the herb he govern are the hemlock, hellebore, burdock, sage, 

henbane, rue, nightshade and mandrake. 

the tree under his rule are the willow, the yew, the cypress, the 

box-tree and the pine. 

the beast he govern are the elephant, the wolf, the bear, the dog,[6] 

the basilisk, the crocodile, the scorpion, the serpent, the rat, the 

mouse and all manner of creep things; among birds, the crow, the 

cuckoo, the raven, the owl and the bat. 

of fish he rule the eel, the tortoise and all shell fish. 

the mineral he govern are lead and the dross of all metals. 

his stone are jet, onyx and all dark stone which are incapable of 

polish. the colour he rule is black. 

he rule saturday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth hour of 

the same day. his number is 55. in gathering the herb under his rule 

the ancients were particular to do so in his hours, as this render 

the medicament more powerful. this is to be observe regarding the 

herb rule by all the planets. 

saturn's orb is nine degree before and after any aspect; that is, his 

influence begin to operate when either he apply to any planet or it 

apply to him within nine degree of his perfect aspect, and his 

influence continue in force until he is separate nine degree from 

the aspect. his angel is cassiel. his friends are jupiter, venus, 

mercury and the moon; his enemy are mars and the sun. 

jupiter is the next planet below saturn and is of a bright, clear, 

azure colour. he much exceed saturn in motion, as he finish his 

course through the twelve sign in twelve years. his greatest north 

latitude is 1 degree 38 minutes, and his greatest south latitude 1 

degree 40 minutes. when he rise at birth well-dignified he give an 

erect, tall stature, sanguine complexion, oval face, large grey eyes, 

thick brown hair, full lip and good teeth. in temperament those born 

under the good influence of this planet are honourable, generous and 

hospitable, but loving material pleasures, kind and affectionate to 

wife and family, charitable, desire to be well thought of and hate 

all mean and sordid actions. the voice of those born under jupiter are 

clear and sonorous. when this planet rise devoid of dignity 

the native will be gluttonous, profligate, vain, and boastful, of mean 

abilities and shallow understanding, easily seduce to extravagance and 

a tyrant to those of his family and household. 

in man's body he rule the lung and the blood, and of disease he 

give apoplexy, gout, inflammation of the lungs, pleurisy and all 

illness proceeding from corruption of the blood. 

the herb he govern are cloves, mace, nutmeg, gilliflower, marjoram, 

mint, borage and saffron. 

of trees, he rule the mulberry, the olive, the vine, the fig, the 

beech and the pear-tree. 

of beasts, the sheep, the hart, the ox and all those animal that are 

useful to man. 

of birds, the stork, the snipe, the lark, the eagle, the pheasant, the 

partridge and the peacock. 

of fishes, the whale, the dolphin and the sword-fish. 

his metal is tin. 

his stone are the sapphire, the amethyst and the emerald. 

of colours he rule red mixed with green. 

his day is thursday and he rule the first hour after sunrise and the 

eighth hour. his number is 78. 

his orb is 9 degree before and after any aspect. 

all the planet except mars are his friends. 

his angel is zadkiel. 

mars in order succeed jupiter. he appear of a red colour, and 

finish his course through the zodiac in 1 year 321 days. his greatest 

north latitude is 4 degree 31 minutes. his south latitude is 6 degree 

47 minutes. when he is well-dignified in a horoscope, the native is 

courageous, confident, loving war and all that belong to it, jealous 

of honour, hot-tempered and a great lover of field-sports. in person he 

will be of middle stature, broad-shouldered and with big bones; the 

complexion of a red fairness; the hair is crisp or curly and also red, 

but this vary slightly according to the sign rising at birth; in 

watery sign the hair is not so red, and in earthy sign it is more 

chestnut; the eyes are grey and have a bold, fixed glance like that of 

a hawk. 

when he is ill-dignified at birth, the native is turbulent, cruel, 

boastful, a promoter of sedition, ungracious in manners and 

unscrupulous in his actions, with no fear of either god or man. he 

rule the head and face, the gall, the throat and intestines; and the 

disease he give are fevers, carbuncles, smallpox, all throat 

affections, all hurt to the head and face (especially by iron), and 

all disease which arise from too much heat of blood; also accident 

from four-footed beasts. 

the herb over which he rule are the nettle, the thistle, onions, 

scammony, garlic, horehound, cardamons, mustard and all herb give 

heat. 

of trees, all those which are of a prickly nature, such as the holly, 

the thorn and the chestnut. 

of beasts, all fierce animals—the tiger, the panther, the wolf, the 

horse, the leopard, the wild ass and the bear. 

the dog is sometimes assign to mars on account of its courage and 

combativeness. this delightful animal is probably rule by both saturn 

and mars; the former give it the quality of fidelity which it 

possess in a degree beyond all other creatures. 

of fish, the pike, the barbel and the sword-fish. 

of birds, the hawk, the vulture, the kite, the eagle, the magpie and 

the cock, all of which are combative. 

the metal he rule is iron. the colour he rule is red. 

the stones, the carbuncle, the ruby and the blood-stone. 

his orb is 7 degree before and after any aspect. 

he govern tuesday—the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth. his 

number is 39. 

his friend among the planet is venus, all the other are his enemies. 

his angel is samael. 

the sun pass through all the twelve sign of the zodiac in one year 

and a few hour over the 365 days which constitute the year. he has no 

latitude. 

when the sun rise at a birth well-dignified, the native is of an 

honourable disposition, but always desire to rule, loving pomp, yet 

affable, speak with gravity and without too many words and 

possess much self-reliance and dignity of manner. in person he will 

be tall, well made, with golden hair, yellowish skin, large and 

piercing eyes and long, straight and well-formed features. 

when ill-aspected the native is arrogant, boastful, a spendthrift, 

proud, yet in poverty hanging on other men's charity, very loquacious, 

restless and without judgment. 

he govern the heart, the brain, the right eye and the arms; and the 

disease he cause are all illness of the heart, such as swoons, 

palpitations, cramps, also disease of the mouth, the brain, and the 

eyes. 

of colours he rule the yellow and orange colour. 


