


chapter xii. 

concerning directions and horary question 

we have seen in the chapter on the judgment of a nativity that by the 

consideration of the position of the planet and of the sun and moon in 

the twelve houses, what the general fortune of the native will 

be in the whole course of his life; but the art of direction measure 

out the time into years, months, week and days and thus inform us 

when we may expect in particular what is generally 

promise us in the nativity. 

directions are of two kinds, primary and secondary, and 

are base upon arithmetic calculation of the time of the event 

cause by the aspect of the significator (that is, of the sun or the 

moon), with the place of the planets. they are found upon the 

familiarity of the stars amongst each other in the zodiac (after 

the nativity), and show, by calculations, the distance of the place 

of a significator at the moment of the nativity from the place it must 

reach before it can join the aspect, which distance is call the 

arc of direction. some astrologer consider what are call 

"mundane directions," which are distance in the world measured 

by the semi-arc, and are wholly independent of the zodiac. these were 

invent by placidus, but as ptolemy do not treat of them they will 

not be considered here. 

it must always be remember that—in directions—the place of a 

planet, at the time of the nativity, is call the planet itself, 

although it may not be there when the significator arrives; thus, if we 

wish to direct the sun to the conjunction of jupiter, we must do so to 

the position which that planet occupy at the moment of the 

nativity. when the arc of direction is found the sun's right ascension 

must be add to it, and the sun will be the right ascension (without 

latitude) of that place in the zodiac at which, when the sun arrives, 

the direction will be completed. for every day of the sun's approach to 

this point a year must be added, and thus the time when the event is 

likely to happen is pointed out: these primary directions, however, 

cannot be depend upon to produce an event of great importance unless 

the secondary directions agree; but where the nativity is weak the 

primary direction alone is powerful enough to kill (especially if it 

should be oppose to the hyleg), and misfortune will always happen if 

the position of the planets, at the moment of birth, are unfortunate, 

without the coincidence of any secondary direction. 

secondary directions are those daily aspect to the luminary 

which happen after birth, every day of which is reckon for a year, 

two hour for a month, thirty minutes for a week, and four minutes for 

a day.[13] thus, whatever aspect take place in the first day of 

the native's life will develop their effects in the first year and 

those of the second day in the second year, so that, should the native 

live fifty years, his secondary direction for his fiftieth year will 

arise from the aspect which took place on the fiftieth day after his 

birth. the ancient astrologers—particularly the egyptians—used to 

predict the event of a nativity wholly from these secondary 

directions,[14] in which the moon should be chiefly considered; for in 

those days on which she come to an evil aspect with the malefics, 

saturn or mars, the years corresponding to those days will be 

peculiarly unfortunate and dangerous to the native; and where, on the 

contrary, the moon is well-aspected to the benefics, the years 

corresponding to those days will be very fortunate: a good direction 

give prosperity in that matter which the significator indicates; thus 

we direct the sun to signify the native's preferment or disgrace, his 

good or bad health, and the favour or disesteem of great personages. 

the direction of the moon refer to the nature of the native's 

journeys, whether prosperous or the reverse, his marriage, his wife, 

his women friends and kinsfolk. 

the direction of saturn signify the native's inheritance, buildings, 

possessions, and also his fears, jealousy and mistrusts. 

jupiter is direct as regards glory, renown, riches, children and 

religion. 

mars is direct for the native's law-suits, animosity and victories; 

he also show the estate of brethren. 

venus is direct for marriage, love and pleasure and all matter in 

connection with women. 

mercury is direct for a knowledge of the amount of wit, 

understanding, trade, industry, and journey of the native; also for 

distinction in scholarship and all intellectual pursuits. 

the horoscope or ascendant is direct to signify the life, affection 

and manners of the native. 

the mid-heaven's direction affect the position and career of the 

native. 

if the directions are to good aspect of benevolent planets, they 

signify prosperity both of mind and body, cheerful and all manner 

of earthly happiness; but if the horoscope should have directions to 

the ill aspect of the malefics, mars or saturn, then evil is to be 

expect of the nature given by the malevolent star. if direct to the 

good aspects, such as the trine or sextile of these evil planets, the 

misfortune is not so great, and even in some instance good may be 

predicted. as, for example, the horoscope direct to the trine or 

sextile of mars give preferment by arms; the same aspect towards 

saturn would indicate success in building or in mines, or some calling 

connected with metals. 

the occasional difference in the life, tastes, health, marriage and 

pecuniary affair of twins, born within ten or twenty minutes of each 

other, are account for by the fact that at the birth of the first 

child the last degree of a sign may ascend with planet therein, or a 

planet in the 2nd house at 5 p.m. may be in the 1st at 5.15 p.m. and 

the early degree of another sign may be exactly on the ascendant at 

the birth of the second child. 

a planet may reach the m.c., or any other of the four cardinal points 

at, say, 10 p.m. and ten minutes later have pass off, when its powers 

would have greatly diminished. though the sign rise and set at the 

rate of 15° per hour, in our latitude from 50° to 60° north, it often happen that 30° will ascend in fifty-two minutes. 

horary question are question ask at a certain time when a person 

feel anxious concerning any undertaking or impending event. a figure 

or map of the heavens, like that erect for a nativity, is drawn out 

for the minute in which the question is asked; and, if the astrologer 

be skilful, and the querist sincere—that is, not putt the question 

from frivolous motives—the answer will, in general, be true, for the 

whole is the effect of that sympathy which pervade all nature and 

which is the keynote of all divination under whatsoever form it is 

practised. 

in horary question the sign ascend and its lord represent the 

querent, and to these the moon is add and must be considered with the 

lord of the ascendant. 

the house to which the thing belongs—about which enquiry is made—is 

the significator of that person and thing, and every other house and 

its lord are to be considered according to their respective 

significations, so as to indicate the means and person by which the 

event, about which the enquiry are made, will be accelerate or 

retarded. 

the dates of event are regulate by the sign and angles. for example, 

should the significator of the event be in a movable sign and an angle 

the event will come to pass in the same number of days as there are 

degree between the significator's aspect and the star to which it is 

direct if the aspect be by application; if by 

separation, the thing will not take place at all. in one 

of the succedent house movable sign give months, common sign years 

and fixed sign bring about the event, after much delay, and when all 

hope of it are past. 

significator in any of the cadent house seldom do anything and, 

should they bring about an event at all, they do so after much wait 

and with much trouble and vexation. 

the matter of horary question is very well treat in lilly's 

grammar of astrology, publish in 1647, and, by way of 

explain the manner in which this branch of astrology is worked, we 

give a fac-simile of a map of a horary question to be found in 

this book, with (verbatim) lilly's method of dealing with that 

particular question. 

judgment of the figure given in plate.—"living in london, where 

we have few or no small cattle as in the country, i cannot give example 

of such creatures, but i once set the figure preceding concerning a 

dogge (which is in the nature of small beasts), which dogge was 

missing. the question to me was what part of the city they should 

search and if he should ever be recovered. 

"the querent was signify by the sign ascend and the lord thereof, 

for, in his person, he was saturnine and vitiate (according to the 

dragon's tail in the ascendant) in his nature, mind and 

understanding—that is, he was deform in body and of a covetous 

disposition. the sign of the sixth house and his lord signify the 

dogge, for that sign stand for sheep, hog and small cattle. 

"the sign of gemini is west, and by south the quarter of the heaven is 

west; mercury (the significator of the dogge) is in libra, a western 

sign, but southern quarter of heaven, tend towards the west; the 

moon is in virgo, a south-west sign, and verge towards the western 

angle. the strength of the testimony being thus examine i found the 

plurality to signify the west, and therefore i judge that the dogge 

ought to be westward from the place where the owner lived, which was at 

temple bar, wherefore i judge that the dogge was about long acre, or 

the upper part of drury lane. in regard that mercury (the significator 

of the beast) was in a sign of the same triple as gemini the 

ascendant, which signify london, and applied to a trine aspect of the 

cusp of the sixth house, i judge that the dogge was not out of the 

lines of communication, but was in the same quarter, of which i was 

more confirmed by the trine of the sun and saturn. the sign in which 

mercury appear was libra—an airy sign; therefore i judge that the 

dogge was in some chamber or upper room, and kept privately, or in 

great secrecy, because the moon was under the beam of the sun; and 

mercury, the moon and the sun were in the eighth house: and because the 

sun on the monday following would apply by trine to saturn, the lord of 

the ascendant, and the moon to trine of mars have exaltation in the 

ascendant, i intimate to the owner of the beast that, in my opinion, 

he should have his dogge again, or news of his dogge or small beast, 

upon the monday following, or near that time, which was true; for a 

gentleman of the querent's acquaintance sent home the dogge the very 

same day, about ten in the morning, who, by accident, coming to see a 

friend in long acre, found the dogge chain up under a table, and, 

knowing the dogge to be the querent's, sent him home as above said, to 

my very great credit," and no doubt also to the great satisfaction of 

"the dogge" himself. 


