

chapter xiii. 

solar horoscopes[15] 

january.—aquarius 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-second of january 

to the twenty-first of february. 

the man born under this influence will be of medium stature, good 

genius and a great speaker. he will achieve what he desire and will 

become famous in his own country. 

he will be subject to melancholy, very religious and of a highly 

conscientious nature. the stars, however, destine him to pass through 

much poverty in his youth and he will have other trouble in the matter 

of death of relations and friends before he is thirty. he will travel 

much and, in his early youth, he will suffer from illness. he will be 

much influence by women to his own detriment. he will lose his first 

wife and will marry twice, but the second marriage will not be very 

fortunate. at thirty he will be very seriously ill, but will recover 

and live on to about sixty-four years. 

the woman who is born at the above-mentioned dates will have a charming 

and expressive face; her eyes will be soft and beautiful in shape and 

her hair of a medium brown colour, neither very dark nor very fair. in 

character she will be slightly melancholy and of a romantic turn of 

mind. she will be happy in her marriage. she will have a serious 

illness at fifty, but will recover from it through the affectionate 

care of her husband, and will live to a good old age, surround by her 

children's children. 

february.—pisces 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-second of february 

to the twentieth of march. 

the man who is born under the influence of this sign will be above 

middle height, his chin will be fleshy, his eyes blue and his 

complexion rather colourless. his forehead will be low and broad and 

his eyes will express much kindness and goodness of disposition. he 

will be very fond of aquatic pursuit and take great delight in 

angling. he will not be studious, for he has not much perseverance, but 

he will take delight in conversation of an instructive order. he will 

not be much of a talker and will be slow to give his opinion on any 

subject. he will be of a luxurious temperament and will be much 

influence by women. he will be economical in his household expenses, 

but will spend money freely on his own pleasure out of his family 

circle. he will be fond of travel and will be more fortunate in 

other place than in his own country. he will be ingenious and of good 

counsel, yet wise for other than for himself. he will lose his wife 

early in life, but will not marry again, yet this more from indolence 

than constancy of feeling. 

the woman born at this time will be fairly good looking; her eyes will 

be light blue and she will have a fair complexion and a dimple in the 

right cheek. she will be of a good disposition and kind to the poor; 

but yet she will be self-indulgent and much given to luxury of all 

sorts. she will marry twice and have many children, but the stars do 

not promise her much happiness. she will die at sixty-eight. 

march.—aries 

the quality given by this sign of the zodiac last from the 

twentieth of march to the twentieth of april. 

the man born under this sign will be of medium stature, of fierce 

countenance, with an aquiline nose, quick moving eyes and a strong 

marked dimple in the chin. his hair will be of a reddish tint, his 

forehead broad and his complexion florid. he will be a loud talker and 

have much inclination for women and also for the pleasure of the 

table. he will be fond of field sports and very courageous. he will be 

subject to accidents, both from fire and from four-footed beasts. he 

will be capricious in his affection and will suffer much from his 

affair with women in his youth, but will grow wise towards middle 

age. he will not marry. at fifty he will lose much money and will fall 

into poverty, and thus become alienate from the friends of his youth. 

his life will not be prolonged much beyond fifty-five years. 

the woman born at this time will have a florid complexion, large 

round-shaped eyes and a square chin. she will be of middle height and 

rather strong made. she will be quick-tempered, strong-willed, very 

courageous and rather selfish. she will marry at twenty-three, but will 

not have many children. she will be a widow in middle life and will 

marry again within a year of her first husband's death. she will die 

sudden by an accident in her fifty-sixth year. 

april.—taurus 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-first of april to 

the twenty-first of may. 

the man born under this sign will have full lips, a short throat, and a 

mole at the back of his neck. he will be subject to sudden fit of 

anger and will be fierce and cruel. he will be fond of women, but will 

not be much like by them and will suffer much in consequence. he will 

be ambitious, fortunate in business and energetic. he will not be very 

prudent in speech and will often get himself in trouble by 

over-communicativeness. he will marry a rich wife and will acquire much 

money by legacy from her relations. he will be very ill at forty, but 

he will survive it and come into much riches soon after it. his life 

will go on to about sixty-two, when he will die of much the same 

illness which he had at forty. 

the woman born at this time will be graceful and well formed, with 

luxuriant hair and a full and well-formed mouth. she will have a good 

complexion and will have fascinating manners, so that she will much 

attract men. she will run great risk both from fire and water, and she 

will be subject to weakness of the eyes to such excess that towards the 

end of her life she will have reason to fear blindness, but she will 

escape this calamity. although she will have many lovers she will only 

marry once, for her husband will survive her. she will have many 

children and they will all live. she herself will die before sixty. 

may.—gemini 

the influence of this sign will last from the twenty-second of may 

till the twenty-first of june. 

the man born under the influence of this sign will be subject to ulcer 

and all skin diseases. he will be tall, well form and of florid 

complexion. he will be much like for his amiable quality and will 

govern his family well. he will travel much in foreign country and 

will acquire many beautiful things in the course of his travels. he 

will be attentive to women, very conscientious, gracious and valiant. 

he will not be at all given up to luxury, but will be of a pious and 

self-denying temperament. he will be bitten by some venomous reptile, 

yet will not die of the wound, but will recover entire from it in a 

short time. he will be false accused of some sin and will be 

imprison for it; but he will come out victorious and his innocence 

will be acknowledge by all. his marriage is uncertain. 

the woman who is born at this time will be fluent of speech, gracious 

in manners, witty and intelligent, but rather sensitive in temper. she 

will be small of stature, slight in figure and of a fair complexion. 

she will have well marked yet delicate eyebrows, brilliant eyes and 

small white teeth; her hand will be slender, with pointed fingers. by 

reason of her grace and wit she will be much loved, but she will not 

marry until she is twenty-five. she will be passionately love by her 

husband, but she will not return his affection. she will have very few 

children who will not live beyond childhood. she herself will die at 

sixty-seven. 

june.—cancer 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-first of june to 

the twenty-first of july. 

the man born under this sign will be of medium height and will have 

light hair and eyebrows. he will be given to deceit in his manners with 

women and will be very inconsistent, yet always with such gracious 

manners towards them that he will be much beloved by them. he will 

travel much, and will suffer many misfortune in the way of accidents. 

he will in middle age lose much money through the misconduct of his 

brothers, who will, by their extravagance, spend all the father's money 

and thus leave only a poor inheritance. he will occupy himself with 

agriculture and be successful with it. at forty he will suffer from a 

very serious illness and his life will probably end at forty-eight. 

the woman born at this time will have large grey eyes, full lip and an 

abundance of soft, rather colourless hair. she will be fond of luxury 

and ease, and will be much given to the pleasure of the table, and 

will eat much and drink more. she will marry early, but will not agree 

with her husband by reason of her own inconstancy. she will be married 

three times, and will get on better with her last husband than with the 

two others. she will have several children, but they will all be of a 

sickly constitution. she herself will have a very serious illness at 

seventy which will cure her of all her troubles. 

july.—leo 

the influence of this sign extend from the twenty-first of july to 

the twenty-first of august. 

the man born under this sign will be of middle height, but more 

inclined to be tall than short; his hair will be of a red colour, and 

his eyebrow will be well marked and much arch in their form. he will 

be valiant, hot tempered, very talkative, somewhat boastful, but 

pleasant and jovial in his manners. he will be a great admirer of 

women, but not constant in his affection. he will marry once, but not 

the woman he so much loves. 

the woman born at this time will be tall, with bright hair of a reddish 

gold colour, grey eyes, with a bold fierce glance, and long features. 

her nose will be aquiline and the face a long oval. the lip will be 

full but firm closed and the teeth good and large. she will be quick 

of temper and difficult to please, fond of pleasure and very ambitious 

of shining in society. her great desire for admiration will cause her 

to be much talk about—not always in a manner pleasing to her 

husband. she will marry early. she will lose her husband in early youth 

and will marry again soon after her widowhood. she will be much subject 

to illness through the blood, and at forty-eight she will have a very 

serious illness; but she will recover and live another fifteen years, 

but her life will always be full of anxiety and troubles. 

august.—virgo 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-second of august to 

the twenty-third of september. 

the man born under this influence will have an abundance of hair and 

will have a large chin and a good complexion. he will be ambitious, 

enterprising, and very valiant, but a little capricious. he will suffer 

much illness and, when he is about thirty years of age, he will be 

menace by death or imprisonment, yet he shall escape both evils. he 

will be of a sympathetic and benevolent disposition and will give good 

counsel to his friends. he will have a beautiful wife whom he will 

tender love, although she will not return his affections. 

a woman born at this time will be graceful and charming, with a 

well-formed face, an agreeable expression, small mouth and 

well-proportioned figure. her voice will be one of her charms, and will 

be clear and soft and singularly harmonious. she will be much love and 

admire for her wit, and will show much taste for music and dancing. 

she will have fairly good health, and her beauty and charm of manner 

will make her much sought after in marriage, but she will not accept 

any of her numerous lovers until after her twenty-second birthday. she 

will be much love by her husband, and being inclined to be devout, she 

will educate her children in the fear of god. she will die at 

sixty-nine. 

september.—libra 

the influence of this sign last from the twenty-third of september 

to the twenty-third of october. 

the man born under this sign will be fluent of speech and his voice 

will be sonorous and will sound angry even when he is not so. he will 

be wise and prudent and will be much esteem by good men. he will be 

just and honourable in all his dealings and will acquire the respect of 

all who know him for his conscientious dealings with his fellow-men. he 

will marry twice. his second wife, whom he will marry when he is turn 

forty, will be extravagant, and will so worry him by spend all his 

substance, that she will bring on his death before he is fifty. 

the woman born at this period will be, say the astrologers, cheerful 

and of a kindly disposition. she will be of a lively temperament and 

will easily learn both music and dance and will excel in both. she 

will be amiable, very caress in manner and much love by all who 

know her. she will marry twice. her first husband will be rich and of 

mature age and very prudent. the second will be young and will soon 

spend the greater part of the money left her by her first husband. she 

will be gay, fond of pleasure and rather a coquette, which will much 

displease the second husband. she will be rather given to gamble and 

will lose money in this way, which will cause her much discomfort and 

anxiety in her latter years. 

october.—scorpio 

the influence of this sign will last from the twenty-second of 

october to the twenty-first of november. 

a man born under this sign will be short and broad in figure and 

ungraceful in his movements. he will be dark in complexion; but the 

hair will be of a red-brown colour, the eyebrow thick and meeting over 

the nose. he will be prompt in judgment, but very wily and inconstant, 

promising one thing and do another, so much so, that those who have 

once had dealings with him will never again have confidence in him, 

knowing how likely he is to deceive them. he will be of a perverse and 

irritable temper, which will cause him to have many enemies; and 

notwithstanding all his acuteness, he will always be poor. he will 

travel much and will lead a somewhat vagabond life. he is very unlikely 

to marry, and he will probably die a violent death. 

the woman who is born under the influence of the scorpion will be of a 

reddish colouring and of middle height and strong built. as regards 

her character, she will be affable, much beloved by her relations, fond 

of pleasure, yet very energetic in the discharge of her household 

duties, sensitive in temper, a little revengeful and very ingenious and 

of quick judgment. in her youth she will have much trouble from 

lawsuits, but she need not fear the result, for as she is pious god 

will always protect her. she will only marry once, at about her 

twenty-sixth year, and will die at sixty-eight. she will have no 

children. 

november.—sagittarius 

the influence of this sign continue from the twenty-second of 

november till the twenty-first of december. 

the man born under this sign will be of pale complexion and he will 

have long features and dark hair and eyes. he will be prudent, studious 

and economical. he will see many foreign country and will gain much 

money in his youth, by reason of which he will excite the envy of his 

friends. he will receive much injury from a relative, who will 

endeavour to prejudice people against him, but he will always be well 

received and much like in society. he will be generous to his friends, 

but he will be badly recompense for his kindness. he will be 

persevering in his profession and will attain a good position in it. he 

will be subject to internal complaints, but will live long. he will be 

untrue to his wife, but he will be careful that she do not know it. 

he will have several children, but they will be no comfort to him, as 

they will be always ungrateful to him. 

the woman who is born at this time will be well formed, with luxuriant 

hair and well-marked and rather arch eyebrows; her forehead will be 

broad and her intellect good, but her temper easily irritate and over 

sensitive, especially where her affection are concerned. she will be 

timid, very constant both in love and friendship, generous in her 

affections, yet very ill-requited in this respect. she will marry at 

twenty-six and will have many children. she will suffer much from the 

evil tongue of false friends, who will malign her to her husband, but 

her innocence will be made known and in the end she will be fully 

justified. she will live to sixty-eight. 

december.—capricornus 

