
thed t v e r sofi ~astrological world view 
society that did possess what we would recognize as a form of astrol- 
ogy were associate with world-views that differ radcal in their concep- 
tion regardmg the nature of ultimate reality, their basic hierarchy struc- 
tures, the mode of divine activity (and whether the divine nature was per- 
son or nonpersonal), the nature of the self, the destiny of human beings, 
and so on. likewise, the associate astrology often differ from each oth- 
er along essential dimensions. for example, the circumpolar stars, the pole 
star, and the quadrant &visions of the sky uthze in china astrology are 
use different in western astrology. the circle of 12 animal in china as- 
trology bear little resemblance to the western zodiac. the ascendant is irn- 
portant in western astrology but not in china astrology, and so on (cul- 
ver & lama, 1988, p. 25; dean, mather, & kelly, 1996, pp. 56-57). 
in lndia there are also a number of astrology system which conhct 
both with each other and with western approach [see premanand, bhatty, 
& risbud (1993) for an overview and critique of i n l a n astrology]. in the 
dasha-paddhati system the name of the planet are written in a sequence 
that is not only arbitrary from a western astrology perspective but is also 
not related to any physical characteristic of the planet or their lstance 
from the earth. each planet is allege to have a certain period of influence 
over the destiny of people. these periods vary from 6 years to 20 years. 
each planet take control over a person's destiny in the order specify by 
the system and the duration assign to them. the sequence of the planet 
is the same for all people provided you are following the vinshotiari 120- 
year system. on the other hand, if an astrologer use the ashtottari dasha 
system, the last four planet appear in a reverse order and together have a 
1058 i. w. kelly 

different duration of 108 years. during one's life-time, the same planet can- 
not take charge of your destiny again, unless you live for more than 120 
years (or 108 years). both of these mutual exclusive system are satisfying 
to the astrologer themselves and to their clients. 
when we turn to the mayan of the americas, other fundamental dif- 
ference in world-view, along with astrology differences, emerge. in terms 
of hierarchy structure and ahed astrology, the mayan cosmology was 
quite different from the orbital-themed earthbr sun-centered idea of other 
cultures. for a start, mayan astrology assign a very central role for venus. 
ln addtion, the position of venus relative to the horizon was, contrary to 
western astrology, more important for the mayan than its movement. they 
also associate the morning and evening appearances of venus with lunar 
phase and eclipse which have no counterpart in other astrology sys- 
tems. finally, astrology in mayan me was close to the astrology of in&a and 
traditional western astrology than perry's vision in that the central focus 
was divination and prophecy (aveni, 1992; danien & sharer, 1992). 
astrology symbolism is magical thinking 
while the astronomical and mathematics bases of the cosmology and 
astrology develop by the mesopotanian, chinese, mayan, and 1ndian cul- 
ture were sophisticated, the meaning or quality ascribe to planetary con- 
junction and movements were dependent on the religious and mythological 
belief of the particular society in question. this explain why many of the 
physical characteristic of the celestial body (size, distance, etc.) are consid- 
- ~ 




ered irrelevant with regard to their effects or meaning, or even whether a 
planetary body actually exist (e.g., vulcan) because what matter is the sym- 
bol or mythology attach to the body's name. the influences, effects, or 
correlation attribute to the planetary configuration are base on a prior1 
endemic "magical correspondences," rely on superficial sidar and 
analogies. for example, the medieval astrologer-physician william of en- 
gland appeal to the magical doctrine of " k e affect k e , " as have astrolo- 
ger of all periods. hence, he argued, ". . . the sun and mars affect red bile 
(because all three are hot) and the moon and venus affect phlegm (because 
they are cold)" and "should the hot and dry mars be cause a disturbance 
of the blood, then when mars move into a house that has a dsturbance of 
the chest, the patient d spit blood" (french, 1996, p. 478). " the modern 
astrologer davidson (1963) stated, "without the sun there would be no life. 


"venus was widely believe at the time to be a cold planet, whereas mars was characterize as 
hot and dry. hot(h), cold(c), wet(w), and dry(d) were the four ¶ualities underlyin the four ele- 
ment considered by greece philosopher to be the basic constituenr of the p!ysical world, 
namely, earth=cd, air=hw, fire= hd, water=cw. elements with common quahty were able to 
change inro each other, e.g., water= cw could change into earth = cd because both included the 
modern astrology: a critique 1059 

it is the driving force behind the whole solar system. it represenr will 
power, vitality, leadership, creativity . . ." (p. 29) and "the ring of saturn 
symbolize the hit impose by saturnian action that operate as a 
harsh external disciphe until we have learnt to disciphe ourselves" (p. 32). 
the practice of present day astrologer give add~tionalgrounds for the 
independence of their symbolism from any observation or test theory 
base. whenever a newly discover astronomical body is found, the attribu- 
tion of its earthly connection is not base on the result of publish inves- 
tig with extensive public discussion to establish its relationship with 
worldly affairs. rather, if the name can be identified, e.g., by look it up 
in dictionary of mythology, and could be plausible related to existing plan- 
etary mythology (not difficult), then the result will be long articles in astrol- 
ogy~journalsby author surf the mythology wave, where reader will be 
move to tear or to outrage by the beauty and insight of the connections. 
when pluto was discover in 1939 and chiron in 1977 (a minor planet or 
moon between the orbit of saturn and uranus), astrologer did not publish 
research to establish their relationship with human and worldly affairs. plu- 
to is given, as one might expect from mythology, a malefic influence on hu- 
man me. as davidson (1963) stated, "the planet name after the god of 
hades represent the underworld of man's consciousness, those elements in 
his nature that have not been redeem . . ." (p. 33). could it be otherwise? 
it is difficult to imagine that astrologer would ever inform us that a planet 
name "pluto" would be associate with love of me and fellow human be- 
ings, sensitivity and lea sure (ilke venus)! similarly, hand (1981) remark 
"(chiron) is believe by many to have a connection with conscious-expand- 
ing teaching and with initiation into higher consciousness" (p. 94). in the 
case of chiron, as with pluto, these relationship are those we would expect 
astrologer to attribute to them if they were base entire on mythology 
(cdver & ianna, 1988). 
similarly, as the astrologer press (1993) said about asteroids, ". . . the 
particular mythology, whether greek, roman, egyptian, etc., is relevant to 
the expression of the asteroid in the [birth] chart" (p. 178). what happen 
here is that, have determ~ned the asteroid's mythology, the astrologer 
looks at the asteroid's posit~on(e.g., by sign, by house, by aspect) in various 
peoples' chart to see if there 1s anything in the personality or case history 
that could match the interpretation of that position. for example, "the as- 
teroid icaru represent flying too close to the sun. the position (house, 


of coldness. most greece scholars, of course, considered science (as we know it roda ) 
ro be an insignificant part of philosophy, which meant that their world view was base m a d y 
on hilosophic ideal rather than empirical observations. so hot and cold, etc. do not neces- 
sarfy correspond to what we today call hor and cold, etc. 
1060 i. w. kelly 

sign, numerical) and exact aspect of icaru w d show where a person wlll 
take risks" (p. 197). whenever possible, some astrologer will add physical 
symbolism to the mythological symbolism. for example, 
the orbit of icaru is between the sun and jupiter. this containment surround icaru with the 
irradiate of the sun and the expansive of jupiter. icarus' orbit is in and cross the orbit 
of mercury, venus, the earth and mars. being in those orbit give icaru a smattering of the 
restless of mercury, the sensuous of venus, the earthy of the earth and the self-as- 
sertive of mars" (press, 1993, p. 1961.'" 

what happen if the new astronomical body are name after modern indi- 
viduals? startup (1981) said, 
a popular modern astrology doctrine maintain that newly discover planet are inevitable 
given appropriate name [from which the correct terrestrial relationship can be inferred], even 
though the name are bestow by astronomer nowadays. this is usually taken as one more 
example of synchronic (p. 33). 

asteroid without classical name have a special lund of importance, again 
base purely on symbolic considerations. here we enter the realm of 
"personal name asteroids." press (1993, p. 212) conclude (after much un- 
control research), that if an asteroid has your name, or something close to 
it, then its position in your horoscope describe your relationship to yourself 
(whatever that means). if an asteroid has the name of another person (e.g., 
asteroid 3085 is call donna), then its position in your horoscope (birth 
chart) describe your relationship to that person. this would seem to imply 
that your relationship to all the donna in the world would have much in 
common. 
along the same lines, magical or unknown influence are appeal to 
whenever astrology is in ddficulty. early in this article (p. 1044) the prob- 
lem of includmg all the asteroid in the birth chart or horoscope was de- 
scribed. hand (1981) pointed out that astrologer eleanor bach 'solved' the 
problem by use just the first four asteroid to be discovered. hand (1981) 
justified this arbitrary choice by inform us that: 
one way of defend the use of the first four to be discover (rather than the four largest) is 
to say that the effect of celestial body is in some way related to human consciousness of them 
rather chan to their physical properties. as the first to be discovered, they no doubt made a 
greater impact chan the thousand later to be discover (p. 93). 




"the diversity of symbolism use b astrologer with ap arent no rule about being consis- 
rent is noteworthy. davidson (1963) lase his a s t r o ~ o ~ i c a mbol 
fs variously on physical at- 
tribute of the planet and on attribute of che g r e e k g d s . !he a ~ t m l o p~ yr s (1993). on the 
other hand, uthze other mythology and add ano er d m e n s ~ o no physical characteristic 
to her symbolism such as a celestial body's proximity to other celestial bodies. which particular 
magical correspondence are perceive as relevant are in the eye of the beholder, and there are 
many dfierent astrologer beholders. 
modern astrology: a critique 1061 

such speculation have the great advantage of require no argument 
and the disadvantage of saying nothing. we are left in the dark as to what 
the "some way related" and "greater impact" are intended to mean here. 
what about people who have never heard of the first four asteroids? do 
this mean the asteroid cannot be use in construct their charts, or do 
the aware of academic of their existence cover for the rest of us? no 
doubt another set of "special rules" can be devise by astrologer to 'solve' 
this problem. 
some of the grave ddficulty of magical correspondence as explana- 
tion were describe by dean, loptson, and kelly (1996): 
first, magical correspondence are argument from analogy, which can be express in the 
form object x has property a and b, object y has property a, therefore y also has b. john 
smith is tall, therefore john brown is tall.. . the inference is vivid and quick, and therefore 
(as in astrology) agreeably seductive, but our change of its being correct are not good. . . no 
long do midwife open the door to ease a painful labour. no long do alchemy idea ap- 
pear in chemistry courses. in fact, magical correspondence have been so spectacular unsuc- 
cessful that in western education today the doctrine survive only as an example of fallacious 
thinlung. second, it is impossible to spec& any nvo things, no matter how dissimilar, that do 
not show some kind of correspondence. a raven is like a writing desk because both begin with 
the 'r' sound, both cast shadows, both contain quds. a speck of sand is like the empire state 
building because h e y have the same color, both contain shca, and have the same number of 
atom as bricks.. . . the point is, how can we distinguish a magical correspondence from other 
correspondences? the books do not td us. third, we have no immediate way of choose be- 
tween oppose magical correspondences. black cat were lucky ro ancient egypt but un- 
lucky to medieval europeans. the moon was male to the babylonian but female to the greece 
. . . . is mars unfortunate because red=blood (war), or fortunate because red=blood (life)? 
who can believe any magical correspondence when it is so easily deny by another? (pp. 
28-29). 

other criticism of magical thlnking can be found from a philosophical view- 
point by thagard (1980) and from a psychological perspective by zusne and 
jones (1989). 
conclusion 
the argument given in this article show that account put forward by 
astrologer for the origin and justification of postulate celestial relationship 
with outward behavior or activity of human being (traditional astrology), 
or inner structure of consciousness (modern psychological astrology) are 
problematic and implausible in the extreme. 
we can conclude that astrology, as presently practiced, is not a source 
of information or knowledge about ourselves. anomaly and problem do 
not result in constructive attempt to revise the conceptual basis of astrology 
or extend it in ways that would allow astrologer to learn from failure as 
they do in orthodox discipline (mayo, 1996). rather, they are dealt with by 
the use of metaphor that lead nowhere and constant shking ad hoc hy- 
1062 i. w. kelly 

pothese that are not independent testable. confirmation are readily 
attribute as support, but failure can be hidden in the complexity of astrol- 
ogy and never need confront any specific astrology hypotheses. hence, the 
general indifference of astrologer to negative evidence (mayo, 1996, pp. 
280-282; kelly, 1997). but astrology rhetoric, hyperbole, and bluff are not 
adequate grounds for claim of knowledge (see dean & loptson, 1996 for 
other conceptual criticism of astrology). 
the failure of physical model to provide an underpin for astrologi- 
cal tenet has result in a shift to more animistic, magical worldviews. 
while astrology is more "plausible" within such worldviews, it is so only in 
the banal sense that such framework provide few constraint on what may 
be postulate than modern scientific formulation of the world. the appeal 
to magical world-views allow astrologers' postulate to override or side- 
step any physical law that may conbct (evans, 1994). astrologer who 
advocate such worldview do not provide articulated position capable of 
constructive evaluate and improvement, but rather, couch their 'frame- 
work' in terms of a hodgepodge of spiritualloccult expressions, along with 
passing reference to modern physics and &ed disciphe to appear con- 
temporary and fashionable. these occult convolutions, e.g., 'animating spir- 
its,' 'sympathies,' 
. - 'pure consciousness,' 'resonant bonds of vibratory frequen- 
cies,' 'psychic anatomy,' etc., are not ascribe property to be of any useful 
explanatory value. we are left with a &sparate set of idea taken out of con- 
text from various, often incompatible, ancient worldviews, juxtapose 
without any coherent, interlock metaphysics. 
astrology, as current practiced, do not have any plausible observa- 
tional or theoretical basis for the groundmg of its particular claim (dean, 
loptson, & kelly, 1996). there is little agreement on what astrology fac- 
tor should be considered in a birth chart (that is, what factor can be ig- 
nored) and how they should be combined, or even consensus regarding how 
to collect relevant data to resolve even the most basic astrology dlspute 
(dean & mather, 1996). astrology consequently do not have the concep- 
tual resources to deal with its own anomaly or to benefit from, or contrib- 
ute to, finding in other field such as psychology or biology in any way 
other than by arbitrary means and sophistry. the basis and structure of as- 
trology is entire base on cultural specific mythology and symbolism in a 
magical context. astrology is part of our past, but astrologer have given no 
plausible reason why it should have a role in our future. 
