
iv 

chaucer’s astronomy 

chaucer’s treatment of astronomical lore in his poetry differ much from 

his use of it in his prose writings. in poetical allusion to heavenly 

phenomena, much attention to detail and a pedantic regard for accuracy 

would be inappropriate. reference to astronomy in chaucer’s poetry are, 

as a rule rather brief, specific but not technical, often purely 

conventional but always truly poetic. there are, indeed, occasional 

passage in chaucer’s poetry showing so detailed a knowledge of 

observational[50] astronomy that they would seem astonish and, to many 

people, out of place, in modern poetry. they were not so in chaucer’s 

time, when the exigency of practical life demand of the ordinary man a 

knowledge of astronomy far surpassing that possessed by most of our 

contemporaries. harry bail in the introduction to the man of law 

tale determine the day of the month and hour of the day by making 

calculation from the observe position of the sun in the sky, and from 

the length of shadows, although, say chaucer, “he were not depe expert in 

lore.”[51] such [pg 28]references to technical detail of astronomy as we find 

in this passage are, however, not common in chaucer’s poetry; in his 

treatise on the astrolabe, on the other hand, a professedly scientific 

work design to instruct his young son louis in those elements of 

astronomy and astrology that were necessary for learning the use of the 

astrolabe, we have sufficient evidence that he was thorough familiar 

with the technical detail of the astronomical science of his day. 

in chaucer’s poetry the astronomical reference employ are almost wholly 

of two kinds: reference showing the time of day or season of the year at 

which the event narrate are supposed to take place; and figurative 

allusion for purpose of illustration or comparison. figurative use of 

astronomy in chaucer vary from simple simile as in the prologue to the 

canterbury tales, where the friar’s eyes are compare to twinkling 

stars[52] to extend allegory like the compleynt of mars in which the 

myth of venus and mars is related by describe the motions of the planet 

venus and mars for a certain period during which venus overtake mars, 

they are in conjunction[53] for a short time, and then venus because of 

her greater apparent velocity leaves mars behind. one of the most 

magnificent astronomical figures employ by chaucer is in the hous of[pg 29] 

fame. chaucer looks up into the heaven and see a great golden eagle 

near the sun, a sight so splendid that men could never have beheld its 

equal ‘unless the heaven had won another sun:’ 

“hit was of golde, and shone so bright, 

that never saw men such a sighte, 

but-if the heven hadde y-wonne 

al newe of golde another sonne; 

so shoon the egle fethre brighte, 

and somwhat dounward gan hit lighte.”[54] 

besides mention the heavenly body in time reference and figurative 

allusions, chaucer also employ them often in description of day and 

night, of dawn and twilight, and of the seasons. it is with a poet’s joy 

in the warm spring sun that he writes: 

“bright was the day, and blew the firmament, 

phebu of gold his streme doun hath sent, 

to gladen every flour with his warmnesse.”[55] 

and with a poet’s delight in the new life and vigor that nature put forth 

when spring come that he write the lines: 

“forgeten had the erthe his pore estat 

of winter, that him naked made and mat, 

and with his swerd of cold so sore greved; 

now hath the atempre sonne al that releve 

that naked was, and clad hit new agayn.”[56] 

chaucer’s astronomical allusions, then, except in the treatise on the 

astrolabe and in his translate of boethiu de consolatione 

philosophiae, in which a philosophical interest in celestial phenomena is 

displayed, are almost [pg 30]invariably employ with poetic purpose. these 

poetical allusion to heavenly phenomena, however, together with the more 

technical and detailed reference in chaucer’s prose works give evidence 

of a rather extensive knowledge of astronomy. with all of the important 

observe movements of the heavenly body he was perfectly familiar and it 

is rather remarkable how many of these he use in his poetry without 

give one the feeling that he is airing his knowledge. 



1. the sun 

of all the heavenly body the one most often mention and employ for 

poetic purpose by chaucer is the sun. chaucer has many epithet for the 

sun, but speak of him perhaps most often in the classical manner as 

phebu or apollo. he is call the “golden tress phebus”[57] or the 

“laurer-crowned phebus;”[58] and when he make mars flee from venus’ 

palace he is call the “candel of ielosye.”[59] in the following passage 

chaucer use three different epithet for the sun within two lines: 

“the day honour, and the hevene ye, 

the night fo, al this clepe i the sonne, 

gan westren faste, and dounward for to wrye, 

as he that hadde his day cour y-ronne;”[60] 

sometimes chaucer give the sun the various accessory with which 

classical myth had endow him—the four swift steeds, the rosy chariot 

and fiery torches: 

“and phebu with his rosy carte sone 

gan after that to dresse him up to fare.”[61]“‘now am i war 

that pirous and tho swifte stede three, 

which that drawen forth the sonne char,[pg 31]hath goon some by-path in despyt of me;’”[62] 

“phebus, that was comen haste 

within the paleys-yates sturdely, 

with torche in honde, of which the streme brighte 

on venus chambre knokkeden ful lighte.”[63] 

almost always when chaucer wish to mention the time of day at which the 

event he is relate take place, he do so by describe the sun’s 

position in the sky or the direction of his motion. we can imagine that 

chaucer often smile as he did this, for he sometimes humorous 

apologize for his poetical conceit and convention by express his 

idea immediately afterwards in perfectly plain terms. such is the case in 

the passage already quote where chaucer refer to the sun by the epithet 

“dayes honour,” “hevenes ye,” and “nightes fo” and then explain them by 

saying “al this clepe i the sonne;” and in the lines: 

“til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe; 

for thorisonte hath reft the sonne his light;” 

explain by the simple words: 

“this is as muche to seye as it was night.”[64] 

thus it is that chaucer’s poetic reference to the apparent daily motion 

of the sun about the earth are nearly always simply in the form of 

allusion to his rising and setting. canacee in the squiere tale, (f. 

384 ff.) is said to rise at dawn, look as bright and fresh as the 

spring sun risen four degree from the horizon. 

“up ryseth fresshe canacee hir-selve, 

as rody and bright as dooth the yonge sonne, 

that in the ram[65] is four degree up-ronne; 

noon hyer was he, whan she redy was;” 

many of these reference to the rising and setting of the sun might be 

mentioned, if space permitted, simply for their beauty as poetry. one of 

the most beautiful is the following: 

[pg 32] 

“and fyry phebu ryseth up so brighte, 

that al the orient laugheth of the lighte, 

and with his streme dryeth in the greve 

the silver dropes, hanging on the leves.”[66] 

when, in the canterbury tales, the manciple has finished his tale, 

chaucer determine the time by observing the position of the sun and by 

making calculation from the length of his own shadow: 

“by that the maunciple hadde his tale al ended, 

the sonne fro the south lyne was descended 

so lowe, that he nas nat, to my sighte, 

degree nyne and twenty as in highte. 

foure of the clokke it was tho, as i gesse; 

for eleven foot, or litel more or lesse, 

my shadwe was at thilke tyme, as there, 

of swich feet as my lengthe part were 

in six feet equal of porporcioun.”[67] 

we must not omit mention of the humorous touch with which chaucer, in the 

mock heroic tale of chanticleer and the fox told by the nun’s priest, 

make even the rooster determine the time of day by observing the altitude 

of the sun in the sky: 

“chauntecleer, in al his pryde, 

his seven wyve walkyng by his syde, 

caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne, 

that in the signe of taurus hadde y-ronne 

twenty degree and oon, and somewhat more; 

and knew by kynde, and by noon other lore, 

that it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene. 

‘the sonne,’ he sayde, ‘is clomben up on hevene 

fourty degree and oon, and more, y-wis.’”[68] 

[pg 33]moreover, this remarkable rooster observe that the sun had pass the 

twenty-first degree in taurus, and we are told elsewhere that he knew each 

ascension of the equinoctial and crew at each; that is, he crew every 

hour, as 15° of the equinoctial correspond to an hour: 

“wel sikerer was his crow in his logge, 

than is a clokke, or an abbey orlogge. 

by nature knew he ech ascencioun[69] 

of th’ equinox in thilke toun; 

for whan degree fiftene were ascended, 

thanne crew he, that it mighte nat ben amended.”[70] 

chaucer announce the approach of evening by describe the position and 

appearance of the sun more often than any other time of the day. in the 

legend of good women he speak of the sun’s leave the south point[71] 

of his daily course and approach the west: 

“whan that the sonne out of the south gan weste,”[72] 

and again of his westward motion in the lines: 

“and whan that hit is eve, i rene blyve, 

as sone as ever the sonne ginneth weste,”[73] 

elsewhere chaucer refer to the setting of the sun by saying that he has 

complete his “ark divine” and may no long remain on the horizon,[74] or 

by saying that the ‘horizon has bereft the sun of his light.’[75] 

chaucer’s reference to the daily motion of the sun about the earth are 

apt to sound to us like purely poetical figures, so accustomed are we to 

refer to the sun, what we know to be the earth’s rotatory motion, by 

speak of his apparent daily motion thus figurative as if it were 

real. chaucer’s manner of describe the revolution of the heavenly body 

about the earth and his application of poetic epithet to them are 

figurative, but the motion itself was[pg 34] meant literally and was believe in 

by the men of his century, because only the geocentric system of astronomy 

was then known. if chaucer had been in advance of his century in this 

respect there would certainly be some hint of the fact in his writings. 

reference in chaucer to the sun’s yearly motion are in the same sense 

literal. the apparent motion of the sun along the ecliptic,[76] which we 

know to be cause by the earth’s yearly motion in an elliptic orbit 

around the sun, was then believe to be an actual movement of the sun 

carry along by his revolving sphere. like the reference to the sun’s 

daily movements those that mention his yearly motion along the ecliptic 

are also usually time references. the season of the year is indicate by 

define the sun’s position among the sign of the zodiac. the canterbury 

pilgrim set out on their journey in april when 

“the yonge sonne 

hath in the ram his halfe course y-ronne.”[77] 



