

superstition regarding animal 

serpents.—these creature have been regard from very different angles, 

according to the time and the country. the story of the serpent in the garden 

of eden has cause many people to detest them: but numerous are the 

reference in history which go to show that serpent and snake have been 

reverenced. in ancient rome, the serpent was a household god: at other 

times, it was regard as a symbol of life and vitality, and it was frequent 

use as a medium for heal the sick. in india, this creature is look upon 

as a mascot for time and wisdom. thus, it is worn by fanatic as a part of 

their headgear, and people make metal replica and wear them as rings, 

bracelets, etc. clearly, then, serpent have found more favor than disapproval, 

and they may be count as mascots, standing for wisdom, long life and good 

health. 

cats.—cats, the most domestic of animals, are regard with mixed feelings. 

generally speaking, they are supposed to be unlucky, though oddly 

enough a black cat is credit with good quality when it take up its abode 

in a house. this is due to the fact that, during the middle ages, black cat 

were supposed to be associate with witch and in league with the evil one. 

as a result, people treat them kindly and shower favor on them, not 

because they like them, but because they thought that this treatment would 

avert bad luck. 

the person who drown or kill a cat may look for ill-fortune for nine 

years. bad luck attend the vessel or ship on which a cat is found, but on no 

account may the creature be thrown overboard after the vessel has sailed. 

this would only make matter worse. 

if a cat leaves a house, it is supposed to take the luck with it, and leave 

nothing but bad fortune behind. if a white cat enter a home, it announce 

trouble and sickness. a cat licking itself all over signify fair weather, but 

if it merely wash its face, it means the approach of rain or storms. 

dogs.—a dog howling under a window indicate death. 

dogs begin in jest and end in earnest. 

a dog, a woman, a walnut tree, 

the more you beat 'em, the better they be. 

if a dog bark, go in: if a bitch, go out. 

a dog will bark ere he bite. 

hares.—if a hare cross your path, you may look out for a disappointment. 

if it runs past houses, there will soon be a fire in one of them. 

in the isle of man, hare are believe to be the spirits of old women, and 

on that account are shun as articles of food. in other parts, those who 

wish to look beautiful for a week make a point of eat hare. 

[105] 

birds.—robins are variously regard in different parts of the country. 

some people think them unlucky, possibly because of their association with 

the tragedy of the babe in the wood. but generally they are welcome to 

a garden or house, which is supposed to be all the lucky for their coming. 

robins that show sign of being friendly are considered to foretell a hard 

winter. 

woodpecker and kingfisher are also lucky, and any suggestion of ill-luck 

is only possible when bird are deliberate kill after have built their nest 

and claim the hospitality of a home. 

the screech of a peacock is best unheard when luck is particularly wanted. 

the feather of this bird, known to everyone by reason of their beautiful 

coloring, should never be taken indoors, as they are reckon specially unlucky. 

there is an old superstition regarding the cuckoo. should a maiden, hearing 

its note for the first time that season, kiss her hand to it and say:— 

cuckoo, cuckoo, 

tell me true, 

when shall i be married? 

she may tell the number of years which will elapse until her wedding by 

count the number of times the bird cries "cuckoo." she must reckon 

each cry as a year. 

another superstition relate to the cuckoo is that what you are do 

when you hear its cries for the first time in any season is what you will spend 

most time at during the remainder of the year. folk in the channel island 

claim that they are sure to be fortunate if they jingle their purse and run a 

short distance when hearing the cuckoo for the first time in the year. 

owls, crow and magpie do not presage any good: in fact, many people 

would rather not meet them when anxiety is at hand. an old jingle say of 

magpies:— 

one for anger, 

two for mirth; 

three for a wedding 

four for a birth. 

raven are supposed to bring luck to the house where they build their nests, 

so it is unlucky to kill one. 

it is unlucky to touch a yellowhammer in may, since there is the devil's 

blood in it then. 

for a white pigeon to single out a house and hover round it is a sure sign 

of an early marriage or engagement in that house. 

a cock crow during the night-time means a bad illness for someone close 

at hand: if it crow during the afternoon, a visitor will arrive. 

sailor are not over-fond of seagulls, believe them to be the spirits of their 

dead mates, yet they are most indignant if anyone try to shoot or kill one 

of them. 

[106] 

other animals.—a cricket singing within a house ensure good luck 

for all the household. 

kill a spider and it will surely rain. 

see a moth on your clothes and you will get new ones. 

a death's head moth indicate bereavement. 

pig are unlucky creature when seen singly. 

to see a white horse and then, shortly after, a red-haired person, tell of 

approach good fortune. 

mole are unlucky to find alive. 

of bees, the following rhyme is prophetic:— 

a swarm of bee in may 

is worth a load of hay. 

a swarm of bee in june 

is worth a silver spoon. 

a swarm of bee in july 

is not worth a fly. 

country people are still given to treat bee as if they belong to the 

family. for instance, not a few folk tell the bee of the betrothal, marriage 

and other outstanding event happening in the home. 

prophecy regarding animal 

(a) when black snail cross your pathblack cloud much moisture hath. 

(b) when the peacock loud bawls,soon we'll have both rain and squalls. 

(c) when rook fly sporting high in air,it show that windy storm are near. 

(d) bee will not swarm before a near storm. 

(e) when the cuckoo come to the bare thorn,sell your cow and buy your corn.but when she come to the full bit,sell your corn and buy some sheep. 

(f) little bantam are great at crowing. 

(g) good luck for a grey horse. 

(h) let a horse drink what he will, not when he will. 

(i) trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth. 

(j) plenty of ladybirds, plenty of hops. 

(k) never offer your hen for sale on a rainy day. 

(l) when the glow-worm lights her lamp,the air is always damp. 

(m) unlucky to hear the cuckoo sing sitting.or to sit and see the first swallow flitting. 

[107] 
