

chapter xv. 

chiromancy and its origin 

chiromancy is a science which teach us to read not only the character 

but the whole destiny—for good or evil, the length of life and often 

the manner of death of a man by the lines and mark to be seen in his 

hand. this study is sometimes call palmistry, in which case, however, 

it properly refer only to a judgment form from what appear 

in the palm of the hand, whilst chiromancy (taken from the word 

cheir, a hand, and manteia, divination) signify the 

revelation made by the hand, taken as a whole. chiromancy is nearly as 

ancient as astrology, with which it is indissoluble connected, 

for the hand represents, as has been before said, a natural horoscope, 

which is placed upon it at the time both of the conception and the 

birth by the influence of the stars. the seven planet are all 

represent in the hand and also the twelve sign of the zodiac, so 

that the casting of a nativity is needless, as by simply examine a 

hand by the light of chiromancy we can indicate what planet have been 

powerful at the time of birth, and what, therefore, will be their 

effect for good or evil over the existence; and we can also find the 

dates of the principal event of the life. we find many allusion to 

this subject in the bible, and still more in the ancient kabbala. 

the holy kabbala, as it was call by the magi, must not be confounded 

with what is call "the black art"; it is, on the contrary, the 

quintessence of reason and morality as they were understood by the 

ancients and contain that traditional science of the secret of nature 

which, from age to age, is borne towards us as the wave is carry by 

the tide to the shore; but it has been transmit obscurely, because 

the doctrine of the kabbala were known only, in those early ages, to 

the adept and the initiation, later on, of neophyte was only yield 

after a series of severe and terrible ordeals, whilst the revelation of 

its mystery to the uninitiated was punish by death. 

the necessity of silence was, in fact, one of the principal tenet of 

the kabbala and is represented, in the figure of adda-nari,[16] by the 

position of the finger of the hand holding the flowering branch of 

abundance; the thumb and the first two fingers, which in chiromancy 

represent will, power and fatality, are held open; 

whilst the third and fourth fingers, represent light and science, 

are closed. this was meant to indicate to the good—the initiated—that 

they would have, when united, strength and will to direct fate; but 

that they must keep hidden from the wicked and ignorant both light and 

science. it must, however, in justice to the ancient kabbalists, be 

suggest that their inculcate of silence probably arose, not so much 

from a desire of domination, but rather from the fact that, feeling 

themselves superior in knowledge, they thought they were obey a 

divine law in refuse to the wicked those lights which, when possessed 

by them, led, as perhaps they had sometimes found, to error. we, seeing 

things in a wide light, give, or try to give, equal knowledge to all, 

without submit the ignorant to the ordeal of initiation to prove 

their worthy as recipients; but, after all, it amount to much the 

same thing—give to all men truth and light in abundance, but all will 

not profit by it. we see this every day in our college system; the 

lesson is the same for all, but it is only the few who profit by it; 

and although we appear to be obey a divine law in opening the way of 

light and life—the life of knowledge—to all, as god make his sun to 

shine on good and bad equally, still we can, in some sort, understand 

the feeling of the ancient magi, whose motto was: "know, dare, will, 

but keep silence." 

to face chapter xvi. 



chapter xvi. 

the principal lines in the hand and the mount 

in the plate belong to this chapter we give a hand on which are 

marked the principal lines seen on the palm; three of which, viz., the 

line of life, the line of head and the line of heart, are found in a 

clear or faint degree on all hands, but which vary, as regards 

their relative position, in every hand. the first and largest, that 

which encircle the thumb, is call the line of life; by the length, 

colour and evenness, or the reverse, of this line the length of life is 

indicated, and also the illness and accident by which the life is 

menace in running its course. the line immediately above it, crossing 

the palm of the hand, is the line of head; by it we are to judge of the 

intellectual powers. above it is the line of heart, from which we form 

an opinion of the strength of affection, or the want of it, in the 

native. 

the lines which are not always to be found are the lines go from the 

wrist to the finger of saturn, which is call the saturnian line, and 

which show the event of the life; the line of the sun, which go 

towards the finger of the sun and which indicate success in art, 

literature, or the pursuit of riches; and the line of health, which 

go from the wrist to the finger of mercury: this line is often absent 

in a hand. 

all these lines will be more fully discuss further on; at present it 

is only necessary to name them in order to explain the plate belong 

to this chapter. 

at the base of each figure there is a mount, more or less developed, on 

every hand. now, each of these mount correspond with one of the 

planet from which it has received more or less influence, according to 

its development, and the sign or mark to be found upon it. 

it will be seen also, from the plate, that the ancients gave to each 

finger the name of one of the planets, thus:— 

the first finger represent jupiter, the mount at its base being 

call the mount of jupiter. 

the second, saturn, the mount at its root being the mount of saturn. 

the third, the sun, the mount below being the mount of the sun. 

the fourth, mercury, the mount at its base being call the mount of 

mercury. 

the thumb is sacred to venus, and the root of the thumb is call the 

mount of venus. 

it will also be seen that the planet mars (although no finger is 

dedicated to it) is twice represent in the hand, along the side of 

the palm by the mount of mars, and in the palm, between the line of 

life and the line of the head, which is call the plain of mars. 

the moon is only represent by the mount of the moon, at the lower 

part of the palm on the opposite side of the hand to the thumb. 

when these mount are well in their places, and clearly but not too 

strong defined, they give the quality of the planet they represent; 

but when any mount is not well marked, or even, as frequent happens, 

is quite deficient, there is a want of the quality shown to exist 

where the mount is clearly defined. if the mount are not only 

ill-defined, but represent by a cavity, that cavity would indicate 

the existence of quality which are the reverse of those indicate by 

the mount; whereas an exceed development would denote an excess of 

the quality given by the mount. 

thus the mount of jupiter, which is immediately under the index finger, 

when fairly developed, indicate noble ambition, will-power, love of 

nature, kindliness, generosity, religion and happy marriage. when in 

excess—that is, when the mount is so large as to invade that next 

it—the mount of saturn—it give superstition, exaggerate pride and 

domineer self-assertion. the total absence of this mount (which is 

sometimes, but rarely, seen) indicate coldness, selfishness, 

irreligion and that want of dignity which is produce by the utter 

absence of self-respect. 

the mount of saturn is found immediately beneath the second finger, 

which the ancients assign to saturn, the planet of fatality. saturn 

give extreme misfortune, or extreme good fortune, according to the 

development of the mount and the sign and lines to be seen upon it, 

and the course of the saturnian line, or line of fate (of which we will 

speak further on), in the palm of the hand. this mount also denote a 

tendency to occult science. those born specially under the influence of 

saturn are timid, lovers of solitude, and very seldom marry, but are 

very persistent in their affection when they do love. 

saturn, when well developed, give prudence, wisdom and, to a certain 

extent, success; when in excess it give sadness, taciturnity, 

asceticism, dread of the after-life and yet, sometimes, a 

predisposition to suicide. the total absence of the mount indicate an 

insignificant existence. 

the mount of the sun is placed at the root of the third finger, which 

was sacred to the sun; when this mount is well develop it indicate 

love of art and literature, which show itself (according to 

temperament) in poetry, painting, sculpture, or music; it give also 

religion of the æsthetic, tolerant sort, grace, riches and celebrity; 

in excess it give love of show, frivolity and vaingloriousness. the 

total absence of the mount means a thorough material existence; 

absence of all taste for art—a life without colour, a day without 

sunlight. 

the mount of mercury is found at the base of the fourth finger, and, 

when well defined, indicate intelligence, success in science and in 

occult studies, the love of work and activity, both of mind and body 

and eloquence; in excess it give impudence, theft and falsehood: 

absence of the mount indicate no aptitude for science, no 

intellectuality—a negative existence. of course, should the mount of 

the sun be well defined, the last quality would be overridden by the 

success which that indicates. 

the mount of mars is at the side of the hand opposite the thumb, just 

below the mount of mercury, and, when well developed, indicate 

courage, ardour and resolution; in excess it give cruelty, anger, 

revenge and tyranny: the absence of the mount give cowardice and want 

of self-command. 

the mount of the moon is found immediately below that of mars, and, 

when well developed, give imagination of the dreamy, sentimental 

order, gentle melancholy and love of solitude; in excess it give 

morbid melancholy, caprice and fantastic imagination: the absence of 

the mount indicate want of poetry in the nature, positivism. 

the mount of venus, which is form by the root of the thumb, 

indicates, when fairly developed, love of the beautiful, melody in 

music, the desire of pleasing and sensuous tenderness; in excess it 

give love of material pleasures, coquetry, inconstant and (when other 

signs, afterwards to be explained, are also seen in the hand) extreme 

sensuality. 


