the project gutenberg ebook of tale of destiny, by edmund mitchell 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 

almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 

re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 

with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

title: tale of destiny 

author: edmund mitchell 

release date: august 10, 2006 [ebook #19017] 

language: english 

character set encoding: iso-8859-1 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook tale of destiny *** 

produce by r. cedron, joseph r. hauser and the online 

distribute proofread team at http://www.pgdp.net 

tale of 

destiny 

by 

edmund mitchell 

london 

constable and company ltd 

1913 

copyright, 1912, 

united states of america, 

by 

edmund mitchell 

contents 

introduction 

1 

chap. i. 

the maid of jhalnagor. told by the rajput chief 

5 

ii. 

the hollow column. told by the tax-collector 

19 

iii. 

what the stars ordained. told by the astrologer 

35 

iv. 

the spirit wail. told by the merchant 

60 

v. 

the blue diamonds. told by the fakir 

101 

vi. 

the tiger of the pathans. told by the afghanistan general 

128 

vii. 

her mother love. told by the physician 

146 

viii. 

the sacred pickaxe. told by the magistrate. 

170 

tale of destiny 

[pg 1] 

introduction 

just without one of the massive bastion gate of the city of 

fathpur-sikri there stood in the year 1580 a caravanserai that afford 

accommodation for man and beast. here would alight traveller drawn by 

the call of homage, by business, or by curiosity to the famous town of 

victory, built, as the inscription over the gateway told, by "his 

majesty, king of kings, heaven of the court, shadow of god, jalal-ad-din 

mohammed akbar padishah." 

at the time of our story akbar was at the zenith of his glory. he had 

move his court from agra, the capital of his predecessor on the throne 

of the moguls, after have raise for himself, on the spot where the 

birth of a son had been promise him by a hermit saint, this superb new 

city of fathpur-sikri, seven mile in circumference, wall and guarded 

by strong fort at its seven gateways. emperor and noble had vie with 

each other in erect palace of stately design and exquisite finish of 

adornment. a beautiful mosque commemorate the good deed of the saint, 

and provided a place of prayer for those of the moslem faith. in the 

palace of the emperor was a magnificent audience hall, with marble 

column and stone-carved galleries, in the centre of which stood the 

throne of gold sprinkle with rubies, emeralds, and diamonds, surround 

by a silver rail[pg 2]ing, and cover by a canopy of rich crimson brocade. 

in this audience hall the great and good akbar was wont to receive not 

only his subjects, rich and poor, the former assemble to pay their 

court, the latter to lay their grievance before the imperial judge; but 

he also extend welcome to stranger from afar. on the question of 

religion his mind was at this period in a state of change, for he had 

broken from the strict faith of the moslem, had public announce that 

there was good in all beliefs, had overthrown ceremonial rules, whether 

of islam or of hinduism, and had proclaim all things lawful except 

excess. his thought thus drift toward a new religion, a divine faith 

that would bring into one fold the votary of all religions, he was 

glad at his court to give audience to learned doctor from distant lands 

as well as from every part of india. all were welcome—brahmins and 

buddhists, moslem schoolmen, hindu fanatics, pantheists, the worship 

of fire, the jew whose prophets are abraham and moses, even christian 

padre from far-off europe. it was akbar's delight to listen to their 

exposition and discussions, and to the defence of their varied dogmas. 

thus did the fame of the king for tolerance, benevolence and wisdom 

become noise abroad far and wide, so that visitor flock in 

ever-increasing numbers to the beautiful city. at our caravanserai 

without the gate there would often, in the cool of an evening, be 

gather together on the shade veranda a group of traveller 

represent diverse races[pg 3] and classes. some of the town-dwellers, too, 

would be there, rest and refreshing themselves after their walk to 

the city walls, while from the near-by camp of the rajputs, who form a 

portion of the royal bodyguard, there would oftentime stroll over a few 

men-at-arms. 

on such occasion it would generally happen that the debate recently 

listen to in the imperial hall of assembly would be subject to 

comment. and from discussion of this kind the conversation would quite 

frequent change to story-telling, dear to the heart of all native of 

hindustan, and by no means to be despised, for in a good story there may 

be implant the kernel of a sound philosophy. 

on a summer night in the year name eight men were assemble on the 

veranda of the caravanserai. the full moon had just risen above a tope 

of tamarind trees, and its silvern radiance reveal every detail of the 

scene. a rajput chief occupy the place of central prominence, cushion 

arrange for his convenience, on one of which rest his scimitar, the 

emblem of his soldierly profession. not far from him, in a 

half-reclining posture, was a general of the afghans, also of the 

bodyguard of the emperor. a hakeem, or physician, and an astrologer, 

both in the moslem style of dress, were seat close together, leg 

cross beneath them; while a little apart were two hindus, as the caste 

mark on their forehead showed, a tax-collector from the country and a 

kotwal, or city magistrate. just above the steps leading on to the 

veranda, surround by his[pg 4] bale of merchandise, sat a merchant from 

bombay, a big and stalwart man, attire in spotless white raiment, on 

his head a voluminous muslin turban. in striking contrast, squat on 

the ground below the steps, at his feet a wooden beg bowl, was a 

fakir, or religious ascetic, a loin cloth his sole covering, his face 

bedaub with ashes, his lean chin rest on his upraise knee while 

he listen to the dialogue and watch each speaker's face with eyes of 

keen alertness. 

there had been some desultory conversation, which finally result in 

the rajput chief being beg to relate in detail an experience at which 

he had previous hinted. the first story led to another story, and the 

third to yet another, and so on, until each member of the company had 

contribute to the general entertainment. and these are the tale that 

were told by the traveller on the veranda of the caravanserai outside 

the wall of fathpur-sikri that moonlight night in the days of the 

mighty akbar: 

[pg 5] 
