
i. the maid of jhalnagor 

told by the rajput chief 

well, since you would have it so, listen to the story of rukpur singh, 

hereditary chief of jhalnagor, mansabdar of five hundred men, captain of 

the bodyguard of akbar the great, king of kings, lord of the earth. 

"this day in the hall of assembly, in the presence of the great padishah 

himself, we have listen to the argument of men of diverse faiths. it 

is well. as akbar, the most high, himself has said, all religion are 

good; each man has the god or gods of his fathers; let there be no 

obstacle placed against worship the divine power in any manner that 

seemeth fit. that is both wisdom and justice. that is why i, a hindu, a 

rajput, one of the twice born, can serve my lord, the moslem emperor 

akbar, with loyalty of heart and of sword that no man may question." 

at these words the captain of the bodyguard touched the jewelled hilt of 

his scimitar lie on the cushion by his side. he glance around, as if 

to see whether anyone present dare to question the fidelity he had 

professed. but there was neither movement nor remark among his 

listeners, and with a disdainful little smile of self-complacency he 

resumed. 

"during to-day's discussion, in the spirit of tolerance that akbar[pg 6] 

teach to all of us, we rajput have had to harken to severe 

upbraiding. we are accused of inhumanity because in our home a female 

child may be done away with at birth, lawful and without dishonour. be 

it so; the fact itself i shall not dispute. nor shall i defend the 

practice except to point out that a woman more or less in the world do 

not matter, that the babe suffer no pain and know no ill, that had she 

live it might have been to a life of widowhood—if courage were wanting 

to choose the suttee—and therefore to long days of shame and sorrow. 

"furthermore, has it to be remember that the marriage of one of our 

daughter costs much money. according to the rule of our caste and the 

customs of our race, the ceremony must be worthy of the parent and of 

the position they occupy; all of the district must be feasted, and let 

the expense be grievous as it may it must be borne. to some who are rich 

the money thus spent is of no account. but to other who are poor yet 

proud—and all rajput are proud—a wedding that is seemly for a 

daughter of the house may mean poverty and ruin for the father and 

brother during twenty years to follow. in certain circumstances this 

misfortune cannot be thought of. the honour of the race, the very safety 

of a whole clan, may depend on rigid economy as a provision against 

danger. so it may be both right and wise for an infant daughter to be 

put painless to her death. such was the doctrine my father taught me, 

and his name is blessed." 

the speaker drop his eyes, fold his hand across his breast, and[pg 7] 

for a full minute remain in silent meditation. when at last he look 

up again, there had come over the usually stern and haughty face a 

wonderful glow of kindliness, and his voice took a soft modulation. 

"however, know this, my friends, that in my zenana at jhalnagor there 

are little girls—three, and more will be welcome should the divine 

krishna send them. three little daughter have i, all born of my wife 

lakmibai, the jewel of jhalnagor. with son also am i blessed—two brave 

little boys, of whom i may well be proud. but i love them not more than 

my daughters, nor would i change any one daughter for a son. this do i 

say out of the truth of my heart, and in no wise because fortune has 

been kind to me and mine, and has given us such prosperity that there is 

a fit dower for each daughter without my treasury knowing the loss. 

"so when the learned mullah from stamboul denounce infanticide, i was 

one with him in sympathy, for my inclination is to cherish with love and 

care every female child the gods send. 

"now would you hear how a rajput came to this manner of thinking? my 

story is that of a little maid. listen. it happen just five years gone 

by. 
