the project gutenberg ebook of astral worship, by j. h. hill 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 

almost no restriction whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or 

re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included 

with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org 

title: astral worship 

author: j. h. hill 

posting date: april 6, 2014 [ebook #8855] 

release date: september, 2005 

first posted: august 14, 2003 

language: english 

character set encoding: utf-8 

*** start of this project gutenberg ebook astral worship *** 

produce by david deley 

astral worship 

by 

j. h. hill, m. d. 

“now, what i want is—facts.”—boz. 

contents. 

introduction 

5 

the geocentric system of nature 

13 

the earth 

13 

the firmament 

13 

the planet 

14 

the constellation 

15 

the zodiac 

15 

the sacred numbers 7 and 12 

17 

the twelve thousand year cycle 

18 

the ancient triad 

19 

god sol 

22 

the ancient cosmogony 

30 

fall and redemption of man 

31 

incarnation of god sol 

33 

fable of the twelve labor 

36 

anniversary of solar worship 

40 

the nativity 

40 

epiphany or twelfth day 

41 

lent or lenten season 

42 

passion week 

44 

passion play 

45 

resurrection and easter festival 

46 

annunciation 

48 

ascension 

49 

assumption 

49 

the lord's supper 

50 

transubstantiation 

50 

autumnal crucifixion 

51 

michaelmas 

56 

personification of the division of time 

57 

the hour 

57 

the days 

57 

the month 

58 

the season 

60 

half year of increase days 

63 

half year of decrease days 

63 

last quarter of the year 

64 

zodiac symbol of solar worship 

64 

the sphinx 

65 

the dragon 

66 

the bull 

67 

the ram 

68 

the lamb 

68 

the fish 

71 

sign of the cross 

72 

future rewards and punishment 

74 

the oriental system 

75 

the occidental system 

75 

the second or general judgment 

77 

jewish, or ancient christianity 

79 

the prophecy 

83 

roman or modern christianity 

88 

freemasonry and druid 

109 

the sabbath 

117 

pious fraud 

121 

conclusion 

125 

introduction. 

in an article, entitle "then and now," publish in 

the december number, 1890, of "the arena," its author, 

a distinguished unitarian d.d. of boston, mass., says. 

"astronomy has shatter the fallacy of astrology;" 

and people have found out that the stars are mind their 

own business instead of meddle with theirs." now, 

while it is true that modern astronomy has supersede 

the ancient system, and people have cease to believe that 

the stars are intervene in mundane affairs, nothing 

could be further from the truth than the assertion that 

"astronomy has shatter the fallacy of astrology; 

and those of our reader who will accord to this work an 

unprejudiced peruse can hardly fail to be convinced that 

a large majority of the people of christendom are dominate 

as much by these fallacy as were our pagan ancestry—the 

only difference being a change of name. the 

dogmatic element of religion, which was ancient designate 

as astrology, is now known as theology. 

all the evidence bearing upon the subject indicate 

that the founder of the primary form of religion were a 

sect of philosophers, known as magi, or wise men, of the 

aryan race of central asia, who, have live age before 

any conception of the supernatural had obtain in the 

world, and speculate relative to the "beginnings of 

things," were necessarily confine to the contemplation 

and study of nature, the elements of which they believe 

to be self-existent and endless in duration; but, being 

wholly without knowledge of her inherent forces, they 

explain her manifold process by conceive the idea 

that she was animate by a great and inherent soul or 

spirit, emanate from which impress all her parts 

with life and motion. thus, endow man, and other 

animals, with soul emanate alike from the imaginary 

great soul of nature, they believed, and taught, that immediately 

after death all soul were absorb into their 

source, where, as "the dewdrop slips into the shining 

sea," all personal identity was forever lost. hence we see 

that although recognize the soul as immortal, considering 

it, not as an entity existing independent of matter, but 

as the spirit of matter itself, the primary religion was the 

exponent of the purest form of materialism. 

being the astronomer of their day, and mistake 

the apparent for the real, the ancient magi construct 

that erroneous system of nature known as the geocentric, 

and, in conformity thereto, compose a collection of astronomical 

allegories, in which the emanate from the 

imaginary great soul of nature, by which they believe 

all material we're impress with life and motion, were 

personify and made to play their respective parts. base 

the religion they institute upon their system of allegorical 

astronomy, and making its personification the 

object of worship, they thus originate the anthropomorphic 

or man-like gods, and, claim to have compose 

them under the inspiration of these self same divinities, 

they designate them as sacred records, or scriptures, 

and taught the ignorant masses that they were literal histories, 

and their personification real personages, who, 

have once live upon earth, and; for the good of mankind, 

perform the wondrous works impute to them, 

were then in heaven whence they came. 

thus we see that the primary religion, which is popularly 

known as paganism, was found in the worship 

of personify nature; that, according special homage to 

the imaginary genii of the stars, and inculcate supreme 

adoration to the divinity supposed to reside in the sun, it 

was ancient known by the general name of astrolatry, 

and by the more specific one of solar worship; and that its 

founders, arrogate to themselves the title of astrologers, 

gave to its dogmatic element the name of astrology. 

in study the primitive form of religion it will be 

found that none of them taught anything relative to a 

future life, for the simple reason that their founder had 

no conception of such a state. hence it follow that the 

law they enact were intended solely for the regulation 

of their social relations, and, to secure their observance, 

they were embody into their sacred record and made 

part of their religion. one form of that most ancient 

worship was known as sabaism, or sabism. another 

form of the same religion was the ancient judaism, as 

portray in the old testament, and more especially in 

the pentateuch, or first five books; in the decalogue of 

which the only promise made for the observance of one of 

the commandment is length of days on earth; and, in a 

general sum up of the blessing and curse to be 

enjoy or suffered, for the observance or violate of the 

laws, as record in the 28th chapter of deuteronomy, it 

will be seen they are all of a temporal character only. at 

the beginning of the christian era there were still in existence 

a sect of jew known as sadducees, who were strict 

adherent to the primitive form of worship, and their belief 

relative to the state of the dead we find record in 

ecclesiastes xii., 7, which reads: "then shall the dust return 

to earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to god 

who gave it." 

for age the doctrine of soul absorption, immediately 

after death, constitute the belief of mankind; but ultimately 

recognize the fact that the temporal punishment 

of the existing law were wholly inadequate to the 

prevention of crime, and conceive the idea that the 

ignorant and vicious masses could be govern with a 

sure hand by appealing to the sentiment of hope and 

fear in relation to the rewards and punishment of an 

imaginary future life, the ancient astrologer resolve to 

remodel the dogmatic elements of religion so as to include 

that doctrine. but realize the necessity, of suppress 

the belief in the absorption of all souls, immediately 

after death, they cease to teach it, and ultimately it 

was embody in that secret and unwritten system known 

as the esoteric philosophy, in which the astrologer 

formulate their own private belief, and which for many 

century was kept from the knowledge of the uninitiated 

by their successor in the priestly office. as they were 

the sole custodian of the scriptures, they made do change 

in their verbiage, but, add the doctrine of future rewards 

and punishment to that written and openly taught 

system of faith known as the exoteric creed, they made it 

the more impressive by institute a system of imposing 

rite and ceremonies, which they designate as mysteries, 

into which they initiate the neophytes, and in which were 

portrayed, in the most vivid manner, the rewards and 

punishment of the imaginary future life, which they 

taught were the award of the gods for the observance or 

violate of the laws. these teaching were inculcate in 

the lesser degree only, but those who were found worthy 

of so great a distinction were also induct into the higher 

degrees, in which was impart the knowledge of the 

esoteric philosophy. in both the lesser and higher degree 

the initiate received instruction in an oral manner 

only; and all were bound by the most fearful oath not to 

reveal the secret impart to them. 

thus were the votary of the ancient astral worship 

divide into two distinct classes, the esoterics, or gnostics; 

and the exoterics, or agnostics; the former comprise 

those who knew that the gods were mythical and 

the scripture allegorical; and the latter, those who were 

taught that the gods were real, and the scripture historical; 

or, in other words, it was philosophy for the cultured 

few, and religion for the ignorant multitude. the initiate 

into the secret of these two system recognize 

them as the two gospels; and paul must have had reference 

to them in his epistle to the galatian ii., 2, where he 

distinguish the gospel which he preach on ordinary 

occasion from that gospel which he preach "privately 

to them which were of reputation." 

such was the system of astrolatry, which, originate 

in the orient, and becoming, after being remodel 

in egypt, the prototype of all occidental form of worship, 

was recognized, successively, as the state religion of 

the grecian and roman empires; and we propose to describe 

the erroneous system of nature upon which it was 

based, and to develop the origin of its cycles, dogmas, 

ordinances, anniversaries, personification and symbols, 

with the view to prove that it was the very same system 

which was ultimately perpetuate under the name of 

christianity. we also propose to present the origin and 

abridge history of its two forms, the jewish, or ancient, 

and the roman, or modern; and to give an account of the 

conflict between the votary of the latter, and the adherent 

to the establish form of worship, which culminate 

in the fourth century in the substitute of christianity 

as the state religion of the roman empire. we furthermore 

propose to show the change to which the creed and 

scripture were subject during the middle ages, and at 

the reformation in the sixteenth century, through which 

they assume the phase as now taught in the theologies, 

respectively of catholicism and orthodox protestantism. 

we also present an article relative to freemasonry and 

druidism, for the purpose of showing that, primarily, they 

were but different form of the ancient astrolatry. we 

also devote a few page to the subject of the sabbath, and 

to that of "pious frauds." 

note.—for the matter publish in this work, we are 

principally indebted to the writings of robert taylor, an erudite 

but recusant minister of the church of england, who flourish 

about seventy years ago, and who, being too honest to 

continue to preach what, after thorough investigation, he did 

not believe, began to give expression to his doubt by writing 

and lecturing. not being able to cope with his arguments, the 

clergy, under the charge of the impossible crime of blasphemy, 

had him imprison for more than two years, during which 

time he wrote his great work entitle "the diegesis," which 

should be read by all person who are investigate the claim 

of the christian religion to divine authenticity. 



roman or modern christianity. 

have present the evidence that the jewish, or 

ancient christianity, originate at the university of alexandria, 

under greece rule, we now propose to show that its 

modern form emanate from the same source, under roman 

rule; but, before enter upon this investigation, it 

is important to become conversant with the sentiment 

manifest towards religion by the cultured element of 

roman society in that enlightened era, which, designate 

as the golden age of literature, was adorn by such distinguished 

orators, philosophers, historians, poet and 

naturalist as cicero, tacitus, pliny, horace and virgil. 

