the geocentric system of nature. 

in construct their system of nature, the ancient 

astronomer constitute it of the earth, the firmament, 

the planets, the constellation and the zodiac, and we 

will refer to them in the order named. 

the earth. 

believe that the earth was the only world, that it 

was a vast circular plane, and that it was the fixed and 

immovable center around which revolve the celestial 

luminaries, the ancient astronomers, in conformity to the 

requirement of the doctrine of future rewards and punishments, 

as inculcate in the egypt version of the 

exoteric creed, divide it into an upper and an under, 

or nether world, which they connected by a sinuous and 

tenebrious passage. 

the firmament. 

the azure dome, call the firmament in the book of 

genesis, was believe to be a solid transparency, which 

we find described, in the fourth chapter and sixth verse, 

of that collection of astronomical allegories, call the 

apocalypse, or book of revelation, "as a sea of glass like 

unto crystal." it was represent as being support by 

four pillars, rest upon the earth, one at each of the cardinal 

points, which were designate as "the pillar of 

heaven." conceive the idea that there were window 

in the firmament, the ancient astronomer call them 

"the window of heaven" and taught that they were 

open when it rained, and closed when it cease to rain. 

hence it is evident that the ancient astronomer did not 

refer to these pillar and window in a figurative sense, 

but as real appurtenance to a solid firmament, as will be 

seen by reference to gen. vii. 11, and viii. 2, job xxvi. 11, 

and malachi iii. 10. 

the planets. 

believe that the stars were but mere flambeaux, 

suspend beneath the firmament, and revolving round 

the earth, for the sole purpose of give it light and heat; 

and observing that seven of these, answer to the sun, 

moon, mercury, venus, mars, jupiter and saturn, had 

perceptible movements, in relation to the other luminaries, 

the ancient astronomer designate them as planet 

or wandering stars. 

the constellations. 

perceive that the other celestial luminary maintain 

the same relation to each other, and designate 

them as fixed stars, the ancient astronomer group 

those visible to them into forty-eight constellations; and 

give name to these, they also attach name to the 

stars of large magnitude, which was done for the purpose 

of locate and distinguish them with greater 

ease. 

the zodiac. 

through twelve of these constellations, mostly contained 

within a belt of 16 degree in width, and within 

which the planet appear to revolve, the ancient astronomer 

inscribe a central line represent the ecliptic, or 

apparent orbit of the sun, which they divide into 360 

degrees; and quartering these to denote the seasons, they 

name the cardinal points the summer and winter solstices, 

and the vernal and autumnal equinoxes; the 

former refer to the longest and shortest days of the 

year; and the latter to the two periods when the days and 

nights are equal. an abbreviatory sign have been attach 

to each of these constellations, the great celestial 

belt contain them was call "the wheel of the signs," 

or "a wheel in the middle of a wheel," as designate by 

that old astrologer, ezekiel the prophet, in chap. i. and 

16th verse. but for the reason that, with only one exception, 

the form of living things, either real or mythical, 

were given to them, this belt, ultimately, wad designate 

as the zodiac; or circle of living creatures, see ezekiel, 

chap. i. constitute the essential feature of the ancient 

astronomy, we present, in our frontispiece, a diagram of 

the zodiac, as ancient represented, to which, as well as 

to burritts' celestial atlas, our reader will be necessitate 

to make frequent reference. 

recent research among the ruins of ancient city 

have develop the fact that several century before the 

beginning of our era the astronomer had invent the 

telescope, and discover the true or heliocentric system 

of nature; but for the reason that religion had been base 

upon the false, or geocentric system, it was deem prudent 

not to teach it to the masses. hence, hiding it away 

among the other secret of the esoteric philosophy, the 

knowledge of it was lost during the middle ages; and 

when rediscovered, the hierarchy of the church of rome, 

upon the plea that it was contrary to the teaching of 

scripture, resort to inquisitorial torture to suppress 

its promulgation; but, in spite of all their efforts, it has 

been universally accepted; and, in this otherwise enlightened 

age, we have present to us the anomaly of a religion 

base upon a false system of astronomy, while its 

votary believe in the true system. 

