sign op the cross. 

among the numerous symbol of solar worship, besides 

those we have already refer to, there are three 

to which we will direct attention. two of these were of 

astronomical signification: the one adopt when the 

spring equinox was in the sign of taurus and shaped like 

the letter t, was the model after which the ancient temple 

were built; and the other, shaped like the letter x, in reference 

to the angle of 23½ degree made by the crossing 

of the ecliptic and the celestial equator, is known as st. 

andrew's cross. the third, and most important of all the 

symbol of solar worship, in its relation to the christian 

religion, which, have no astronomical signification, 

originate in egypt, in reference to the annual inundation 

of the river nile. to mark the height to which the water 

should rise to secure an abundant harvest, post were 

plant upon its bank to which cross beam were attach 

thus ┼. if the water should rise to the designate 

height, it was call "the waters of life," or "river 

of life;" and, ultimately, this form of the cross was adopt 

as the symbol of the life to come, or eternal life; and the 

ancient astrologer had it engrave upon stone, encircle 

with a hieroglyph inscription to that effect, one of 

which was discover in the ruins of the temple erect 

at alexandria, and dedicated to "our lord and saviour 

serapis." 

but, if the water fail to rise to the require height, 

and the horrors of starvation becoming the inevitable result, 

it was the custom of the people to nail to these cross 

symbolic personification of the demon of famine. to 

indicate the sterility of the domain over which he reigned, 

he was represent by the figure of a lean and haggard 

man, with a crown of thorn upon his head; a reed cut 

from the river's bank was placed in his hands, as his unreal 

sceptre; and, considering the inhabitant of judea as the 

most slavish and mean-spirited race in their knowledge, 

they placard this figure with the inscription: "this is 

the king of the jews." thus, to the ancient egyptians, 

this sign of the cross was blessed or accursed as it was 

represent with, or without, this figure suspend 

upon it. 

when the roman, or modern, form of christianity 

was instituted, the hieroglyph inscription signify 

the life to come or eternal life was substitute by a placard 

nail to the cross with the letters i. n. r. i. inscribe 

upon it, which are the initial of the latin words convey 

the same meaning. but if we would learn how the 

figure of a man came to be suspend upon this form of 

the cross, we must refer to mediaeval history, which 

teach that in the year 680, under the pontificate of agathon, 

and during the reign of constantine pogonat, at the 

sixth council of the church, and third at constantinople, it 

was ordered in canon 82 that "instead of a lamb, the figure 

of a man nail to a cross should be the distinguish 

symbol of the christian religion." now, as this figure 

is represent by that of a lean and haggard man, with a 

crown of thorn upon his head, do it not look as if the 

old egypt demon of famine was the model after 

which it was constructed? 

future rewards and punishments. 

in the ancient astrolatry, two different system of 

future rewards and punishment were inculcated; the 

oriental or east indian, and the occidental or egyptian; 

the former, ignore the resurrection of the body, taught 

but one judgment immediately after death, and the latter 

inculcate an individual judgment immediately after 

death, the resurrection of the body, and a general judgment 

at the end of the world, or conclusion of the 12,000 

year cycle. 

the oriental system. 

considering perfect happiness to consist in absolute 

rest, the oriental astrologer conceive a state of eternal 

and unconscious repose, equivalent to soul absorption, 

to which they gave the name of nirvana, into which they 

taught that, by the award of the gods, the soul of the 

righteous, or those who had live what they call "the 

contemplative life," would be permit to enter immediately 

after death. but, for the soul of sinners, they invent 

a system of expiatory punishment which, known 

as the metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, taught 

that they would be compel to successive animate the 

body of beasts, birds, fishes, etc., for a thousand years 

before being permit to enter the nirvana. 

the occidental system. 

in concoct the doctrine of the first judgment the 

egypt astrologers, ignore the nirvana, inculcate 

the future sentient existence of the soul; and, while retain 

the metempsychotial expiate of the oriental system, 

taught that its rewards, and principal punishments, 

would be enjoy or suffer in the under or nether 

world, the existence of which they had conceive in construct 

their system of nature. this imaginary region, 

known to the egypt as the amenti, to the greece as 

hades, and to the hebrew as sheol, was divide by an 

impassable gulf into the two states of happiness and 

misery which were designate in the grecian mythology 

as the elysium, or elysian fields, and the tartarus. in 

the lower part of the latter was located the phlegethon, 

or lake of fire and brimstone, the smoke from which ascend 

into an upper apartment. 

in this system it was taught that the soul of the 

two extreme of society, constitute of the righteous 

and the great sinners, would be consign immediately 

after the first judgment, the one to the elysium, and the 

other to the phlegethon, where they were to remain until 

the second or general judgment; while the soul of less 

venial sinners, constitute the greater mass of mankind, 

before being permit to enter the elysium would be 

compel to suffer the expiatory punishment of the 

metempsychosis, or in the upper region, or "smoky row" 

of the tartarus. such was the egypt purgatory, and 

its denizen constitute "the spirits in prison" refer to 

in i. peter iii. 19, from which the astrologer claim to 

have the power to release, provided their survive friends 

paid liberally for their propitiatory offices; and, from this 

assumption, the clergy of the catholic church derive the 

idea of saying masses for the repose of the soul. these 

doctrine were carry by pythagoras from egypt to 

greece about 550 years before the beginning of our era; 

and passing from thence to rome, the greece and latin 

poet vie with each other in portray hades and the 

joy and terror of its two states. 

the second or general judgment. 

the egypt astrologers, recognize the soul as 

a material entity, and conceive the idea that in the 

future life it would require a material organization for its 

perfect action, taught that at the general judgment it 

would be re-united to its resurrect body. in conformity 

to this belief, job is made to say in chapter xix. 25, 26, 

"i know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand 

at the latter day upon the earth; and though worm destroy 

this body, yet in my flesh shall i see god." the 

higher class egyptians, however, fear that their existence 

would continue to be of the same shadowy and intangible 

character after the second judgment, as they believe 

it would be in the amenti, if worm were allow to 

destroy their bodies, hope to preserve them until that 

time by the process of embalming. 

the imaginary event to occur in connection with 

the second judgment, which, constitute the finale of the 

plan of redemption, and inculcate in what are known as 

the doctrine of second adventism, were to be inaugurate 

by an archangel sound a trumpet summon 

the quick and the dead to appear before the bar of the 

gods to receive their final awards. at the second judgment, 

designate in the allegory as "the last day," "day 

of judgment," "great and terrible day of the lord," etc., 

it was taught that the tenth and last saviour would make 

his second advent by descend upon the clouds, and 

after the final awards, the elect being caught up "to meet 

the lord in the air" (i. thes. iv. 17), the heaven and the 

earth would be reduce to chaos through the agency of 

fire. in reference to that grand catastrophe we find it 

record in ii. peter iii. 10, that "the heaven shall pass 

away with a great noise and the elements shall melt with 

fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein 

shall be burn up." 

after the organization of a new heaven and a new earth 

it was taught that upon the latter would descend a beautiful 

city, with pearly gate and golden streets, call the 

city of god, the kingdom of god, the kingdom of heaven 

or new jerusalem, in which the host of the redeem 

would, with their lord and saviour, enjoy the millennium, 

or thousand years of happiness unalloyed with evil; 

and such was the kingdom for the speedy coming of 

which the votary of astral worship were taught to pray 

in what is known as the lord's prayer. 

according to the teaching of the allegories, there were 

to be no sun, moon or stars during the millennium, their 

author have arrange it so that the light of those luminary 

would not be needed, as we find record in rev. 

xxi. 23, and xxii. 5: "the city had no need of the 

sun, neither of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of 

god did lighten it," and "there shall be no night there; 

and they need no candle, neither the light of the sun; for 

the lord god giveth them light." it must be remembered, 

when reading the fanciful idea relative to the city 

of god, that they were compose by men who, living in 

a very ignorant age, gave free rein to fervid imaginations. 
