
fall and redemption of man. 

religion have been base upon the worship of personify 

nature, it is evident that its founder fabricate 

its dogmatic element from their conception of her destructive 

and reproductive process as manifest in the 

rotation and diversity of the seasons. the apparent retreat 

of the sun from the earth, in winter, and his return in 

the spring, suggest the idea of a figurative death and 

resurrection of the genius of that luminary, they applied 

these phenomena of the year to man, and compose the 

allegory relative to his fall and redemption, as inculcate 

in the exoteric creed. in the allegory relate to the fall, 

it was taught that, after making the first human pair, the 

lord of good or the lord god placed them in a beautiful 

garden—corresponding to the season of fruits and flower 

or month of spring and summer, with the injunction, 

under a penalty, not to eat of the fruit of a certain tree. 

when the lord of evil, or devil, symbolize by the serpent 

and represent by the constellation "serpens" 

placed in conjunction with the autumnal equinox, meeting 

them on the confines of his dominion, and tempt 

the woman, and she the man, they ate of the forbidden 

fruit; thus, fall from their first estate, and commit 

the original sin, they involved the whole human race in the 

consequence of their disobedience. then the lord god, 

pronounce a curse against the serpent, clothe the man 

and woman with skin to protect them against the inclement 

of his, dominion as lord of evil, and drove them 

from the garden; after which they were necessitate to 

earn their bread by till the ground. 

in, reference to the plan of redemption, the ancient 

astrologer divide the 6,000 years appropriate to man, 

as the duration of his race on earth, into ten equal cycles, 

and taught that at the conclusion of each god sol, as 

lord of good, would manifest himself in the flesh, to destroy 

his works as lord of evil, and through suffering 

and death make an atone for sin. thus have originate 

the doctrine of original sin, incarnation and vicarious 

atonement, as parts of the plan of redemption, and 

making its finale correspond, in point of time, to the conclusion 

of the 12,000 year cycle, their successor in the 

priestly office ultimately inculcate the additional dogma 

of the general judgment and future rewards and punishments, 

as we have shown in our introduction. 

have base the fable of the fall and redemption of 

man upon the idea that he was impelled, without his 

volition, to pass from the dominion of god to that of the 

devil, or in other words, upon his subjection to the inexorable 

necessity which make the inclement season 

of autumn and winter succeed the beneficent one of 

spring and summer, its author compose the original 

of the text which, found in roman viii., 20, read that 

"the creature was made subject to vanity (evil), not willingly, 

but by reason of him who hath subject the same 

in hope." 

but for the popular teaching in favor of its being 

literal history, no one could read the account of the fall of 

man, as record in the third chapter of genesis, without 

recognize it as simply an allegory; or fail to realize, the 

force of the argument of no fall, no redemption, and if no 

redemption, no god to reward or devil to punish; no hell 

to suffer, or heaven to enjoy. the fact is that these are 

but antithetic idea which came in together, and must 

survive or perish together. they cannot be separate 

without destroy the whole theology fabric. 

incarnation of god sol. 

believe that god sol was necessitate to remain at 

his post to direct the course of the sun, the ancient astrologer 

conceive the idea of teaching that, attend by a 

retinue of subordinate genii, he descended to earth 

through the medium of incarnation at the end of 600 year 

cycles, to perform the work of man's redemption and, 

have made virgo of the zodiac the mother of the solar 

divinity, they taught in their allegorical astronomy, or 

scriptures, that his incarnation were born of a virgin. 

hence we find that god sol, usually designate by the 

title of the word, "was made flesh, and dwelt among us." 

john i., 14. 

in a discourse upon this text deliver by tillotson, 

archbishop of canterbury, in the year 1680, publish in 

the fourth volume of woodhouse's edition of his grace's 

sermons, in the year 1744, concerning the incarnation of 

our blessed saviour, he explain the necessity of incarnation 

by saying that "there was likewise a great inclination 

in mankind to the worship of a visible deity, so god was 

pleased to appear in our nature, that they, who were so 

fond of a visible deity, might have one, even a true and 

natural image of god the father, the express image of 

his person." it only require a little reflection to appreciate 

the prelate's covert irony and want of faith. 

have ascribe to the imaginary incarnation of 

god sol the characteristic of heaven-descending, virgin-born, 

earth-walking, wonder-working, dying, resuscitate 

and ascend son of god, the ancient astrologer 

attach to them the several title of saviour, redeemer, 

avatar, divine-helper, shiloh, messiah, christ; and, in 

reference to their foster-father, that of son of man. 

teaching that they continue to make intercession for sin, 

after their ascension to the right hand of the father, they 

were also call intercessors, mediate or advocate 

with the father. from teaching their appearance every 

600 years originate the egypt legend of the phoenix, 

a bird said to descend from the sun at these intervals, and, 

after being consume upon the altar in the temple of on, 

or city of the sun—called heliopoli by the greeks—would 

rise from its ashes and ascend to its source. according 

to the civil law of egypt, manhood was not 

attain until the age of thirty years. hence the earthly 

mission of incarnate saviour was made to begin at that 

age; and for the reason that, relate to the apparent transit 

of the sun through the twelve sign of the zodiac, it 

was complete during the period of one year. 

to impress the ignorant masses with the belief that 

the scripture were literal histories, and the incarnate 

saviour real personages, the ancient astrologer cause 

tomb to be erect in which it was claim they were 

buried. such sepulchre were erect to hercules at 

cadiz, to apollo at delphi, and to other saviour at many 

other places, to which their respective votary were induce 

to perform pilgrimages. in egypt the pyramid 

were built, partly for astronomical purposes, and partly 

as tomb for saviours, claim to have been kings, who 

had once rule over the country; and why should we not 

recognize that magnificent structure known as the church 

of the holy sepulchre, at jerusalem, as but another of 

those tomb of saviour in which no saviour was ever entombed? 

thus we have shown that it was god sol, the only 

begotten of the father, or second person in the sacred 

triad, to whom supreme adoration was inculcate in all 

form of the ancient astrolatry; and that its cultured 

votaries, understanding that the doctrine pertain to 

the fall and redemption of man were evolve from the 

figurative death and resurrection of the solar divinity, 

recognize the doctrine of incarnation as a priestly invention 

intended only for the ignorant masses. 

