

CHAPTER X

But see, his face is black and full of blood;

His eye-balls farther out than when he lived,

Staring full ghastly like a strangled man,

His hair uprear’d, his nostrils stretch d with struggling,

His hands abroad display’d, as one that grasp’d

And tugg’d for life, and was by strength subdued

Henry VI, Part II

The Sheriff-depute of the county arrived at Ellangowan next morning by

daybreak. To this provincial magistrate the law of Scotland assigns

judicial powers of considerable extent, and the task of inquiring into all

crimes committed within his jurisdiction, the apprehension and commitment

of suspected persons, and so forth. [Footnote: The Scottish sheriff

discharges, on such occasions as that now mentioned, pretty much the same

duty as a coroner.]

The gentleman who held the office in the shire of---at the time of this

catastrophe was well born and well educated; and, though somewhat pedantic

and professional in his habits, he enjoyed general respect as an active

and intelligent magistrate. His first employment was to examine all

witnesses whose evidence could throw light upon this mysterious event, and

make up the written report, proces verbal, or precognition, as it is

technically called, which the practice of Scotland has substituted for a

coroner’s inquest. Under the Sheriff’s minute and skilful inquiry, many

circumstances appeared which seemed incompatible with the original opinion

that Kennedy had accidentally fallen from the cliffs. We shall briefly

detail some of these.

The body had been deposited in a neighbouring fisher-hut, but without

altering the condition in which it was found. This was the first object of

the Sheriff’s examination. Though fearfully crushed and mangled by the

fall from such a height, the corpse was found to exhibit a deep cut in the

head, which, in the opinion of a skilful surgeon, must have been inflicted

by a broadsword or cutlass. The experience of this gentleman discovered

other suspicious indications. The face was much blackened, the eyes

distorted, and the veins of the neck swelled. A coloured handkerchief,

which the unfortunate man had worn round his neck, did not present the

usual appearance, but was much loosened, and the knot displaced and

dragged extremely tight; the folds were also compressed, as if it had been

used as a means of grappling the deceased, and dragging him perhaps to the

precipice.

On the other hand, poor Kennedy’s purse was found untouched; and, what

seemed yet more extraordinary, the pistols which he usually carried when

about to encounter any hazardous adventure were found in his pockets

loaded. This appeared particularly strange, for he was known and dreaded

by the contraband traders as a man equally fearless and dexterous in the

use of his weapons, of which he had given many signal proofs. The Sheriff

inquired whether Kennedy was not in the practice of carrying any other

arms? Most of Mr. Bertram’s servants recollected that he generally had a

couteau de chasse, or short hanger, but none such was found upon the dead

body; nor could those who had seen him on the morning of the fatal day

take it upon them to assert whether he then carried that weapon or not.

The corpse afforded no other indicia respecting the fate of Kennedy; for,

though the clothes were much displaced and the limbs dreadfully fractured,

the one seemed the probable, the other the certain, consequences of such a

fall. The hands of the deceased were clenched fast, and full of turf and

earth; but this also seemed equivocal.

The magistrate then proceeded to the place where the corpse was first

discovered, and made those who had found it give, upon the spot, a

particular and detailed account of the manner in which it was lying. A

large fragment of the rock appeared to have accompanied, or followed, the

fall of the victim from the cliff above. It was of so solid and compact a

substance that it had fallen without any great diminution by splintering;

so that the Sheriff was enabled, first, to estimate the weight by

measurement, and then to calculate, from the appearance of the fragment,

what portion of it had been bedded into the cliff from which it had

descended. This was easily detected by the raw appearance of the stone

where it had not been exposed to the atmosphere. They then ascended the

cliff, and surveyed the place from whence the stony fragment had fallen.

It seemed plain, from the appearance of the bed, that the mere weight of

one man standing upon the projecting part of the fragment, supposing it in

its original situation, could not have destroyed its balance and

precipitated it, with himself, from the cliff. At the same time, it

appeared to have lain so loose that the use of a lever, or the combined

strength of three or four men, might easily have hurled it from its

position. The short turf about the brink of the precipice was much

trampled, as if stamped by the heels of men in a mortal struggle, or in

the act of some violent exertion. Traces of the same kind, less visibly

marked, guided the sagacious investigator to the verge of the copsewood,

which in that place crept high up the bank towards the top of the

precipice.

With patience and perseverance they traced these marks into the thickest

part of the copse, a route which no person would have voluntarily adopted,

unless for the purpose of concealment. Here they found plain vestiges of

violence and struggling, from space to space. Small boughs were torn down,

as if grasped by some resisting wretch who was dragged forcibly along; the

ground, where in the least degree soft or marshy, showed the print of many

feet; there were vestiges also which might be those of human blood. At any

rate it was certain that several persons must have forced their passage

among the oaks, hazels, and underwood with which they were mingled; and in

some places appeared traces as if a sack full of grain, a dead body, or

something of that heavy and solid description, had been dragged along the

ground. In one part of the thicket there was a small swamp, the clay of

which was whitish, being probably mixed with marl. The back of Kennedy’s

coat appeared besmeared with stains of the same colour.

At length, about a quarter of a mile from the brink of the fatal

precipice, the traces conducted them to a small open space of ground, very

much trampled, and plainly stained with blood, although withered leaves

had been strewed upon the spot, and other means hastily taken to efface

the marks, which seemed obviously to have been derived from a desperate

affray. On one side of this patch of open ground was found the sufferer’s

naked hanger, which seemed to have been thrown into the thicket; on the

other, the belt and sheath, which appeared to have been hidden with more

leisurely care and precaution.

The magistrate caused the footprints which marked this spot to be

carefully measured and examined. Some corresponded to the foot of the

unhappy victim; some were larger, some less; indicating that at least four

or five men had been busy around him. Above all, here, and here only, were

observed the vestiges of a child’s foot; and as it could be seen nowhere

else, and the hard horse-track which traversed the wood of Warroch was

contiguous to the spot, it was natural to think that the boy might have

escaped in that direction during the confusion. But, as he was never heard

of, the Sheriff, who made a careful entry of all these memoranda, did not

suppress his opinion, that the deceased had met with foul play, and that

the murderers, whoever they were, had possessed themselves of the person

of the child Harry Bertram.

Every exertion was now made to discover the criminals. Suspicion hesitated

between the smugglers and the gipsies. The fate of Dirk Hatteraick’s

vessel was certain. Two men from the opposite side of Warroch Bay (so the

inlet on the southern side of the Point of Warroch is called) had seen,

though at a great distance, the lugger drive eastward, after doubling the

headland, and, as they judged from her manoeuvres, in a disabled state.

Shortly after, they perceived that she grounded, smoked, and finally took

fire. She was, as one of them expressed himself, ‘in a light low’ (bright

flame) when they observed a king’s ship, with her colours up, heave in

sight from behind the cape. The guns of the burning vessel discharged

themselves as the fire reached them; and they saw her at length blow up

with a great explosion. The sloop of war kept aloof for her own safety;

and, after hovering till the other exploded, stood away southward under a

press of sail. The Sheriff anxiously interrogated these men whether any

boats had left the vessel. They could not say, they had seen none; but

they might have put off in such a direction as placed the burning vessel,

and the thick smoke which floated landward from it, between their course

and the witnesses’ observation.

That the ship destroyed was Dirk Hatteraick’s no one doubted. His lugger

was well known on the coast, and had been expected just at this time. A

letter from the commander of the king’s sloop, to whom the Sheriff made

application, put the matter beyond doubt; he sent also an extract from his

log-book of the transactions of the day, which intimated their being on

the outlook for a smuggling lugger, Dirk Hatteraick master, upon the

information and requisition of Francis Kennedy, of his Majesty’s excise

service; and that Kennedy was to be upon the outlook on the shore, in case

Hatteraick, who was known to be a desperate fellow, and had been

repeatedly outlawed, should attempt to run his sloop aground. About nine

o’clock A.M. they discovered a sail which answered the description of

Hatteraick’s vessel, chased her, and, after repeated signals to her to

show colours and bring-to, fired upon her. The chase then showed Hamburgh

colours and returned the fire; and a running fight was maintained for

three hours, when, just as the lugger was doubling the Point of Warroch,

they observed that the main-yard was shot in the slings, and that the

vessel was disabled. It was not in the power of the man-of-war’s men for

some time to profit by this circumstance, owing to their having kept too

much in shore for doubling the headland. After two tacks, they

accomplished this, and observed the chase on fire and apparently deserted.

The fire having reached some casks of spirits, which were placed on the

deck, with other combustibles, probably on purpose, burnt with such fury

that no boats durst approach the vessel, especially as her shotted guns

were discharging one after another by the heat. The captain had no doubt

whatever that the crew had set the vessel on fire and escaped in their

boats. After watching the conflagration till the ship blew up, his

Majesty’s sloop, the Shark, stood towards the Isle of Man, with the

purpose of intercepting the retreat of the smugglers, who, though they

might conceal themselves in the woods for a day or two, would probably

take the first opportunity of endeavouring to make for this asylum. But

they never saw more of them than is above narrated.

Such was the account given by William Pritchard, master and commander of

his Majesty’s sloop of war, Shark, who concluded by regretting deeply that

he had not had the happiness to fall in with the scoundrels who had had

the impudence to fire on his Majesty’s flag, and with an assurance that,

should he meet Mr. Dirk Hatteraick in any future cruise, he would not fail

to bring him into port under his stern, to answer whatever might be

alleged against him.

