

HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?

"A person who finds a four-leaved clover, and believes it is a harbinger

of something good, has adopted the right attitude, for he keeps a keen

look-out for that particular good and holds out both hands for it. Seldom

is he disappointed, for he has unconsciously set going the mental machinery

which brings his wishes within reach. Had he not found the clover and

had gone along life's highway unexpectant of anything good, he would never

have discovered this pleasant happening. And therein lies the true psychology

of luck, which seems too simple to be true, but then its simplicity

is really the sign-manual of its verity."

This quotation from the writings of a well-known author goes direct to

the point about talismans. If you adopt a talisman and put your faith in

it, you immediately prepare your mind for receiving an abundance of good

fortune. Reject all talismans and argue that there is no such thing as luck,

and you straightway set going the mental machinery which looks on the

dark side of things and which misses every slice of luck that comes along.

Therefore, we say, with emphasis, take to yourself a talisman, a mascot, a

charm—call it what you will—and you will never regret it.

Of talismans, there are countless varieties; some are known the world

over, others are the particular choice of individuals. They range from the[7]

amulets and scarabs of the ancients to the golliwogs and crudities of the

ultra-moderns. Your choice may roam between these two extremes, but

whatever your choice, it must be set with the seal of your faith.

In order to assist you in picking out a talisman for yourself, we append

the following accounts of those examples which are favored most:—

THE HORSE-SHOE.—No symbol is a greater favorite than the horse-shoe.

There are many legends regarding its origin, but the most commonly

accepted concerns the well-known visit of his Satanic Majesty to the shoe-smith.

As a consequence, the Devil evinced a wholesome dread of horseshoes,

and would not go near a house or person possessing one. It is more

likely, however, that the horse-shoe was accepted as a symbol of luck because

it was a commonplace object very nearly the same shape as the metal crescents

worn by the Romans when they wanted to be fortunate. These crescents

were always carried with the horns turned up, and, if a horse-shoe is to bring

good luck, it, too, must be placed with the prongs uppermost. The reason

for the prongs being so turned depends on a belief that misfortune always

travels in circles, but when it reaches the tips of a horse-shoe, it is baffled,

unless all the luck has already run out of the tips through them being turned

downwards.

Of course, an old, worn shoe is more lucky than a new one, and it is

a recognized fact that the more nails found in it the luckier will be the

finder.

THE SCARAB.—This device is accounted very lucky or very unlucky,

according to the disposition of the wearer. The symbol represents the[8]

scarab beetle with its wings outspread or with them closed. Such charms

are made to-day in large numbers for sale in Egypt, but those who trade in

them usually claim that each particular specimen has been in the family

since Biblical times. As a rule, the device is made in a rough kind of bluish

porcelain and is carved, in intaglio, with divine figures. The Egyptians used

to make up the scarab as a neck pendant or as a little ornament for

placing in the coffins of the dead. Its mission was to scare away the evil one.

No. 2.—An Egyptian Scarab, such as were used as talismen. Two forms are shown,

one with the pectoral wings outspread; the other, with wings closed.

THE TET.—This symbol was shaped somewhat like a mallet, and was

always worn with the head uppermost and the handle hanging down. It

was made in porcelain or stone, and was often colored gaudily. The Egyptians

were the first to find efficacy in this charm, and they wore it suspended

around the neck to ward off attacks from visible and invisible enemies.

Thus, it was a protection against evil in any form; it was also supposed to

provide the wearer with strength and endurance. The tet has been much

forgotten of late years, but there are adherents who value it above the horseshoe

and almost any other charm.

No. 3.—The Talisman on the left is the Tet; on the right, the Arrow-Head.

THE ARROW-HEAD.—The early Britons spent a great deal of their

time in taking suitable flints and shaping them into the form of triangles.

These were called arrow-heads, and when the two side edges had been

sharpened they were fixed into sticks and used as weapons or tools. Out

of this use grew the idea that arrow-heads were potent charms in providing

bodily protection against enemy force or the usual illnesses. Accordingly,

people began to wear them as neck ornaments and, for this purpose, decorative

arrow-heads were made. Ever since then, they have been cherished

for their powers in warding off attacks, and a superstition still exists which

claims that if one of these arrow-heads is dipped in water, the water will be

more potent than any doctor's medicine.

THE CADUCEUS.—This device, which figures as part of the design of[9]

some postage stamps, has been considered a bringer of good fortune ever since

the time of the ancient Greeks. It consists of two snakes entwining a rod,

surmounted by a pine cone. By the side of the cone is a pair of wings. It

was the symbol of Mercury. The rod had the supernatural powers of

quelling disputes and letting people dwell in harmony. The snakes possessed

the property of healing; the pine cone preserved good health; and the wings

stood for speed and progress. Thus people wear the caduceus today in order

to ensure a life free from quarrels and illness, and to enable them to be

healthy and "go ahead."

No. 4.—The Caduceus or Staff of Mercury.

THE EYE AGATE.—As is generally appreciated, the "evil eye" is the

source of all trouble and misfortunes, and the early Eastern races thought

that, if the "evil eye" could be avoided or frightened away, all would be well.

Searching for a charm to effect their purpose, they alighted upon the eye agate,

and this they believed would give no quarter to the "evil eye." Accordingly,

agates were cut to resemble an eye which would be powerful enough to

neutralize the effects of the evil one, and these were worn as brooches, rings

and necklaces. The agate chosen for the purpose consisted of thin layers

of stone of various colors. Thus, by cutting the stones oval and removing[10]

parts of the top layers, it was possible to produce a charm closely resembling

a human eye, both in shape and color.

Such eyes are still sold today, and many people treasure them in the hope

that they will ward off evil in any form.

THE JADE AXE-HEAD.—Many jewelers still sell little axe-heads carved

out of jade, for wearing around the neck. The axe-head has been considered

a symbol of strength and vigor ever since primitive times, and jade has a

world-wide reputation as a charm against disease and accidents.

THE SEAL OF SOLOMON.—This device is now regarded as a symbol

of the Jewish religion, but it can be traced to several other religions, and,

no doubt, it dates even farther back than the commencement of the Jewish

era. The triangle with the upward point stood for goodness; the triangle

with the downward point for wickedness; while the two intertwined symbolized

the triumph of good over bad. Those who wear the device contend

that it preserves them from all that is ill, and, at the same time, it gives

them a share of the world's blessings.

No. 5.—The Seal of Solomon, one of the oldest lucky charms in existence.

THE ABRACADABRA.—This charm dates from the second century,

and was a symbol of the Gnostic worship. It often took the form of a little

piece of parchment, folded into the shape of a cross, but it can, also, be seen

as a tablet, made of stone or metal, shaped like an inverted triangle. On

the charm, of whatever shape, was inscribed the following:

A B R A C A D A B R A

B R A C A D A B R

R A C A D A B

A C A D A

C A D

A

[11]

It will be seen that the word "Abracadabra" can be read along the upper

line and also down and up the two sides. This word is said to conceal the

name of God and the charm has the powers of warding off dangers and

sickness.

THE FOUR-LEAF CLOVER OR SHAMROCK.—Everyone knows that

a four-leaf clover or shamrock is supposed to be a bringer of luck and good

fortune. As these are not readily found and, moreover, they soon perish, the

opportunity has been seized by jewelers to produce artificial ones in various

precious and semi-precious metals. To wear either is supposed to avoid

misfortune. It may be mentioned that the four-leaf Shamrock as a charm

has proved immensely popular by those who are interested in the Irish sweepstakes.

BLACK CATS.—Of course, it is lucky for a black cat to walk into your

house, but failing an actual cat, a counterfeit one serves the same purpose.

Thus, people who pin their faith to black cats often make stuffed ones, or

draw pictures of them, and look to the creature of their own handiwork to

serve the role of mascot.

YOUR OWN TALISMAN.—So far, the talismans that have received universal

acceptance have alone been mentioned, but the tendency today is for

enthusiasts to originate a mascot of their very own. It may take any or

every form, according to the whim or fancy of the individual. Maybe you will

prefer to find your own mascot or talisman in this direction. If you have no

preferences, why not constitute a device which embraces your lucky number,

your lucky flower, your lucky color, and so on? It is a suggestion bristling

with opportunities.

Just to show that people are tending towards the idea of choosing a talisman

of their very own, we will conclude with a story that was recently

published.

"There is a precious stone to which the board of directors of a firm of

diamond dealers annually pass a vote of thanks. The stone is a sapphire

and it has been named Shani, meaning 'bringer of luck.'

"Shani was bought by the firm about seventy years ago, and it only

leaves the safe on New Year's Day. A special meeting, attended by every

member of the firm, is then held in the board room. Shani is placed in

the middle of the table and, with hands clasped in prayer, the members

offer thanks for the good luck the sapphire has brought the firm during the

preceding year.

"One of the directors said, 'My grandfather once received a tempting offer

for Shani and yielded, but a few hours after the sapphire had been sent

away he was taken violently ill with fever. The sapphire was brought back

from a distant part of India, and my grandfather became well at once.'"

Should not we all have a Shani?

[12]