
YOUR LUCKY COLOR

The old saying, "green for grief," is a well-known one, and the writer

would rather wear any color on earth than green, not even a green scarf or

belt. Moreover, she sees to it that the other members of the family do not

indulge in the unlucky color. But mind you, green only brings her ill-fortune

when used for wearing apparel. There is no objection, of course, to a green

front-door nor to wallpaper of the same color. For such uses, green plays

its part harmlessly enough.

Though green dresses are more distressing to the writer than a red rag

to a bull, she is quite prepared to admit that many people find it a very

lucky color. This brings us to the point. There is no color that is universally

unlucky; it is only so in the hands of certain individuals. With

others, it may be an absolute harbinger of all that is lucky. Even green may

do this.

Now the question is, "Which is your lucky color?" If you know it, well

and good. Make use of it in every possible way. When wearing dresses

made of it, you will feel more confident of yourself than when arrayed in

something else. You will get more work done, and it will be better work.

The only thing is that you must be sure that it is your lucky color. If you

are not quite sure, the tonic effect is absolutely lost.

Not only should you wear your fortunate color, but it is a good plan

to surround yourself with it. We know a woman who pins her faith to

purple. Her dresses are mostly purple; the wallpaper in her bedroom is

purple; purple casement curtains adorn the windows; there are purple rugs

in various parts of the house; even the back of the hair-brush on her dressing

table is purple. And, since she decided that purple was her lucky color and

used it in every reasonable way, she has had several strokes of marvelous

good fortune.

But, of course, you may say in reply to all this that you do not know

your lucky color. What then? This is where we can give you a little help.

Most people's lucky color depends on the time of their birth and the following

list sets out the birth colors. We know full well that everybody does not

derive good fortune from his birth color, but that they find it in some other

hue. Therefore, the proper course is to make trials with the appropriate

color listed below and, if that does not answer satisfactorily, to choose another

of your own liking and try that. Only by personal experiment can you

finally decide the point.

These are the birth-colors. The first given for any period is the one almost

universally accepted. Those following after the first are, however, favored

by a certain number of people.

[66]

Birth Date

Colors

Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th

Emerald Green

Sapphire Blue

Black

Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th

Various Blues

Dark Green

Feb. 20th to March 20th

Purple

White

Silver

March 21st to April 19th

Rose Red

April 20th to May 20th

Turquoise Blue

Other shades of Blue

May 21st to June 21st

Light shades of Yellow

Orange

Gold

June 22nd to July 22nd

Mauve

White

Silver

July 23rd to August 21st

Gold

Brown

Yellow

Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd

Yellow

Orange

Light Blue

Sept. 23rd to Oct. 23rd

Rose Pink

Yellow

Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd

Dark Green

Red

Brown

Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st

Purple

Blue

COLORS, of course, have certain values attached to them:

White is a symbol of purity.

Red is typical of fire, blood and anger.

Orange stands for marriage.

Green recalls spring and suggests youth and hope.

Purple means royalty and everything regal.

Yellow is associated with great success.

Black is a symbol of sadness and mourning.

[67]

WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?

Ever since time began, it has been a common belief that people derived

luck and good fortune by wearing precious stones. A stone, however, that

brought luck to one person might be ineffective when worn by someone else.

Thus everybody is required to find out which stone he or she must wear in

order to enjoy the utmost good fortune.

As a rule, the stone which any particular person must choose is decided

by the month in which that individual was born. But this it not invariably

the case. Many people have noticed that luck has come to them when they

have been wearing some other stone than that decreed by their birth-month.

And, of course, the opposite has often happened. History records a well-known

case in point. The Hope diamond, for instance, wrecked the lives

of several royal personages, even including some that were born in April;

while an opal, possessed by members of the Spanish royal family, brought

disaster to many people, one after the other, although certain of them were

born in October.

Clearly, then, the proper thing is for all of us to choose our lucky stone

according to our own preferences; but failing any definite preference to

select it according to the month of our birth.

STONES OF THE MONTHS

Twelve verses of poetry have been written which set down in rhyme

the stones for all the months of the year. Here they are:—

JANUARY

By her, who in this month was born,

No gem save Garnets should be worn.

They will ensure her constancy,

True friendship and fidelity.

FEBRUARY

The February born shall find

Sincerity and peace of mind,

Freedom from passion and from care,

If they the Amethyst will wear.

MARCH

Who in this world of ours, their eyes

In March first open, shall be wise,

In days of peril, strong and brave,

And wear a Bloodstone to their grave.

[68]

APRIL

Those who from April date their years,

Should Diamonds wear lest bitter tears

For vain repentance flow: this stone,

Emblem of innocence is known.

MAY

Who first beholds the light of day,

In spring's sweet, flowery month of May,

And wears an Emerald all her life,

Shall be a loved and loving wife.

JUNE

Who comes in summer to this earth

And owes to June her time of birth,

With ring of Agate on her hand

Can health, wealth and lengthy life command.

JULY
