
                                         SECTION III
                        HOW TO READ THE HOROSCOPE
                                            CHAPTER I
                                 THE PLANETS IN THE HOUSES


It is impossible to categorically state the eﬀects which are due to the positions of the planets in the several
Houses, because very much depends upon the signs they are in and the aspects they have from other planets.
The means of judging the eﬀects is very simple, when once the natures of the planets and the dominion of the
several Houses have been thoroughly digested. Thus, it is ﬁrst necessary to see in what House a planet is
situated. Then consider the nature of the planet in the following concrete manner:
      Neptune means chaos, confusion, deception.
      Uranus, eccentricity, originality, estrangement.
      Saturn, privation, hindrance, denial.
      Jupiter, affluence, fruitfulness, increase.
      Sun, dignities, honours.
      Mars, excess, impulse, quarrels.
      Venus, peace, happiness, agreement Mercury, commerce, versatility, adaptability.                              [Pg 52]

      Moon, changes, publicity.
Now look to the things that are governed by the House in which any particular planet is situated at the moment
of birth (Sect. I., chap. iii.).
Suppose Saturn to be found in the 11th House. Saturn is “privation” and the 11th House is the domain of
“Friends.” Hence a paucity of friends, or such as there may be are evil or unfortunate to the subject. Jupiter in
the 2nd House, in the same manner, would signify “increase” of “money and possessions.” Mars in the 7th
would indicate “quarrels” with “partners”; and so on. Each planet reﬂects its own nature upon the aﬀairs
governed by the House in which it is found at the moment of birth.
It will not infrequently happen, however, that there are more than one planet in the same House. Suppose two
planets to occupy the same House. In such case one may be good (Jupiter), and the other evil (Mars). It is then
necessary to take ﬁrst that which ﬁrst comes to the horizon or Midheaven, that is to say, the one which is in the
earlier part of the House, and next that which follows. Thus Saturn followed by Jupiter in the 11th House, would
signify misfortune by means of advisers and friends, followed at a later period in the life by some great good
through the same source. The degrees which separate the planets will indicate the years which elapse between
these changes of fortune. Similarly if there be more than two planets in the same House; in such cases you may
safely predict many changes in that department of life which the House is said to rule.
But the fact of a planet being in a House is not of itself suﬃcient evidence from which to make a judgment. The     [Pg 53]

aspects which that planet has must also be considered, for in this matter Saturn when throwing a good aspect to
any of the Signiﬁcators—the Sun, Moon, Ascendant or Midheaven, and well aspected by other planets, is to be
preferred to Jupiter when the latter is badly placed and aspected; for Jupiter has his own ill eﬀects, and Saturn
has his good inﬂuences. Jupiter is only a beneﬁc when acting by conjunction or good aspect with another
planet, and Saturn is only a malefic when acting by conjunction or evil aspect.
These things being duly considered, it is possible to arrive, with even brief experience, at the results that are
signified by the planets in the several Houses.




                                                                                                                    [Pg 54]
                                              CHAPTER II
                                           THE CONSTITUTION


The Sun is the chief signiﬁcator of the constitution, and the aspects he holds to the other planets are to be
considered. Thus if he be found in good aspect, or at least not in evil aspect, to the other planets, the
constitution may be judged as sound.
When, however, the Sun is aﬄicted by some planets and assisted by others, there will be only a moderate
constitution, and judgment has to be made as to which inﬂuence predominates, the good or evil. When the
aﬄicting planets are angular—that is to say, in the 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10th Houses—the congenital or hereditary
tendency to organic disease is by that circumstance so much the stronger. But when the assisting planets are
angular, the predisposition to disease is considerably mitigated, and in most cases entirely overcome.
The predisposition of the body to aﬀections of a constitutional nature is to be judged from the prevalence of evil
aspects to the Sun, and the parts of the body liable to be aﬀected are judged from the Signs which are occupied
by the afflicting bodies.
The various aﬀections due to the several planets have already been cited (Sect. I., chap. i.). The Signs are
grouped for purposes of pathological study as follows:—
The Movable Signs—Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricornus—have relation to the head, stomach, skin, kidneys,                 [Pg 55]

liver, and spine.
The Fixed Signs—Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius—are related to the throat, heart, blood, and excretory
system.
The Common Signs—Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces—are related to the lungs, bowels, and nervous
system.
It will also be advisable to read Sect. I., chap. ii., in order to determine the special points liable to aﬀections, the
nature of the affection being judged solely by the planet which casts the malefic aspect to the Sun.
When the Sun is found to be aﬄicted by several planets, and at the same time there is no assistance from the
good aspects or conjunctions of other bodies, then the constitution is deemed faulty and liable to early
disruption. But when there are several planets aﬄicting and at the same time some beneﬁc inﬂuences from
others, it is probable that there will be prolonged disease and physical weakness, though life will continue.
Death in infancy occurs when the maleﬁc planets are immediately rising or culminating at the birth in evil aspect
to the luminary which at the time may be above the horizon. Also when there are maleﬁc planets immediately
setting or passing the nadir, in evil aspect to the luminary below the horizon. But when there are mitigating
inﬂuences from the good aspects of the beneﬁc planets, or the luminaries, the maleﬁc planets will not induce
death, but there will be great difficulty in rearing.




                                                                                                                           [Pg 56]
                                           CHAPTER III
                                      HEALTH AND SICKNESS


The aspects of the moon are the chief consideration in the matter of sickness. If the Moon be found to be
aﬄicted by the evil aspects of several planets, and no assistance be given by the good aspects of others, then
the health will be precarious and frequent spells of illness will result. The Moon being well aspected and not in
any way aﬄicted, shows that the health will be well established, and that there will be immunity from sickness of
all sorts.
The considerations necessary to be made in this matter are similar to those which have been cited in regard to
the Sun and the constitution, except that we substitute the Moon for the Sun. For, whereas the Sun governs the
vital power in man, the Moon governs the functional powers, and whereas the Sun denotes those aﬀections
which are congenital or hereditary, the Moon denotes such as are brought about by causes after birth. Similarly,
the Sun denotes aﬀections which are incidental to the body, while the Moon denotes such as are accidental
thereto.
These points being borne in mind, they may be memorised at sight:—                                                   [Pg 57]


                                              SUN.           MOON.
                                           Organic.        Functional.
                                           Hereditary.     Acquired.
                                           Incidental.     Accidental.


But it should be observed that the constitution may be strong and the health may be at the same time very bad,
or, on the other hand, the health may be good and the constitution may be weak. In the ﬁrst case, there would
be a long life of considerable suﬀering from ill-health; and in the second case, there would be little or no ill-
health for some considerable time, but the constitution would give way and the vital powers become depleted by
the first serious illness that occurred.
Only when the Sun and Moon are both unaﬄicted by evil aspects or conjunctions, the health and constitution
are both good, and there is every indication of a robust and vigorous life reaching to a ripe old age.
When the Sun and Moon are both heavily aﬄicted, and there is no assistance given by good aspects, there is
every probability of death in infancy, or before reaching maturity.
For reasons which are allied to the connection existing between the constitution and the health, the good aspect
of the Moon to the Sun at birth is an excellent augury, for it indicates co-ordination between the organic and
functional. Where this co-ordination exists there is always considerable power of recuperation, so that illness is
easily overcome and the balance of power restored in the system.
Maleﬁc planets rising and aﬄicting either the Sun or Moon indicate prolonged ill-health, and most frequently         [Pg 58]

some permanent hurt to the body.
When predisposition to illness is shown in the horoscope, the particular aﬀection can be determined by the Sign
which the aﬄicting planets hold. Thus if Saturn aﬄict the Moon from Aries, you will judge some hurts and
obstructions in the head, chills and colds, inﬂuenza, coryza, &c. Similarly Mars in Leo would indicate functional
defects of the heart due to accelerated action and overstrain, such as result from fevers.
A good aspect of the planets Jupiter and Venus is of material help in counteracting the inﬂuence of maleﬁc
aspects or evil positions.
Thus it will be seen that the health may be judged entirely apart from the constitution, the planets which are in
aspect to the Moon being of first consideration, and next those which may be rising at the time of birth.




                                                                                                                     [Pg 59]
                                             CHAPTER IV
                      HOW TO READ CHARACTER AND DISPOSITION


Ptolemy says: “Mercury is the ruler of the rational soul, the Moon of the animal soul.” By this he would mean, no
doubt, that Mercury has relation to the faculty of the mind, while the Moon is related to brain function. There are
certain attributes of the mind which are distinctive of the human being, and certain other qualities which are
common to man and the lower animals. These latter are under the dominion of the Moon, while Mercury has
chief signification of the rational faculties.
The position and aspects of the Moon and Mercury are therefore to be considered in making judgment of the
mental endowments and disposition of the subject.
Planets that are in conjunction or aspect to either the Moon or Mercury will impress their nature strongly on the
character and disposition. The natures of the planets have already been recited (Sect. I., chap. i.), and it is
therefore only necessary to consider further, in this connection, the nature of the aspect that is thrown to the
Mental Signiﬁcators by the other bodies. Thus the Sun being in trine to the Moon will give a proper degree of              [Pg 60]

independence and dignity, while the square aspect or opposition of the Sun would indicate an excess of pride,
harmful to the subject in his ordinary relationships. In the same manner, the good aspect of Jupiter would show
benevolence and regulated philanthropy, while the opposition or other evil aspect of the same body would
indicate extravagance and ostentatious display of charity.
The good and bad aspects of the planets may be summed up in a few lines as follows:—

             IN GOOD ASPECT.                    IN EVIL ASPECT.
      Neptune—Genius, inspiration.      Insanity, obsession.
      Uranus—Originality, invention.    Obstinacy, eccentricity.
      Saturn—Steadfastness, fidelity.   Deceitfulness, suspicion.
      Jupiter—Benevolence, joviality.   Ostentation, profligacy.
      Mars—Energy, executiveness.       Impulse, destructiveness.
      Sun—Dignity, independence.        Vanity, egotism.
      Venus—Affability, art.            Self-indulgence, disorderliness.
      Mercury—Alertness, ingenuity.     Inquisitiveness, meddling.
      Moon—Grace, idealism.             Inconstancy, awkwardness.


The general trend of the disposition and habit of mind is judged by the position of the majority of the planets,
according to the “Constitution” of the Signs they occupy. Thus, the majority of the planets being in—
Cardinal or Movable Signs indicates executive ability, business aptitude, pioneer spirit, ambition, capability to
cut out a line in life for oneself, and to make headway against diﬃculties. Such persons are usually the foremost
in their particular sphere of life, and are always found in the most progressive movements, reforms, &c.
Fixed Signs—Stability, patience, endurance, method, caution, and diplomacy. Such persons are apt to become                 [Pg 61]

the originators of schools of thought, policies, and schemes. They have ﬁxity of purpose, determination,
independence, and pivotal stability. They sit still and the world revolves around them.
Flexed or Common Signs—Versatility, flexibility, suavity, adaptability, and lack of originality. Such people usually
have too many irons in the ﬁre, and take in hand more than they can bring to satisfactory conclusion. This is
due to their versatility. They have a superﬁcial knowledge of many things, but lack the persistence to bring that
knowledge to practical eﬀect. At the same time their adaptability is the occasion of many successes in life, and
their agreeableness, sympathy, and suavity create many friends for them.
In the Wheel of Life the cardinal signs denote the rim or tyre which is ever on the move, having the greatest
acceleration. The Common Signs represent the spokes of the wheel, uniting the tyre to the nave, and in that
sense representing the power of adaptability. The Fixed Signs represent the nave, which remains quiescent and
still, being useful by that pivotal stability and apparent non-entity.
Thus, while the Sign-groupings of the planets are useful in giving the keynote of the nature and disposition, the
particular faculties and characteristics are to be judged only from the aspects of the planets to the Moon and
Mercury. Further, it will be noted that those planets which occupy the 3rd and 9th Houses, and those also which
are just rising at the moment of birth, will strongly impress themselves on the nature, apart from any aspects
they may hold to the Mental Rulers. This is on account of the natural relationship of those Houses to the mind
and its means of expression.
Due attention must be paid to the position and aspects of those planets which are in aspect to the Mental                  [Pg 62]

Rulers, for if they be badly placed, in uncongenial signs, and themselves badly aspected by other planets, they
will not act with the same directness and force as they otherwise would do.
It is of course admitted, in all astrological inquiries, that the eﬀects of heredity, training and association count for
something. A man who is generated from a vitiated parentage, badly nourished and imperfectly trained, cannot
be expected, even with the best aspects, to manifest the highest faculties in their fullest or most perfect
expressions. I have not the slightest doubt that many a clodpole was born under similar aspects to those which
obtained at the birth of Shakespeare, Raphael, Newton, or Cæsar. I am not dismayed. Non gli astri muovono
solamente per Roma! Who shall tell the tale of the world’s starved, neglected, and submerged genius? We are
doing the right thing, at all events, in keeping the school-door wide open.
But to continue. The inspirational and ardent temperament is indicated by the majority of planets being in Fiery
signs. The mental or intellectual temperament is shown by the majority in Aerial signs. The psychic or emotional
temperament by the majority in Watery signs, and the practical or sordid temperament by the majority being in
Earthy signs.
The rising sign at birth often impresses itself strongly on the mind of the Subject, and its characteristics are
those which belong to the planet which governs it, and the “elemental” nature of the sign itself.
Thus you have the chief keys to the estimate of character in the individual, and when once the student is           [Pg 63]

convinced by experience of the paramount reliability of this method of character-delineation, its uses will need
no special pointing.

                                        Mental and Brain Disorders.
When either the Moon or Mercury is aﬄicted by the maleﬁc planets, that is to say, when Neptune, Uranus,
Saturn, or Mars are in conjunction or evil aspect with the mental Signiﬁcators, and there be no relieving aspect
from the beneﬁc planets, Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun, then there is every predisposition to aﬀections of the brain
and nervous system. This is the more to be feared when the Moon or Mercury is aﬄicted in the ﬂexed or
common signs. This observation has been scientiﬁcally established by Mr. A. G. Trent, in his little work entitled
“The Soul and the Stars,” to which the student is referred for a mass of statistical evidence.




                                                                                                                    [Pg 64]
