

CHAPTER II.

THE ALPHABET OF ASTROLOGY

The Science of Astrology consists of four branches, namely, Mundane

Astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the aspect of the

stars, at certain periods, the events likely to happen to nations, such

as pestilences, wars, inundations and earthquakes; Atmospherical

Astrology, which is the art of foreseeing, by the positions of the

heavenly bodies, the quality of the weather at any particular time or

place; the Casting of Nativities, or the art of foretelling,

from the position of the stars at the moment of birth, the fate and

character of the native; and Horary Astrology, or the art of

foreseeing, by the positions of the heavens at the moment, the result

of any business or circumstance.

As the two former branches are treated in the astrological almanacks

issued every year by Zadkiel, Raphael, Orion, and others, it is

needless to go into them; but as the casting of nativities and the

answering of horary questions require individual treatment, the working

of these two branches of astrology (after the ancient methods)

shall be described as clearly as possible.

Before the student can do anything in astrology he must master its

alphabet—that is, he must make himself thoroughly acquainted with the

symbols used to represent the planets, the signs of the zodiac and the

aspects.

The planets recognised by the ancient astrologers are, as we have seen,

seven in number, and are as follows, with their symbols:—Saturn,

; Jupiter, ; Mars, ; Sol, ; Venus,

; Mercury, ; Luna, .

There are also the Dragon's Head, thus symbolised, ; and the

Dragon's Tail, . These are neither planets nor signs of the

zodiac, nor constellations, but are only the nodes or points where the

ecliptic is crossed by the Moon. One of these points looks northward,

where the Moon begins her northern latitude, and the other points

southward, where she commences her south latitude. The head of the

Dragon is considered of a benevolent nature; the tail of the Dragon is

of evil tendency.

There are also the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are as follows,

with their symbols:—

Northern.

 

Southern.

Aries

 

Libra

Taurus

 

Scorpio

Gemini

 

Sagittarius

Cancer

 

Capricorn

Leo

 

Aquarius

Virgo

 

Pisces

Through these twelve signs the planets continually move, and are ever

in one or other of them.

They are divided into north and south. The first six,

from Aries to Virgo, are northern; the latter six, from Libra to

Pisces, are southern; this is because the Sun and planets when

in the first six are north of the equator, and when in the last six

they are south of that line.

Each point of the zodiac rises and sets once every twenty-four hours,

occasioned by the earth's revolution on its axis once every day;

therefore, when any given point is rising, the opposite point

must be setting.

[3]

As the zodiac consists of 360 degrees from the first point of Aries

until we come to that point again, and as these are divided into twelve

portions or signs, they must consist of 30 degrees each.

The aspects are five in number; they represent certain positions which

the planets bear to each other as they move through the signs of the

zodiac; they are as follows, with their symbols:—

Conjunction, when two planets are in the same place, viz., in same

degree of the same sign.

Sextile, when they are 60 degrees or two signs apart.

Square, when they are 90 degrees or three signs apart.

Trine, when they are 120 degrees or four signs apart.

Opposition, when they are 180 degrees or six signs asunder.

The conjunction () is rather a position than an aspect, as

planets can hardly be said to aspect each other when they are in the

same place. When Saturn is in the first degree of Aries, and any planet

in the same degree of that sign, they are said to be in conjunction;

this is good or evil, according to the nature of the planets thus

posited.

The Trine () is the most powerful of all the good aspects.

The Sextile () is favourable.

The Square () is evil.

The Opposition () is also very evil.

There are several other aspects (sometimes called the "modern aspects")

invented by Kepler; but as they only appear to complicate what is at

best a very intricate study, it is best to ignore them and adhere in

this, as in the matter of the planets, to the old methods.

 