                                         I. W. KELLY

                      RECENT SHIFTS IN ASTROLOGICAL     IDEAS
      Classical (traditional) astrology was associated with prognostication and
relatively specific, testable hypotheses about planetary configurations and
human activities. Until the twentieth century, astrologers have held that the
stellar connection mainly reflected actual outward human behavior, but to-
day there is a tendency to claim that the stellar connection reflects only in-
ner life. To appreciate the shlft in claim, consider first the view of Charles
Carter, who was the leadmg British astrologer in the mid-twentieth century:
Practical experiment wiU soon convince the most sceptical that the bodies of the solar system
indicate, if they do not actually produce, changes in (1) our minds, (2) Our feelings and emo-
[ions, (3) Our physical bodies, (4) Our external affairs and relationships with the world at large
(1925, p. 14).

Although every birth chart was different and many astrological factors had
to be assessed (often with mutually conflicting indications), it was conceded
that there was an observable, relatively specific something in common that
should be exhibited by people with a particular planetary configuration in
their birth chart (horoscope). As the Dutch psychologist Jan Van Rooij
pointed out,
If one takes 100 people w~rhthe sun in Aries, they should have something in common, irre-
spective of other astrolog~cdfactors. And this commonality should be d&erent from the com-
mon factor in 100 people uith the sun in Taurus, irrespective of additional factors (1994, p.
55).

On this basis we should not expect to see the influence of a particular factor
on a particular person. But examining large groups of people should allow
commonalities to be detectable, if they exist. Contrast this with the views of
psychotherapist and astrologer Dr. Glenn Perry, perhaps the leadmg propo-
nent of modern inner psychological astrology (also known as astropsychology
and archetype astrology) in the United States today:
Astrology does not deal with quantities that can be objectively measured.. . the [birth] chart
depicts the structure and dynamics of consciousness.. . [it] shifts the emphasis from predicting
outcomes to interpreting the meonirzg of outcomes as they relate to the inner life of the person
(1993, pp. 7, 8, 9).

Further, "astrology only plays a role in the mental plane and does not ex-
press itself consistently or systematically in events or behavior" (Terpstra,
1994, p. 42). Here Carter's direct connection with outward behavior and ex-
ternal events is denied. Instead the connection is with the unobservable in-
ner life. When leadmg astrologers cannot even agree on what astrology deals
with, other conficts and problems can only further reduce the plausibhty of
astrology.
     Since the 1950s many studies were conducted by both astrologers and
sympathetic researchers. The picture that emerged out of this research, as
                             MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                       1039

pointed out, was mostly bad for astrology. But negative studes, even when
they are cumulative, have been 'explained away' and dismissed in many dif-
ferent ways by astrologers, allowing them to maintain their belief in astrolo-
gy whatever the evidence or criticisms.
~ e a l i with
          n ~ Criticisms the Astrological Way
      Some typical ways astrologers have reacted to negative findmgs and cri-
tiques are briefly considered.
      Ignore bad news.-First of all, such findings can be ignored or played
down. As the astrologer Robert Hand said, "Positive results in the scientific
study of astrology have to be taken seriously undeniably, but negative results
not so seriously" (cited in Perry, 1995a, p. 37). Overall, this has been the
dominant response by the astrological community. This tack is taken by
John Anthony West in his "The Case for Astrology" (1991) where he says
"Since the aim of this book is to present the positive evidence, intimate de-
t d s of the bulk of the negative evidence do not really concern us" (p. 234).
But nearly all the evidence is negative, so West's dehberate suppression of it
is irresponsible (Dean, 1993). A visit to any astrology bookstore WIN quickly
confirm that research into astrology is rarely cited and when it is, it usually
only involves a distorted presentation of the Gauquelin findings (Kelly &
Saklofske, 1994)' and an outdated reliance and misinterpretation of studies


 'The research of the late Michael Gauquelin and his d e Francoise have been consistently mis-
understood and distorted by astrologers and those sympathetic to astrolo y The Gauquehns
found evidence of a weak relationship between planetary positions in the        5;
Eminent professionals in Some occupations. For exam le, Mars tended to occur more often
                                                                                       and the birth of
than ex ected by chance in some sectors of the sky ar t f e birth of o u t s t a n d q athletes in many
sports. h e Gauquelins attempted to explain these Eindings by suggestin that the underlying
processes involved an inherited temperament (character traits) imprinted       Ey    planetary geomag-
netic effects. An implication here was chat, if thc suggested mediatin factors were correct, one
would expect such lanetary relationshi s to be Lnked ro hereditary factors. An initial study by
G a u q u e h indeed Pound a (weak) tenBency for chlldren to be born with the same particular
planets in the same secrors of the sky as their parents. Un€ortunatel , follow-up studies by Gau-
quelin with twice 4s lar e a sample as the initial study did nor conirm the reality of the plane-
tary link with herecllry &auquelin, 1988). A further re-analysis of Gauquelin's heredity hypoth-
esis, by Errel (1989. 1992) usin an improved methodology, also ave negative results. In addi-
tion, in a s e r m of studies by g ~ r t e l(1990, 19931, Gau u e h ' s Aaracter-rrait hypotheses and
planetary geornagnerjc hypotheses were nor supported,
                                                  - -
                                                            ?caving     wide open the meaning of the
findings. -
      It 1s of interest to note that the over-all findings of Gauquelin were hardly supportive of
astrology. First of all, the planetary relationships were only found with Ot~tstandingpeo le in
some occupations. No planetary relationships were uncovered for the rest of the popu&rion,
namely, the vast ma'ori of people who visit astrologers. Second, even within the restricted
group of eminent indivixals, the effect was extremely weak; there was only abour a 2% ddfer-
ence benveen those with the hypothesized planets in the relevant sectors and chance expecta-
tions. Third, the data supporting planetary relationshi s &d not support other central asrrologi-
cal h potheses such as zodiac signs, transits, and pfanetary aspects. Fourth, Gauquelin only
found(sorne of the planets (the moon, Venus, Mars, Ju iter, and Saturn) to be related to the
birth-times of the eminent individuals considered. No etfects were found for the other astrolog-
ically significant planets, namely, Mercury, Uranus, Ne tune, Pluto, or the sun. And the rela-
tionships that were found were also inconsistent w i l astrology in rhat astrological theory
1040                                      I. W. KELLY

examining alleged lunar effects on human behavior (see Kelly, Rotton, &
Culver, 1996 for a recent review of studes on lunar effects).'
      Knock science.-A second popular response is the ever-applicable argu-
ment that the limitation is with the present day science and not astrology.
Hand again said: "I don't think that science is yet capable of dealing with
the full complexity of the symbolic language as employed by astrologers"
(cited by Perry, 1995a, p. 37). Unfortunately, this promissory note may never
be cashed in. How would an appropriate science differ from our present
one? As Gross said, "Like all Utopians these [astrologers] are short on spe-
cifics and we are never told what such a science as science would look hke,
even in o u t h e , much less in detail, nor how [such a future science] is likely
to dlffer as science from present day science" (1994, pp. 434-435; Actually
Gross was tallung about extreme views on Feminist science, but the analogy
is perfect).
      Move goalposts.-Criticisms and serious long lasting anomahes can also

would predct weakness rather than strength for the planetary results obtained by Gauquelin.
F i n d y , Gauquelin tested the ability of astrolo ers using the whole chart to discern important
life characteristics of peoples' Lives. The astrofogers inevitabl failed his tests. H e concluded
that horosco es did not provide information of any useful varue in understanding human be-
havior and ciaracter (Gauquelin, 1983).
       Seymour (1990, 1996) recently ar ed for the validity of a limited astrolo y based on the
Gau uelin findings. Alon these lmes,           has attempted to strengthen the case for the Gauque.
lin &netary-occupation findlngh by proposing a s eculacive mechanism based on the aUcgcJ
response of our neural network< ro fluctuations in $e earth's geomagnetic field which, m [urn,
interacts with the gravitational fields of the planets. Udortunately, while Seymour's t h e o r ~ z ~ n ~
does not contradict modern physical theories, to make a plausible case, one needs much more
than an ad hoc fit to the Gauquelin results. And, it is precisel at this point that Seymour's
proposals lack substance. Inrerestin Iy, he cited as support for %is explanatory theory the he-
         and eomagnetic effects h i t i d y uncovered by Gauquelin but neglected to inform readers
:$Loth       Eauqudinvs own research and later studies b E n d did not repPcate such findings.
Furthermore, Seymour never satisfactorily addressed X e problem of the mismatch between
planetary and biological frequencies or how the nervous system is influenced (other than by
vague reference to 'inducing currents in the neural networks,' whch tells us nothing). For all of
Seymour's appealing to the scientific status of his ex lanation he never s ecified tests by which
his theory could be examined. The entire edifice o?~eymour's theory aEo relied on the trust-
worthiness of the G a u x e l i n d a ~ base
                                        a    which has been challenged by the Dutch mathematician
Nienhuys (in press).       e rehabhty of the G a u q u e h database has been the scene of a bitter
controversy. Interested readers might consult the debate between Ertel and Irving (1997) and
Furtz, Nienhuys, and Sandhu (1997) for the most recent exchange on this topic.
  The quality of much astrological thinking is summarized by astrologer Joanna Ashmun's de-
scriptions of internet exchanges between astrologers: "Skepticism is not in evidence and is in
fact discouraged.. . . The way astrologers treat researchers and ske tics is just the way they
treat other astrologers who disagree with them-continuing on as        f    they and their disagree-
ments never existed. . . . The thing that I find least comfortable about astrolo discussions
(and not just on the Internet) is their irnmateriahty, their lack of grounding. ~stro!&ers are less
literate than average; they write badly and they read badly; there is almost no critical res onse;
errors are ignored, corrections are not acknowled ed They answer off the top of their Eeads,
quote from memory, claim that anythin publishef anywhere at an time is general knowled e
and then get sidetracked into arguing atout who's a liar instead orsorting out the facts of I%C
original question. There is nothing resembling peer review, except in regard ro political correct-
ness. The fact is they don't look stuff up, not even when they d ~ s a ~ r cwith     e    you! Most
astrologers would rather have an dfy quotation from Dane Rudhyar or C G. Jung to supporr
their opinions than some good research" (Ashmun, 1996, pp. 41-43).
                            MODERN ASTROLOGY: A CRITIQUE                                      1041

be dealt with by hand-waving in another drection and the elevation of spec-
ulation to a futuristic higher plane. For example, a serious problem for as-
trology is the great &vide between the Eastern Sidereal zo&ac and the West-
ern Tropical zodiac. These zodiacs currently differ by almost one sign. One
may be an Aries in North America but a Pisces in Lndia (Cornelius, Hyde,
& Webster, 1995, p. 31). Is this conact between zodiacs a problem for as-
trology? Of course not! Cornehus stated this could occur because there are
"two different orders of influence, one from the constellations and the other
from the earth-sun cycle" or, alternatively, we can view "both zodiacs as two
reflections of the same symbolic forms. . . [that] both show in their own dif-
ferent ways" (p. 32). The obfuscations 'orders of influence' and 'reflecuons
. . . showing in their own ways' are nowhere clarified, hence we are no h r -
ther in our understanding after being told this than we were before.
       \Xlhat about people who are born at the same time and have M e r e n t
destinies? l h s has been a standard argument against astrology. The same as-
trologers tell us: "The singular horoscope [can be1 read as a signature for
these particular twins with M e r e n t groups of planets describing the two
individuals . . . where frequently one twin answers to the sun and the other
to the moon in the same horoscope" (Cornelius, et al., 1995, p. 131). Here
the term 'frequently' refers to inching not compeUmg, to avoid dsconfir-
mation. We are also entitled to ask how one would tell which one is sun and
which one is moon, but no answer is p r ~ v i d e d If
                                                    . ~ that doesn't work, Cor-
nelius, et al. reminded us that we can always interpret astrological symbolism
in a metaphorical way, for example, "Sigmund Freud was born on a differ-
ent continent but within minutes of Robert Perry. Freud discovered the un-
conscious and Perry discovered the North Pole" (p. 131; see also p. 96).
Hence, these time-twins were both &scoverers!' If interpretations encom-
passing both literal and symbolic (including metaphorical) are equally adrnis-
sible with astrological claims, then we cannot fail to find a fit between the
horoscope and the person. The positive side to this is never having to admit
you are wrong, the negative side saying very little of import.
       Invoke negatives.-A fourth popular response is to say that the phe-
nomena astrology deals with are very subtle and elusive and what we need
are more creative ways of investigating them. For example, even though a
large, consistent body of research converges on the view that sun signs are


'A variety of ad hoc rules could be used, for example, oldest=Sun, o r (for op osite-sex wins)
Male=Sun, or it could be whichever one on inspection fits best. At the end o r t h e day all chat
         .
matters to astrolo ers is having a ~ r a c t i c a strategy
                                                   l        no matter how arbitrary.
'Ac,tud Freud j i d n ' ~discover t e vnconscious. There is a l a q e pre-Freudian literature on the
toplc. &at Freud did was use the term as a working tool chat could be investi ated psycho-
logically (Fine, 1973, pp. 36-37). Further, the Noccb Pole wasn't 'discovered' at a%. Everybody
knew where and what it was.
1042                                    I. W . KELLY

not valid, the astrologer Harvey could still say "It is absolutely correct to say
that there is no evidence for signs and houses as yet. . . (1982, p. 47, itahcs
Harvey's) and twelve years later, after again acknowledging the lack of evi-
dence, tell us "I am personally still convinced that, given more sensitive and
imaginative tests, confirmation of the reality of sun-sign typologies, and the
signs generally, will be obtained" (1994, p. v). Since it is difficult to prove a
negative in such cases, this position can be maintained indefinitely. A col-
lorary is that astrologers with incompatible positions on fundamental tents
can adopt the same intransigent attitude in regard to their own beliefs. Such
a posture in the face of negative evidence can guarantee a static system and
a lack of progress. It also contradicts the supposed ease with which astrolog-
ical connections were first recognized. As Perry (1993) tells us of the an-
cients, "the partial if not complete validlty of astrology was self-evident to
anyone w h g to attempt a serious study of the subject" (p. 3 ) . This dis-
crepancy is in need of explanation. Furthermore, appeals to the self-evident
have not been very fruitful guides to truth in the history of ideas.
      Blame faulty methods.-Finally, one can say that, if you are obtaining
negative results, you must be doing it wrong. You are using the wrong meth-
odology, the wrong paradigm or both. This approach has been adopted by
increasing numbers of astrologers since the 1950s, when research (and nega-
tive results) got undenvay. West (1991), for example, contended that scien-
tific criticisms of astrology are irrelevant because astrology is "a system of
magic" (p. 223), where magic is "the attempt to master the fundamental
laws of resonance that have produced the cosmos" (p. 220). West was insuf-
ficiently explicit about this 'system of magic' and we are left with a conjunc-
tion of unformulated statements about 'the creative powers of nature' or the
'laws of harmony' and appeals to authority ('ancient wisdom'). As Evans
 (1994) pointed out, West's
magical system is a closed system. W e are invited to bcheve that it is true, not because it con-
nects up with other things which experience has shown to be true, but by some inherent truth
of its own which will have it that the planet Saturn symbolizes contraction whereas Jupiter
symbolizes expansiveness. . . (p. 413).

While, in general, astrologers pretend that claims about zochacal signs,
houses, planetary aspects, and so on are empirical statements, that is, claims
capable of being rejected or modified by research or theory, to most astrolo-
gers such claims actually function as necessarily true claims. The "truth" of
central astrological tenets themselves is never in doubt.'


'A more general underlying issue here is why astrologers themselves beheve in astrology. As
Dean, Mather, and Kell (1996) point out, the steps in b&ef are roughly: (1) Read astrology
books, become aware o r h e system. (2) Learn more, calculate charts, see that they appear to
work. (3) Become dazzled by the history, majesty, and sheer appeal of it all. (4) Adopt the sys-

The Origin of Astrological Ideas
    A legitimate query here concerns how these astrological connections
were established in the first place. To make it easier, let us initially consider
a relatively straightforward
                   -          astrological claim and examine the theories ad-
vanced by astrologers to explain the origin of these connections. If astrolo-
gers have no plausible explanation, then we have good reasons to reject
more complicated claims based on these connections.
     According to traltional astrology, the planets are supposed to be asso-
ciated with certain character traits; for example, Mars is associated with com-
bativeness and courage, and Uranus is associated with originality and inde-
pendence. How did astrologers find this out or determine this?
     G a u q u e h (1980) and Startup (1981) have described five such theories
that are taken seriously by members of the astrological community. Ln what
1046                                     I. W. KELLY

follows, I w d describe each of these theories, relying heavily on many of the
insights of Startup to examine them critically:
      (1) The planetary connections were revealed to the ancients by a higher
intelligence, for example, by gods, angels, demons, or extraterrestrials. Apart
from begging the question about the existence of these beings in the first
place, explaining mysteries in terms of other mysteries does not take us any
further than we were before. "We have not explained how these aliens got
their knowledge" and so it merely pushes the problem elsewhere (Startup, p.
26). It is also not clear how this proposal could be independently tested.
      (2) The early astrologers acquired this information about planets and
person&ty by paranormal means. This similarity begs the question in that it
assumes ESP has been demonstrated and is capable of establishing relation-
ships far and beyond the claims of the majority of even the most fervent
advocates of the paranormal. Also,
which parricular psi ability is to be invoked? Surely telepathy is not good here since, prior to
the esrablishment of the typology, there was no one's mind to read. Clairvoyance is equally du-
bious since it is difficult to imagine what state of affairs could have been paranormally per-
ceived which was not available to ordinary perceptions. That leaves precognition. . . but this
would presumably require that the ancient astrologers somehow saw the results of modern in-
vestigauons which were themselves, in turn, inspired, albeit indirectly, by the 'insights' of the
ancients (Startup, 1981, p. 26).

There are other problems. What is the 'it' we are detecting by paranormal
means? Some 'force' emanating from the celestial object? How do the items
detected paranormally relate to items detected by normal perception? (For
example, if we detect all sorts of paranormal 'rays' around us, how can we
tell that they are coming from what we visually perceive as Mars?) How do
we know that there is a correlation between the normal and the paranormal
items? By paranormal means?-That's doubly question begging! By normal
means? If so, then why could not we have noticed the paranormal item
through normal channels?


