

CRYSTAL GAZING

Before we start this chapter, will you just take a look at the following short

list of terms used in crystal gazing and spiritualism? You will find that they

will make what follows quite clear, and that they will be useful to refer to.

SPIRITUALISTIC.—Belonging to the spirit world.

SECOND SIGHT.—The power which all have (but few develop). The

power to see the future and other things with the spirit eye.

AURA.—The circle of thought which each one of us is unconsciously sending

out by our characters and personalities.

THE CRYSTAL.—Any object which helps to fix our attention; i.e., a crystal,

a bowl of water, shining metal. There is nothing about the crystal that is

magical by itself.

PSYCHIC PERSONS.—Persons possessing second sight.

LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

It is believed that this portion of the book will be found particularly

interesting because it is here that we touch upon spiritualism, perhaps one of

the most talked-of subjects of today.

In crystal gazing we actually see many things happen which maybe have

not happened as yet. In palmistry and astrology we see the signs but not the

actual events. Another distinct difference is that in crystal gazing it is

impossible to give definite instructions as to how to receive these messages

or visions because there is no "how."

What we hope to do in this chapter is to show you that perhaps you

possess powers of which you know nothing. Without making the foolish

mistake of taking this subject too seriously, you will be able to interest and

amuse your friends.

You may say, "But I haven't got this power—I could never see anything

in a crystal."

Don't say that, and don't think it! We all have a little of this power

sleeping within us. If we wish to improve it, we must use and practise it,

but don't overdo the thing.

To understand crystal gazing even a little, it is quite important to know

just a few simple facts about spiritualism (the study of the spirit world.)

This second sight, or clairvoyance (call it what you will) is merely in its

childhood as yet. A very short while ago we should have thought it a miracle

for anyone to speak from New York to London along a wire. Now we

think no more of it than we should of crossing a road!

So with the crystal. At present a few of us only are able to see, more or[108]

less clearly, those visions of the future. Who knows but that in some future

time we shall consider this quite an ordinary and natural thing to do, just like

telephoning, for instance.

The first thing to get hold of is this: we have not one body but two. An

earthly body and its exact copy in a spirit body. By this I do not mean the

soul, but rather our earthly body with all its features just as before, is copied

in a spirit of ether body. This may sound difficult, but just try to grasp the

idea.

In spiritualism there are two of each one of us; one an earthly you, the

other (dwelling usually in your earthly body) a spiritual you. But sometimes

this spirit body escapes from its earthly prison, maybe, during sleep, sometimes

when we look into the crystal, and sometimes in what is called a trance

or artificial sleep. It is then (when the spirit body is free) that visions of

future things are seen, and maybe premonitions (or feelings) of the future

are felt.

Our spirit body, with its ten thousand times more clear-sighted eyes, sees

things which are invisible to the earthly eyes. This body is able to travel

swiftly from place to place, although it always keeps a link or connection

with its earthly double.

When a person goes off into a trance, this is what has happened. The

earthly body sleeps while the spiritual body roams about the future, past and

present, or perhaps visits distant places. It is, of course, able to speak with

other spirit bodies, and thus get information about other folk who have

"passed over," as the spiritualists call death.

Now perhaps you can better appreciate the wonderful stories which you

hear about mediums (people who pass into these trances), who have spoken—or

are alleged to have spoken, for the verdict of science is "Not proven"—with

the voices of folk long dead, and whom they have never seen.

While everyone does not actively possess this power of releasing his spirit

body, we all have it. That this is true can be seen in several ways. Have you

never had a presentiment or feeling of evil to come, a strong feeling which

it took all your determination and common sense to drive away? Anyway,

you will have frequently heard other people saying, "I had a feeling that so-and-so

would happen."

That feeling is explained by this wandering of the spirit body; for a short

time we have had our spirit eyes freely opened, and have gained a glimpse

of the unknown. As our spirit eyes are as yet undeveloped it is but a glimpse,

then down falls the thick curtain, and the mystery is once more hidden from

us!

Just as some children learn to walk more easily than others, so do some

people learn to walk with their spirit body and to speak the spirit language

more quickly than others.

Which seems very natural, doesn't it?

Let us briefly refresh our minds with the absolutely necessary facts which

you must know to understand the first steps in fortunetelling by the crystal.

What we are going to say next will then be more readily understood:—

[109]

FIRSTLY.—We have not one body but two, an earthly and a spiritual

body.

SECONDLY.—Though normally contained in the earthly body, it is possible

for the spirit to escape from its prison, and pass from place to place at a

speed greater than light. This occurs during sleep, the artificial or forced

sleep of the trance, and also when one gazes into the crystal.

THIRDLY.—We have four eyes. Two earthly eyes, and two very much

keener spirit eyes. It is with these spirit eyes that we see the future and the

past in the crystal.

FOURTHLY.—Each one of us is sending out thought-waves at this moment.

These are known by spiritualists as our aura. It is found in different

colors, which depend on our characters or the thoughts leaving us. Certain reds

show rage, for instance.

WHAT THE CRYSTAL IS FOR

The first thing to get hold of is that there is nothing magic or in any way

wonderful about the crystal itself. It is merely a means of fixing the attention

of our earthly eyes, so that we may see the more clearly with our spirit eyes.

Now for a few hints upon actually looking into the crystal.

When you gaze into whatever object you have chosen, your earthly body

and earthly eyes pass into a more or less sleepy state, thus enabling your spirit

body to escape. That gives us our first point to remember.

Here it is: When you look into the crystal, whatever you do don't worry

about whether or not you will see anything! Try to think steadily of what

you wish to see; this will at first seem hard, but practice will help you, and

practice makes perfect.

Then remember to keep any glare of light from the eyes; it is wise to sit

with one's back towards the light. Let your surroundings be quiet and peaceful;

there must be absolutely nothing which may catch your attention and so

take it off the crystal. If, for instance, a noisy bus or other vehicle were to

pass during the time in which you were making your attempt, it would

probably disturb things very much.

One should never be discouraged if nothing whatever is seen at the first

few attempts. A puppy cannot at first see out of its eyes, and it is the same

with a beginner in crystal gazing; his spirit eyes may take some little time to

open, while others, more fortunate, may find theirs open almost at once.

Never strain the eyes in an unwinking stare. Let them wink and blink quite

naturally. To do anything else would be sure to take your attention from

the picture which you wish to see.

HOW TO BEGIN

The best thing to do is to try these various methods, and then see for yourself

which is the most successful in your own individual case.

Here are a few means you might try, in order to test this for yourself.

[110]

Use either a (1) crystal, (2) a polished object, (3) a bright coin, (4) a

sparkling gem, or (5) ordinary glass in the shape of a sphere or ball. There

are others, but they are not important.

In conclusion, it will be of interest to know just what you may expect to see

when, and if, your spirit eyes open. Probably a misty, fogged appearance will

first be seen in the crystal. This will remain for some little time, until finally

the scene or person (whatever it may be) will appear. The latter may be

faint and dim, or it may be clear-cut like a good photograph.

The clearness or otherwise will depend among other things upon the

keenness of sight of the spirit eye. It will also be influenced by the degree of

quiet, and upon the absence of anything likely to disturb the searcher in the

realms of the future.

[111]

THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS

People of all ages have looked upon the moon as a provider of good and

bad luck, and most of us have probably noticed that it has influenced our

actions, at times. Here are some of the beliefs that are centuries old.

If you see a new moon over your right shoulder, it means that you will

experience good luck all the month.

If you have money in your pocket and you meet the new moon face to

face, turn the money over and you will not run short of money that month.

It is unlucky to see the new moon through glass. If you do, go out of

doors, curtsey three times to the moon and turn some silver in your hand.

This will break the spell which will be cast over you if you do not do as

directed. There is one little point, connected with this superstition, which

has set us thinking. What of all those individuals who wear glasses? We do

not know the answer.

There is a strongly prevalent idea that everything falling to the lot of man

when the moon is waxing will increase or prosper; but things decrease and

do not prosper when the moon is on the wane.

Irish colleens were wont to drop on their knees when they first caught sight

of the new moon, and say, "Oh, moon, leave us as well as you have found

us." And, long ago, Yorkshire maidens "did worship the new moon on their

bent knees, kneeling upon the earth-cast stone."

If the full moon known as the Harvest Moon appears watery, it is an ill

sign for the harvest. (The Harvest Moon is due about the middle of September.)

If the moon shows a silver shield, be not afraid to reap your field: but if

she rises haloed round, soon we'll tread on deluged ground.

If the moon changes on a Sunday there will be a flood before the month

is out.

A Saturday moon, if it comes once in seven years, comes too soon.

A fog and a small moon bring an easterly wind soon.

In the waning of the moon,

Cloudy morning: fair afternoon.

Pale moon doth rain; red moon doth blow,

White moon doth neither rain nor snow.

When the moon's halo is far, the storm is n'ar (near).

When the moon's halo is n'ar, the storm is far.

It has long been a custom for girls to go to the nearest stile, to turn their

back on the first new moon after Midsummer and to chant these verses:

All hail, new moon, all hail to thee.

I prithee, good moon, reveal to me,

This night, who shall my true love be.

Who he is and what he wears,

And what he does all months and years.

[112]

If she were to be married in the course of the next twelve months, the

moon answered her questions during her sleep of the same evening.

In many parts of the country it is supposed that, on Christmas Eve, the

moon will help maidens to find out when they are to be married. The plan

is for a maiden to borrow a silk handkerchief from a male relation and to

take it and a mirror to some sheet of water, while the night is dark. She

must go quite alone; but the sheet of water may be an unromantic pail, full

to the brim, stationed at the bottom of the garden. As soon as the moon

shows itself, the maiden places the flimsy piece of silk in front of her eyes, and,

by holding the mirror half towards the moon and half towards the water, it

is possible for her to see more than a pair of reflections. The number of

reflections are the months which will ensue before her wedding bells ring out.

We recently came across the following information in a document quite

three hundred years old:

"The first, second and third days of the moon's age are lucky for buying

and selling; the seventh, ninth and eleventh are lucky for engagements and

marriage; the sixteenth and twenty-first are not lucky for anything."

The same document affirmed that:

"A baby born before the new moon is twenty-four hours old is sure to be

lucky. Anything lost during the second twenty-four hours of the moon's

age is sure to be found. All things begun on the fifth twenty-four hours will

turn out successfully. A dream experienced on the eighth twenty-four hours

must come true."

[113]