

VIII. THE SACRED PICKAXE

TOLD BY THE MAGISTRATE

The first wolf-grey of the dawn was creeping over the scene, and turning

to a sickly yellow the flare of the little oil lamps arranged around the

veranda. The morning air bit shrewdly, and more than one of the seated

or reclining figures had gathered his robes more closely around him. All

eyes were now turned on the kotwal. He alone of the company had not

contributed from his store of experiences.

"Methinks it is too late for any more story-telling," he protested

diffidently, with gesture and glance toward the east in token that he

spoke truly.

"Nay, nay," cried the Rajput, "this night will not be complete without

the full measure of our entertainment. Come, come, friend; the sun is

yet an hour below the horizon."

Murmurs of approval showed that the general wish had been interpreted.

"Be it so, then," assented the magistrate. "I have heard so many stories

this night that it would indeed be churlish on my part to refuse to give

you one of mine. Well, listen.

"Know, my friends, that I am a district judge in[Pg 171] Delhi, presiding over

that quarter known as the Bara Bazaar, where the merchants most do

congregate. One day some few years ago it befell that I was seated alone

in the hall where I hold my court. It was the afternoon hour, all the

suits of the day had been disposed of, punishment had been meted out to

those who deserved it, justice had been done to rich and poor alike, in

accordance with the orders of our most righteous master Akbar, to whom

be all honour and glory.

"I had taken from my garments my silver betel-nut box, and was leisurely

spreading on a leaf the smear of lime preparatory to enjoying my pan

supari, musing the while on the strange little ironies of life that came

to my knowledge each day in the discharge of my magisterial functions.

All at once a shadow from the open doorway fell across the room. Raising

my eyes, I beheld the tall figure of a man. On meeting my look he bowed

his body, and with both hands outstretched, courteously salaamed me.

"'Protector of the poor, listen to my story,' he said.

"In silence, while I adjusted the fragments of betel-nut on the limed

leaf and rolled up the morsel, I motioned him to a place on the edge of

the carpet whereon I myself sat. For my first glance had shown me that

the stranger was a man of consequence, his garments being rich and his

look that of one accustomed to the exercise of authority.

"He took his seat, and arranged his flowing and finely embroidered robes

around him. I proffered[Pg 172] him the pan supari I had prepared, but with a

wave of the hand he declined this courtesy. So I placed the morsel in my

own mouth, fell to its meditative mastication, and awaited the beginning

of his tale.

"'I am a well-to-do traveller, as you would think. O kadi—a pilgrim on

my way to the sacred shrine of Juggernaut, as I profess myself to all

who make inquiry and to whom an answer is due. But I am not what I

appear to be. In reality you behold in me—a thug.'

"The man lowered his voice mysteriously when he pronounced the last

word, bending forward so that I might hear it.

"'And what may be a thug?' I asked, for the name to me was quite a new

one.

"'Listen,' he said eagerly, and still in a low whisper. 'The thugs are

worshippers of Bowani.'

"'There are countless thousands who worship Kali, the dread goddess,' I

replied.

"'Yes, but we, the thugs, not only worship her as the wife of Siva, god

of destruction, but we are her devoted priests who put men to death in

her name and for her glory.'

"Now indeed did I prick up my ears and listen intently. But I did not

suffer my awakened interest to betray itself in look or tone of voice.

"'Some fanatics may seek to justify human sacrifice,' I said. I was

treading cautiously; later I would tell the man that such foul deeds

were against the decrees of Akbar, and involved the penalty of death[Pg 173]

under the feet of elephants. But meanwhile I wanted his confession.

"'Ah, you know nothing about the thugs,' continued the stranger. 'But

hearken to me, for I have come to tell you all, and for a reason you

will presently understand. We are thousands strong, and we live in all

parts of Hindustan and the Deccan. We are caste brothers, and are bound

together by our worship of Bowani. The traditions of our creed have been

handed down for generations from father to son. You have never heard of

the thugs, O kadi, although you sit in the place of justice. Do you know

why? Because I am the very first of the sect who has broken his vows of

silence, and spoken the word thug to one outside our secret

association.'

"'Yet you say you are thousands strong.'

"'Yes, we are strong in numbers, but stronger still in our fidelity to

our vows. When once we have sworn on the sacred pickaxe, it is

impossible to speak words of treachery.'

"'If it be for the good and happiness of all men,' I interpolated,

encouraging him to keep on speaking freely, 'there can be no treachery,

no breaking of vows in revealing the truth.'

"'It is to reveal the truth that I have come to you. It is by the orders

of Bowani herself; for I have wronged her, and she is angry and has

loudly proclaimed to me that thuggee is ended—that her protection is

for ever withdrawn from me and my fellows, because, O misery, we have

grievously offended her. Hark! Do you not hear the voice of Bowani even

now?'

"The man raised his face toward the rafters of the room, and, with right[Pg 174]

hand uplifted, his attitude was one of intent listening.

"'Unworthy, unworthy, unworthy,' he murmured, in a strange absent

monotone, as if repeating words he was actually hearing. 'You have

broken my laws. Go now to your doom, you and all your brothers. Such

priests Kali will not have. Thuggee is no more. I will seek some other

worshippers.'

"After a pause of tense silence, as if the listener was awaiting for

more, he dropped hand and eyes. And now my mind took a new turn of

thought. There was the confused, unmistakable glare of insanity in the

man's eyes. Half unconsciously, I leaned back on my cushions and placed

a hand upon the dagger in my kummerbund.

"The stranger noticed the movement, and, lunatic though he undoubtedly

appeared to be, interpreted my thoughts.

"'Be not afraid of me, master,' he said. 'This is the only weapon I

carry.'

"And with these words he slipped off a silken scarf that he had been

wearing loosely around his throat, and tossed it on the carpet between

us.

"Now was I all the more confirmed in my estimate of his madness. To call

such a thing a weapon!—a strip of soft fabric that might kill a

butterfly but would be poor defence indeed to rely on against sword or

dagger. I suppose I smiled contemptuously, for again the man read my

thoughts.

"Then instantly did he do a thing that made my[Pg 175] blood run cold. With a

toss of the scarf into the air, he formed it into a noose, and this he

threw over one upbended knee. Next with a swift twist of fierce hands he

drew the knot tight, and so terribly realistic was his action that for

the moment I saw above his knee the contorted mouth and protruding eyes

of his suddenly strangled victim.

"There was horror in my gaze now, but only calm professional pride in

his, as he flung back the still looped and knotted kerchief on to the

carpet.

"'Yes, I am a strangler,' he said calmly, 'as are all the thugs, born to

become stranglers, and taught how to use the roomal in early youth by

their own fathers' hands.'

"Of strangling as a means of murder I of course knew, and, indeed,

during the years of my magistracy, I had heard vague rumours of robbers

habitually resorting to this method of dispatching their victims rather

than to clubs or swords. But such appalling dexterity as this man

displayed in the handling of an innocent-looking silken scarf I had

never imagined.

